SHIRLEY

BY CHARLOTTE BRONTË

CHAPTER I.

LEVITICAL.


Of late years an abundant shower of curates has fallen upon the north of
England: they lie very thick on the hills; every parish has one or more
of them; they are young enough to be very active, and ought to be doing
a great deal of good. But not of late years are we about to speak; we
are going back to the beginning of this century: late years - present
years are dusty, sunburnt, hot, arid; we will evade the noon, forget it
in siesta, pass the midday in slumber, and dream of dawn.

If you think, from this prelude, that anything like a romance is
preparing for you, reader, you never were more mistaken. Do you
anticipate sentiment, and poetry, and reverie? Do you expect passion,
and stimulus, and melodrama? Calm your expectations; reduce them to a
lowly standard. Something real, cool, and solid lies before you;
something unromantic as Monday morning, when all who have work wake with
the consciousness that they must rise and betake themselves thereto. It
is not positively affirmed that you shall not have a taste of the
exciting, perhaps towards the middle and close of the meal, but it is
resolved that the first dish set upon the table shall be one that a
Catholic - ay, even an Anglo-Catholic - might eat on Good Friday in
Passion Week: it shall be cold lentils and vinegar without oil; it shall
be unleavened bread with bitter herbs, and no roast lamb.

Of late years, I say, an abundant shower of curates has fallen upon the
north of England; but in eighteen-hundred-eleven-twelve that affluent
rain had not descended. Curates were scarce then: there was no Pastoral
Aid - no Additional Curates' Society to stretch a helping hand to
worn-out old rectors and incumbents, and give them the wherewithal to
pay a vigorous young colleague from Oxford or Cambridge. The present
successors of the apostles, disciples of Dr. Pusey and tools of the
Propaganda, were at that time being hatched under cradle-blankets, or
undergoing regeneration by nursery-baptism in wash-hand basins. You
could not have guessed by looking at any one of them that the
Italian-ironed double frills of its net-cap surrounded the brows of a
preordained, specially-sanctified successor of St. Paul, St. Peter, or
St. John; nor could you have foreseen in the folds of its long
night-gown the white surplice in which it was hereafter cruelly to
exercise the souls of its parishioners, and strangely to nonplus its
old-fashioned vicar by flourishing aloft in a pulpit the shirt-like
raiment which had never before waved higher than the reading-desk.

Yet even in those days of scarcity there were curates: the precious
plant was rare, but it might be found. A certain favoured district in
the West Riding of Yorkshire could boast three rods of Aaron blossoming
within a circuit of twenty miles. You shall see them, reader. Step into
this neat garden-house on the skirts of Whinbury, walk forward into the
little parlour. There they are at dinner. Allow me to introduce them to
you: Mr. Donne, curate of Whinbury; Mr. Malone, curate of Briarfield;
Mr. Sweeting, curate of Nunnely. These are Mr. Donne's lodgings, being
the habitation of one John Gale, a small clothier. Mr. Donne has kindly
invited his brethren to regale with him. You and I will join the party,
see what is to be seen, and hear what is to be heard. At present,
however, they are only eating; and while they eat we will talk aside.

These gentlemen are in the bloom of youth; they possess all the activity
of that interesting age - an activity which their moping old vicars would
fain turn into the channel of their pastoral duties, often expressing a
wish to see it expended in a diligent superintendence of the schools,
and in frequent visits to the sick of their respective parishes. But the
youthful Levites feel this to be dull work; they prefer lavishing their
energies on a course of proceeding which, though to other eyes it appear
more heavy with ennui , more cursed with monotony, than the toil of
the weaver at his loom, seems to yield them an unfailing supply of
enjoyment and occupation.

I allude to a rushing backwards and forwards, amongst themselves, to and
from their respective lodgings - not a round, but a triangle of visits,
which they keep up all the year through, in winter, spring, summer, and
autumn. Season and weather make no difference; with unintelligible zeal
they dare snow and hail, wind and rain, mire and dust, to go and dine,
or drink tea, or sup with each other. What attracts them it would be
difficult to say. It is not friendship, for whenever they meet they
quarrel. It is not religion - the thing is never named amongst them;
theology they may discuss occasionally, but piety - never. It is not the
love of eating and drinking: each might have as good a joint and
pudding, tea as potent, and toast as succulent, at his own lodgings, as
is served to him at his brother's. Mrs. Gale, Mrs. Hogg, and Mrs.
Whipp - their respective landladies - affirm that "it is just for naught
else but to give folk trouble." By "folk" the good ladies of course mean
themselves, for indeed they are kept in a continual "fry" by this system
of mutual invasion.

Mr. Donne and his guests, as I have said, are at dinner; Mrs. Gale waits
on them, but a spark of the hot kitchen fire is in her eye. She
considers that the privilege of inviting a friend to a meal
occasionally, without additional charge  a privilege included in the
terms on which she lets her lodgings , has been quite sufficiently
exercised of late. The present week is yet but at Thursday, and on
Monday Mr. Malone, the curate of Briarfield, came to breakfast and
stayed dinner; on Tuesday Mr. Malone and Mr. Sweeting of Nunnely came to
tea, remained to supper, occupied the spare bed, and favoured her with
their company to breakfast on Wednesday morning; now, on Thursday, they
are both here at dinner, and she is almost certain they will stay all
night. "C'en est trop," she would say, if she could speak French.

Mr. Sweeting is mincing the slice of roast beef on his plate, and
complaining that it is very tough; Mr. Donne says the beer is flat. Ay,
that is the worst of it: if they would only be civil Mrs. Gale wouldn't 
mind it so much, if they would only seem satisfied with what they get
she wouldn't  care; but "these young parsons is so high and so scornful,
they set everybody beneath their 'fit.' They treat her with less than
civility, just because she doesn't  keep a servant, but does the work of
the house herself, as her mother did afore her; then they are always
speaking against Yorkshire ways and Yorkshire folk," and by that very
token Mrs. Gale does not believe one of them to be a real gentleman, or
come of gentle kin. "The old parsons is worth the whole lump of college
lads; they know what belongs to good manners, and is kind to high and
low."

"More bread!" cries Mr. Malone, in a tone which, though prolonged but to
utter two syllables, proclaims him at once a native of the land of
shamrocks and potatoes. Mrs. Gale hates Mr. Malone more than either of
the other two; but she fears him also, for he is a tall, strongly-built
personage, with real Irish legs and arms, and a face as genuinely
national - not the Milesian face, not Daniel O'Connell's style, but the
high-featured, North-American-Indian sort of visage, which belongs to a
certain class of the Irish gentry, and has a petrified and proud look,
better suited to the owner of an estate of slaves than to the landlord
of a free peasantry. Mr. Malone's father termed himself a gentleman: he
was poor and in debt, and besottedly arrogant; and his son was like him.

Mrs. Gale offered the loaf.

"Cut it, woman," said her guest; and the "woman" cut it accordingly. Had
she followed her inclinations, she would have cut the parson also; her
Yorkshire soul revolted absolutely from his manner of command.

The curates had good appetites, and though the beef was "tough," they
ate a great deal of it. They swallowed, too, a tolerable allowance of
the "flat beer," while a dish of Yorkshire pudding, and two tureens of
vegetables, disappeared like leaves before locusts. The cheese, too,
received distinguished marks of their attention; and a 'spice-cake,"
which followed by way of dessert, vanished like a vision, and was no
more found. Its elegy was chanted in the kitchen by Abraham, Mrs. Gale's
son and heir, a youth of six summers; he had reckoned upon the reversion
thereof, and when his mother brought down the empty platter, he lifted
up his voice and wept sore.

The curates, meantime, sat and sipped their wine, a liquor of
unpretending vintage, moderately enjoyed. Mr. Malone, indeed, would much
rather have had whisky; but Mr. Donne, being an Englishman, did not keep
the beverage. While they sipped they argued, not on politics, nor on
philosophy, nor on literature - these topics were now, as ever, totally
without interest for them - not even on theology, practical or doctrinal,
but on minute points of ecclesiastical discipline, frivolities which
seemed empty as bubbles to all save themselves. Mr. Malone, who
contrived to secure two glasses of wine, when his brethren contented
themselves with one, waxed by degrees hilarious after his fashion; that
is, he grew a little insolent, said rude things in a hectoring tone, and
laughed clamorously at his own brilliancy.

Each of his companions became in turn his butt. Malone had a stock of
jokes at their service, which he was accustomed to serve out regularly
on convivial occasions like the present, seldom varying his wit; for
which, indeed, there was no necessity, as he never appeared to consider
himself monotonous, and did not at all care what others thought. Mr.
Donne he favoured with hints about his extreme meagreness, allusions to
his turned-up nose, cutting sarcasms on a certain threadbare chocolate
surtout which that gentleman was accustomed to sport whenever it rained
or seemed likely to rain, and criticisms on a choice set of cockney
phrases and modes of pronunciation, Mr. Donne's own property, and
certainly deserving of remark for the elegance and finish they
communicated to his style.

Mr. Sweeting was bantered about his stature - he was a little man, a mere
boy in height and breadth compared with the athletic Malone; rallied on
his musical accomplishments - he played the flute and sang hymns like a
seraph, some young ladies of his parish thought; sneered at as "the
ladies' pet;" teased about his mamma and sisters, for whom poor Mr.
Sweeting had some lingering regard, and of whom he was foolish enough
now and then to speak in the presence of the priestly Paddy, from whose
anatomy the bowels of natural affection had somehow been omitted.

The victims met these attacks each in his own way: Mr. Donne with a
stilted self-complacency and half-sullen phlegm, the sole props of his
otherwise somewhat rickety dignity; Mr. Sweeting with the indifference
of a light, easy disposition, which never professed to have any dignity
to maintain.

When Malone's raillery became rather too offensive, which it soon did,
they joined, in an attempt to turn the tables on him by asking him how
many boys had shouted "Irish Peter!" after him as he came along the road
that day  Malone's name was Peter - the Rev. Peter Augustus Malone ;
requesting to be informed whether it was the mode in Ireland for
clergymen to carry loaded pistols in their pockets, and a shillelah in
their hands, when they made pastoral visits; inquiring the signification
of such words as vele, firrum, hellum, storrum  so Mr. Malone invariably
pronounced veil, firm, helm, storm , and employing such other methods of
retaliation as the innate refinement of their minds suggested.

This, of course, would not do. Malone, being neither good-natured nor
phlegmatic, was presently in a towering passion. He vociferated,
gesticulated; Donne and Sweeting laughed. He reviled them as Saxons and
snobs at the very top pitch of his high Celtic voice; they taunted him
with being the native of a conquered land. He menaced rebellion in the
name of his "counthry," vented bitter hatred against English rule; they
spoke of rags, beggary, and pestilence. The little parlour was in an
uproar; you would have thought a duel must follow such virulent abuse;
it seemed a wonder that Mr. and Mrs. Gale did not take alarm at the
noise, and send for a constable to keep the peace. But they were
accustomed to such demonstrations; they well knew that the curates never
dined or took tea together without a little exercise of the sort, and
were quite easy as to consequences, knowing that these clerical quarrels
were as harmless as they were noisy, that they resulted in nothing, and
that, on whatever terms the curates might part to-night, they would be
sure to meet the best friends in the world to-morrow morning.

As the worthy pair were sitting by their kitchen fire, listening to the
repeated and sonorous contact of Malone's fist with the mahogany plane
of the parlour table, and to the consequent start and jingle of
decanters and glasses following each assault, to the mocking laughter of
the allied English disputants, and the stuttering declamation of the
isolated Hibernian - as they thus sat, a foot was heard on the outer
door-step, and the knocker quivered to a sharp appeal.

Mr. Gale went and opened.

"Whom have you upstairs in the parlour?" asked a voice - a rather
remarkable voice, nasal in tone, abrupt in utterance.

"O Mr. Helstone, is it you, sir? I could hardly see you for the
darkness; it is so soon dark now. Will you walk in, sir?"

"I want to know first whether it is worth my while walking in. Whom have
you upstairs?"

"The curates, sir."

"What! all of them?"

"Yes, sir."

"Been dining here?"

"Yes, sir."

"That will do."

With these words a person entered - a middle-aged man, in black. He
walked straight across the kitchen to an inner door, opened it, inclined
his head forward, and stood listening. There was something to listen to,
for the noise above was just then louder than ever.

"Hey!" he ejaculated to himself; then turning to Mr. Gale - "Have you
often this sort of work?"

Mr. Gale had been a churchwarden, and was indulgent to the clergy.

"They're young, you know, sir - they're young," said he deprecatingly.

"Young! They want caning. Bad boys - bad boys! And if you were a
Dissenter, John Gale, instead of being a good Churchman, they'd do the
like - they'd expose themselves; but I'll - - "

By way of finish to this sentence, he passed through the inner door,
drew it after him, and mounted the stair. Again he listened a few
minutes when he arrived at the upper room. Making entrance without
warning, he stood before the curates.

And they were silent; they were transfixed; and so was the invader.
He - a personage short of stature, but straight of port, and bearing on
broad shoulders a hawk's head, beak, and eye, the whole surmounted by a
Rehoboam, or shovel hat, which he did not seem to think it necessary to
lift or remove before the presence in which he then stood - he folded
his arms on his chest and surveyed his young friends, if friends they
were, much at his leisure.

"What!" he began, delivering his words in a voice no longer nasal, but
deep - more than deep - a voice made purposely hollow and
cavernous - "what! has the miracle of Pentecost been renewed? Have the
cloven tongues come down again? Where are they? The sound filled the
whole house just now. I heard the seventeen languages in full action:
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in
Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, in
Egypt and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, strangers of Rome, Jews
and proselytes, Cretes and Arabians; every one of these must have had
its representative in this room two minutes since."

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Helstone," began Mr. Donne; "take a seat, pray,
sir. Have a glass of wine?"

His civilities received no answer. The falcon in the black coat
proceeded, - 

"What do I talk about the gift of tongues? Gift, indeed! I mistook the
chapter, and book, and Testament - gospel for law, Acts for Genesis, the
city of Jerusalem for the plain of Shinar. It was no gift but the
confusion of tongues which has gabbled me deaf as a post. You ,
apostles? What! you three? Certainly not; three presumptuous Babylonish
masons - neither more nor less!"

"I assure you, sir, we were only having a little chat together over a
glass of wine after a friendly dinner - settling the Dissenters!"

"Oh! settling the Dissenters, were you? Was Malone settling the
Dissenters? It sounded to me much more like settling his co-apostles.
You were quarrelling together, making almost as much noise - you three
alone - as Moses Barraclough, the preaching tailor, and all his hearers
are making in the Methodist chapel down yonder, where they are in the
thick of a revival. I know whose fault it is. - It is yours, Malone."

"Mine, sir?"

"Yours, sir. Donne and Sweeting were quiet before you came, and would be
quiet if you were gone. I wish, when you crossed the Channel, you had
left your Irish habits behind you. Dublin student ways won't  do here.
The proceedings which might pass unnoticed in a wild bog and mountain
district in Connaught will, in a decent English parish, bring disgrace
on those who indulge in them, and, what is far worse, on the sacred
institution of which they are merely the humble appendages."

There was a certain dignity in the little elderly gentleman's manner of
rebuking these youths, though it was not, perhaps, quite the dignity
most appropriate to the occasion. Mr. Helstone, standing straight as a
ramrod, looking keen as a kite, presented, despite his clerical hat,
black coat, and gaiters, more the air of a veteran officer chiding his
subalterns than of a venerable priest exhorting his sons in the faith.
Gospel mildness, apostolic benignity, never seemed to have breathed
their influence over that keen brown visage, but firmness had fixed the
features, and sagacity had carved her own lines about them.

"I met Supplehough," he continued, "plodding through the mud this wet
night, going to preach at Milldean opposition shop. As I told you, I
heard Barraclough bellowing in the midst of a conventicle like a
possessed bull; and I find you , gentlemen, tarrying over your
half-pint of muddy port wine, and scolding like angry old women. No
wonder Supplehough should have dipped sixteen adult converts in a
day - which he did a fortnight since; no wonder Barraclough, scamp and
hypocrite as he is, should attract all the weaver-girls in their flowers
and ribbons, to witness how much harder are his knuckles than the wooden
brim of his tub; as little wonder that you , when you are left to
yourselves, without your rectors - myself, and Hall, and Boultby - to back
you, should too often perform the holy service of our church to bare
walls, and read your bit of a dry discourse to the clerk, and the
organist, and the beadle. But enough of the subject. I came to see
Malone. - I have an errand unto thee, O captain!"

"What is it?" inquired Malone discontentedly. "There can be no funeral
to take at this time of day."

"Have you any arms about you?"

"Arms, sir? - yes, and legs." And he advanced the mighty members.

"Bah! weapons I mean."

"I have the pistols you gave me yourself. I never part with them. I lay
them ready cocked on a chair by my bedside at night. I have my
blackthorn."

"Very good. Will you go to Hollow's Mill?"

"What is stirring at Hollow's Mill?"

"Nothing as yet, nor perhaps will be; but Moore is alone there. He has
sent all the workmen he can trust to Stilbro'; there are only two women
left about the place. It would be a nice opportunity for any of his
well-wishers to pay him a visit, if they knew how straight the path was
made before them."

"I am none of his well-wishers, sir. I don't  care for him."

"Soh! Malone, you are afraid."

"You know me better than that. If I really thought there was a chance
of a row I would go: but Moore is a strange, shy man, whom I never
pretend to understand; and for the sake of his sweet company only I
would not stir a step."

"But there is a chance of a row; if a positive riot does not take
place - of which, indeed, I see no signs - yet it is unlikely this night
will pass quite tranquilly. You know Moore has resolved to have new
machinery, and he expects two wagon-loads of frames and shears from
Stilbro' this evening. Scott, the overlooker, and a few picked men are
gone to fetch them."

"They will bring them in safely and quietly enough, sir."

"Moore says so, and affirms he wants nobody. Some one, however, he must
have, if it were only to bear evidence in case anything should happen. I
call him very careless. He sits in the counting-house with the shutters
unclosed; he goes out here and there after dark, wanders right up the
hollow, down Fieldhead Lane, among the plantations, just as if he were
the darling of the neighbourhood, or - being, as he is, its
detestation - bore a 'charmed life,' as they say in tale-books. He takes
no warning from the fate of Pearson, nor from that of Armitage - shot,
one in his own house and the other on the moor."

"But he should take warning, sir, and use precautions too," interposed
Mr. Sweeting; "and I think he would if he heard what I heard the other
day."

"What did you hear, Davy?"

"You know Mike Hartley, sir?"

"The Antinomian weaver? Yes."

"When Mike has been drinking for a few weeks together, he generally
winds up by a visit to Nunnely vicarage, to tell Mr. Hall a piece of his
mind about his sermons, to denounce the horrible tendency of his
doctrine of works, and warn him that he and all his hearers are sitting
in outer darkness."

"Well, that has nothing to do with Moore."

"Besides being an Antinomian, he is a violent Jacobin and leveller,
sir."

"I know. When he is very drunk, his mind is always running on regicide.
Mike is not unacquainted with history, and it is rich to hear him going
over the list of tyrants of whom, as he says, 'the revenger of blood has
obtained satisfaction.' The fellow exults strangely in murder done on
crowned heads or on any head for political reasons. I have already
heard it hinted that he seems to have a queer hankering after Moore. Is
that what you allude to, Sweeting?"

"You use the proper term, sir. Mr. Hall thinks Mike has no personal
hatred of Moore. Mike says he even likes to talk to him and run after
him, but he has a hankering that Moore should be made an example of.
He was extolling him to Mr. Hall the other day as the mill-owner with
the most brains in Yorkshire, and for that reason he affirms Moore
should be chosen as a sacrifice, an oblation of a sweet savour. Is Mike
Hartley in his right mind, do you think, sir?" inquired Sweeting simply.

"Can't  tell, Davy. He may be crazed, or he may be only crafty, or
perhaps a little of both."

"He talks of seeing visions, sir."

"Ay! He is a very Ezekiel or Daniel for visions. He came just when I was
going to bed last Friday night to describe one that had been revealed to
him in Nunnely Park that very afternoon."

"Tell it, sir. What was it?" urged Sweeting.

"Davy, thou hast an enormous organ of wonder in thy cranium. Malone, you
see, has none. Neither murders nor visions interest him. See what a big
vacant Saph he looks at this moment."

"Saph! Who was Saph, sir?"

"I thought you would not know. You may find it out. It is biblical. I
know nothing more of him than his name and race; but from a boy upwards
I have always attached a personality to Saph. Depend on it he was
honest, heavy, and luckless. He met his end at Gob by the hand of
Sibbechai."

"But the vision, sir?"

"Davy, thou shalt hear. Donne is biting his nails, and Malone yawning,
so I will tell it but to thee. Mike is out of work, like many others,
unfortunately. Mr. Grame, Sir Philip Nunnely's steward, gave him a job
about the priory. According to his account, Mike was busy hedging rather
late in the afternoon, but before dark, when he heard what he thought
was a band at a distance - bugles, fifes, and the sound of a trumpet; it
came from the forest, and he wondered that there should be music there.
He looked up. All amongst the trees he saw moving objects, red, like
poppies, or white, like may-blossom. The wood was full of them; they
poured out and filled the park. He then perceived they were
soldiers - thousands and tens of thousands; but they made no more noise
than a swarm of midges on a summer evening. They formed in order, he
affirmed, and marched, regiment after regiment, across the park. He
followed them to Nunnely Common; the music still played soft and
distant. On the common he watched them go through a number of
evolutions. A man clothed in scarlet stood in the centre and directed
them. They extended, he declared, over fifty acres. They were in sight
half an hour; then they marched away quite silently. The whole time he
heard neither voice nor tread - nothing but the faint music playing a
solemn march."

"Where did they go, sir?"

"Towards Briarfield. Mike followed them. They seemed passing Fieldhead,
when a column of smoke, such as might be vomited by a park of artillery,
spread noiseless over the fields, the road, the common, and rolled, he
said, blue and dim, to his very feet. As it cleared away he looked again
for the soldiers, but they were vanished; he saw them no more. Mike,
like a wise Daniel as he is, not only rehearsed the vision but gave the
interpretation thereof. It signifies, he intimated, bloodshed and civil
conflict."

"Do you credit it, sir?" asked Sweeting.

"Do you, Davy? - But come, Malone; why are you not off?"

"I am rather surprised, sir, you did not stay with Moore yourself. You
like this kind of thing."

"So I should have done, had I not unfortunately happened to engage
Boultby to sup with me on his way home from the Bible Society meeting at
Nunnely. I promised to send you as my substitute; for which, by-the-bye,
he did not thank me. He would much rather have had me than you, Peter.
Should there be any real need of help I shall join you. The mill-bell
will give warning. Meantime, go - unless  turning suddenly to Messrs.
Sweeting and Donne  - unless Davy Sweeting or Joseph Donne prefers
going. - What do you say, gentlemen? The commission is an honourable one,
not without the seasoning of a little real peril; for the country is in
a queer state, as you all know, and Moore and his mill and his machinery
are held in sufficient odium. There are chivalric sentiments, there is
high-beating courage, under those waistcoats of yours, I doubt not.
Perhaps I am too partial to my favourite Peter. Little David shall be
the champion, or spotless Joseph. - Malone, you are but a great
floundering Saul after all, good only to lend your armour. Out with your
firearms; fetch your shillelah. It is there - in the corner."

With a significant grin Malone produced his pistols, offering one to
each of his brethren. They were not readily seized on. With graceful
modesty each gentleman retired a step from the presented weapon.

"I never touch them. I never did touch anything of the kind," said Mr.
Donne.

"I am almost a stranger to Mr. Moore," murmured Sweeting.

"If you never touched a pistol, try the feel of it now, great satrap of
Egypt. As to the little minstrel, he probably prefers encountering the
Philistines with no other weapon than his flute. - Get their hats, Peter.
They'll both of 'em go."

"No, sir; no, Mr. Helstone. My mother wouldn't  like it," pleaded
Sweeting.

"And I make it a rule never to get mixed up in affairs of the kind,"
observed Donne.

Helstone smiled sardonically; Malone laughed a horse-laugh. He then
replaced his arms, took his hat and cudgel, and saying that "he never
felt more in tune for a shindy in his life, and that he wished a score
of greasy cloth-dressers might beat up Moore's quarters that night," he
made his exit, clearing the stairs at a stride or two, and making the
house shake with the bang of the front-door behind him.




CHAPTER II.

THE WAGONS.


The evening was pitch dark: star and moon were quenched in gray
rain-clouds - gray they would have been by day; by night they looked
sable. Malone was not a man given to close observation of nature; her
changes passed, for the most part, unnoticed by him. He could walk miles
on the most varying April day and never see the beautiful dallying of
earth and heaven - never mark when a sunbeam kissed the hill-tops, making
them smile clear in green light, or when a shower wept over them, hiding
their crests with the low-hanging, dishevelled tresses of a cloud. He
did not, therefore, care to contrast the sky as it now appeared - a
muffled, streaming vault, all black, save where, towards the east, the
furnaces of Stilbro' ironworks threw a tremulous lurid shimmer on the
horizon - with the same sky on an unclouded frosty night. He did not
trouble himself to ask where the constellations and the planets were
gone, or to regret the "black-blue" serenity of the air-ocean which
those white islets stud, and which another ocean, of heavier and denser
element, now rolled below and concealed. He just doggedly pursued his
way, leaning a little forward as he walked, and wearing his hat on the
back of his head, as his Irish manner was. "Tramp, tramp," he went along
the causeway, where the road boasted the privilege of such an
accommodation; 'splash, splash," through the mire-filled cart ruts,
where the flags were exchanged for soft mud. He looked but for certain
landmarks - the spire of Briarfield Church; farther on, the lights of
Redhouse. This was an inn; and when he reached it, the glow of a fire
through a half-curtained window, a vision of glasses on a round table,
and of revellers on an oaken settle, had nearly drawn aside the curate
from his course. He thought longingly of a tumbler of whisky-and-water.
In a strange place he would instantly have realized the dream; but the
company assembled in that kitchen were Mr. Helstone's own parishioners;
they all knew him. He sighed, and passed on.

The highroad was now to be quitted, as the remaining distance to
Hollow's Mill might be considerably reduced by a short cut across
fields. These fields were level and monotonous. Malone took a direct
course through them, jumping hedge and wall. He passed but one building
here, and that seemed large and hall-like, though irregular. You could
see a high gable, then a long front, then a low gable, then a thick,
lofty stack of chimneys. There were some trees behind it. It was dark;
not a candle shone from any window. It was absolutely still; the rain
running from the eaves, and the rather wild but very low whistle of the
wind round the chimneys and through the boughs were the sole sounds in
its neighbourhood.

This building passed, the fields, hitherto flat, declined in a rapid
descent. Evidently a vale lay below, through which you could hear the
water run. One light glimmered in the depth. For that beacon Malone
steered.

He came to a little white house - you could see it was white even through
this dense darkness - and knocked at the door. A fresh-faced servant
opened it. By the candle she held was revealed a narrow passage,
terminating in a narrow stair. Two doors covered with crimson baize, a
strip of crimson carpet down the steps, contrasted with light-coloured
walls and white floor, made the little interior look clean and fresh.

"Mr. Moore is at home, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir, but he is not in."

"Not in! Where is he then?"

"At the mill - in the counting-house."

Here one of the crimson doors opened.

"Are the wagons come, Sarah?" asked a female voice, and a female head at
the same time was apparent. It might not be the head of a
goddess - indeed a screw of curl-paper on each side the temples quite
forbade that supposition - but neither was it the head of a Gorgon; yet
Malone seemed to take it in the latter light. Big as he was, he shrank
bashfully back into the rain at the view thereof, and saying, "I'll go
to him," hurried in seeming trepidation down a short lane, across an
obscure yard, towards a huge black mill.

The work-hours were over; the "hands" were gone. The machinery was at
rest, the mill shut up. Malone walked round it. Somewhere in its great
sooty flank he found another chink of light; he knocked at another
door, using for the purpose the thick end of his shillelah, with which
he beat a rousing tattoo. A key turned; the door unclosed.

"Is it Joe Scott? What news of the wagons, Joe?"

"No; it's myself. Mr. Helstone would send me."

"Oh! Mr. Malone." The voice in uttering this name had the slightest
possible cadence of disappointment. After a moment's pause it continued,
politely but a little formally, - 

"I beg you will come in, Mr. Malone. I regret extremely Mr. Helstone
should have thought it necessary to trouble you so far. There was no
necessity - I told him so - and on such a night; but walk forwards."

Through a dark apartment, of aspect undistinguishable, Malone followed
the speaker into a light and bright room within - very light and bright
indeed it seemed to eyes which, for the last hour, had been striving to
penetrate the double darkness of night and fog; but except for its
excellent fire, and for a lamp of elegant design and vivid lustre
burning on a table, it was a very plain place. The boarded floor was
carpetless; the three or four stiff-backed, green-painted chairs seemed
once to have furnished the kitchen of some farm-house; a desk of strong,
solid formation, the table aforesaid, and some framed sheets on the
stone-coloured walls, bearing plans for building, for gardening, designs
of machinery, etc., completed the furniture of the place.

Plain as it was, it seemed to satisfy Malone, who, when he had removed
and hung up his wet surtout and hat, drew one of the rheumatic-looking
chairs to the hearth, and set his knees almost within the bars of the
red grate.

"Comfortable quarters you have here, Mr. Moore; and all snug to
yourself."

"Yes, but my sister would be glad to see you, if you would prefer
stepping into the house."

"Oh no! The ladies are best alone, I never was a lady's man. You don't 
mistake me for my friend Sweeting, do you, Mr. Moore?"

"Sweeting! Which of them is that? The gentleman in the chocolate
overcoat, or the little gentleman?"

"The little one - he of Nunnely; the cavalier of the Misses Sykes, with
the whole six of whom he is in love, ha! ha!"

"Better be generally in love with all than specially with one, I should
think, in that quarter."

"But he is specially in love with one besides, for when I and Donne
urged him to make a choice amongst the fair bevy, he named - which do you
think?"

With a queer, quiet smile Mr. Moore replied, "Dora, of course, or
Harriet."

"Ha! ha! you've  an excellent guess. But what made you hit on those two?"

"Because they are the tallest, the handsomest, and Dora, at least, is
the stoutest; and as your friend Mr. Sweeting is but a little slight
figure, I concluded that, according to a frequent rule in such cases, he
preferred his contrast."

"You are right; Dora it is. But he has no chance, has he, Moore?"

"What has Mr. Sweeting besides his curacy?"

This question seemed to tickle Malone amazingly. He laughed for full
three minutes before he answered it.

"What has Sweeting? Why, David has his harp, or flute, which comes to
the same thing. He has a sort of pinchbeck watch; ditto, ring; ditto,
eyeglass. That's what he has."

"How would he propose to keep Miss Sykes in gowns only?"

"Ha! ha! Excellent! I'll ask him that next time I see him. I'll roast
him for his presumption. But no doubt he expects old Christopher Sykes
would do something handsome. He is rich, is he not? They live in a large
house."

"Sykes carries on an extensive concern."

"Therefore he must be wealthy, eh?"

"Therefore he must have plenty to do with his wealth, and in these times
would be about as likely to think of drawing money from the business to
give dowries to his daughters as I should be to dream of pulling down
the cottage there, and constructing on its ruins a house as large as
Fieldhead."

"Do you know what I heard, Moore, the other day?"

"No. Perhaps that I was about to effect some such change. Your
Briarfield gossips are capable of saying that or sillier things."

"That you were going to take Fieldhead on a lease  I thought it looked a
dismal place, by-the-bye, to-night, as I passed it , and that it was
your intention to settle a Miss Sykes there as mistress - to be married,
in short, ha! ha! Now, which is it? Dora, I am sure. You said she was
the handsomest."

"I wonder how often it has been settled that I was to be married since I
came to Briarfield. They have assigned me every marriageable single
woman by turns in the district. Now it was the two Misses Wynns - first
the dark, then the light one; now the red-haired Miss Armitage; then the
mature Ann Pearson. At present you throw on my shoulders all the tribe
of the Misses Sykes. On what grounds this gossip rests God knows. I
visit nowhere; I seek female society about as assiduously as you do, Mr.
Malone. If ever I go to Whinbury, it is only to give Sykes or Pearson a
call in their counting-house, where our discussions run on other topics
than matrimony, and our thoughts are occupied with other things than
courtships, establishments, dowries. The cloth we can't  sell, the hands
we can't  employ, the mills we can't  run, the perverse course of events
generally, which we cannot alter, fill our hearts, I take it, pretty
well at present, to the tolerably complete exclusion of such figments as
love-making, etc."

"I go along with you completely, Moore. If there is one notion I hate
more than another, it is that of marriage - I mean marriage in the vulgar
weak sense, as a mere matter of sentiment - two beggarly fools agreeing
to unite their indigence by some fantastic tie of feeling. Humbug! But
an advantageous connection, such as can be formed in consonance with
dignity of views and permanency of solid interests, is not so bad - eh?"

"No," responded Moore, in an absent manner. The subject seemed to have
no interest for him; he did not pursue it. After sitting for some time
gazing at the fire with a preoccupied air, he suddenly turned his head.

"Hark!" said he. "Did you hear wheels?"

Rising, he went to the window, opened it, and listened. He soon closed
it. "It is only the sound of the wind rising," he remarked, "and the
rivulet a little swollen, rushing down the hollow. I expected those
wagons at six; it is near nine now."

"Seriously, do you suppose that the putting up of this new machinery
will bring you into danger?" inquired Malone. "Helstone seems to think
it will."

"I only wish the machines - the frames - were safe here, and lodged within
the walls of this mill. Once put up, I defy the frame-breakers. Let them
only pay me a visit and take the consequences. My mill is my castle."

"One despises such low scoundrels," observed Malone, in a profound vein
of reflection. "I almost wish a party would call upon you to-night; but
the road seemed extremely quiet as I came along. I saw nothing astir."

"You came by the Redhouse?"

"Yes."

"There would be nothing on that road. It is in the direction of Stilbro'
the risk lies."

"And you think there is risk?"

"What these fellows have done to others they may do to me. There is only
this difference: most of the manufacturers seem paralyzed when they are
attacked. Sykes, for instance, when his dressing-shop was set on fire
and burned to the ground, when the cloth was torn from his tenters and
left in shreds in the field, took no steps to discover or punish the
miscreants: he gave up as tamely as a rabbit under the jaws of a ferret.
Now I, if I know myself, should stand by my trade, my mill, and my
machinery."

"Helstone says these three are your gods; that the 'Orders in Council'
are with you another name for the seven deadly sins; that Castlereagh is
your Antichrist, and the war-party his legions."

"Yes; I abhor all these things because they ruin me. They stand in my
way. I cannot get on. I cannot execute my plans because of them. I see
myself baffled at every turn by their untoward effects."

"But you are rich and thriving, Moore?"

"I am very rich in cloth I cannot sell. You should step into my
warehouse yonder, and observe how it is piled to the roof with pieces.
Roakes and Pearson are in the same condition. America used to be their
market, but the Orders in Council have cut that off."

Malone did not seem prepared to carry on briskly a conversation of this
sort. He began to knock the heels of his boots together, and to yawn.

"And then to think," continued Mr. Moore who seemed too much taken up
with the current of his own thoughts to note the symptoms of his guest's
 ennui - "to think that these ridiculous gossips of Whinbury and
Briarfield will keep pestering one about being married! As if there was
nothing to be done in life but to 'pay attention,' as they say, to some
young lady, and then to go to church with her, and then to start on a
bridal tour, and then to run through a round of visits, and then, I
suppose, to be 'having a family.' Oh, que le diable emporte!" He broke
off the aspiration into which he was launching with a certain energy,
and added, more calmly, "I believe women talk and think only of these
things, and they naturally fancy men's minds similarly occupied."

"Of course - of course," assented Malone; "but never mind them." And he
whistled, looked impatiently round, and seemed to feel a great want of
something. This time Moore caught and, it appeared, comprehended his
demonstrations.

"Mr. Malone," said he, "you must require refreshment after your wet
walk. I forget hospitality."

"Not at all," rejoined Malone; but he looked as if the right nail was at
last hit on the head, nevertheless. Moore rose and opened a cupboard.

"It is my fancy," said he, "to have every convenience within myself, and
not to be dependent on the feminity in the cottage yonder for every
mouthful I eat or every drop I drink. I often spend the evening and sup
here alone, and sleep with Joe Scott in the mill. Sometimes I am my own
watchman. I require little sleep, and it pleases me on a fine night to
wander for an hour or two with my musket about the hollow. Mr. Malone,
can you cook a mutton chop?"

"Try me. I've  done it hundreds of times at college."

"There's a dishful, then, and there's the gridiron. Turn them quickly.
You know the secret of keeping the juices in?"

"Never fear me; you shall see. Hand a knife and fork, please."

The curate turned up his coat-cuffs, and applied himself to the cookery
with vigour. The manufacturer placed on the table plates, a loaf of
bread, a black bottle, and two tumblers. He then produced a small copper
kettle - still from the same well-stored recess, his cupboard - filled it
with water from a large stone jar in a corner, set it on the fire beside
the hissing gridiron, got lemons, sugar, and a small china punch-bowl;
but while he was brewing the punch a tap at the door called him away.

"Is it you, Sarah?"

"Yes, sir. Will you come to supper, please, sir?"

"No; I shall not be in to-night; I shall sleep in the mill. So lock the
doors, and tell your mistress to go to bed."

He returned.

"You have your household in proper order," observed Malone approvingly,
as, with his fine face ruddy as the embers over which he bent, he
assiduously turned the mutton chops. "You are not under petticoat
government, like poor Sweeting, a man - whew! how the fat spits! it has
burnt my hand - destined to be ruled by women. Now you and I,
Moore - there's a fine brown one for you, and full of gravy - you and I
will have no gray mares in our stables when we marry."

"I don't  know; I never think about it. If the gray mare is handsome and
tractable, why not?"

"The chops are done. Is the punch brewed?"

"There is a glassful. Taste it. When Joe Scott and his minions return
they shall have a share of this, provided they bring home the frames
intact."

Malone waxed very exultant over the supper. He laughed aloud at trifles,
made bad jokes and applauded them himself, and, in short, grew
unmeaningly noisy. His host, on the contrary, remained quiet as before.
It is time, reader, that you should have some idea of the appearance of
this same host. I must endeavour to sketch him as he sits at table.

He is what you would probably call, at first view, rather a
strange-looking man; for he is thin, dark, sallow, very foreign of
aspect, with shadowy hair carelessly streaking his forehead. It appears
that he spends but little time at his toilet, or he would arrange it
with more taste. He seems unconscious that his features are fine, that
they have a southern symmetry, clearness, regularity in their
chiselling; nor does a spectator become aware of this advantage till he
has examined him well, for an anxious countenance and a hollow, somewhat
haggard, outline of face disturb the idea of beauty with one of care.
His eyes are large, and grave, and gray; their expression is intent and
meditative, rather searching than soft, rather thoughtful than genial.
When he parts his lips in a smile, his physiognomy is agreeable - not
that it is frank or cheerful even then, but you feel the influence of a
certain sedate charm, suggestive, whether truly or delusively, of a
considerate, perhaps a kind nature, of feelings that may wear well at
home - patient, forbearing, possibly faithful feelings. He is still
young - not more than thirty; his stature is tall, his figure slender.
His manner of speaking displeases. He has an outlandish accent, which,
notwithstanding a studied carelessness of pronunciation and diction,
grates on a British, and especially on a Yorkshire, ear.

Mr. Moore, indeed, was but half a Briton, and scarcely that. He came of
a foreign ancestry by the mother's side, and was himself born and partly
reared on a foreign soil. A hybrid in nature, it is probable he had a
hybrid's feeling on many points - patriotism for one; it is likely that
he was unapt to attach himself to parties, to sects, even to climes and
customs; it is not impossible that he had a tendency to isolate his
individual person from any community amidst which his lot might
temporarily happen to be thrown, and that he felt it to be his best
wisdom to push the interests of Robert Gérard Moore, to the exclusion of
philanthropic consideration for general interests, with which he
regarded the said Gérard Moore as in a great measure disconnected. Trade
was Mr. Moore's hereditary calling: the Gérards of Antwerp had been
merchants for two centuries back. Once they had been wealthy merchants;
but the uncertainties, the involvements, of business had come upon them;
disastrous speculations had loosened by degrees the foundations of their
credit. The house had stood on a tottering base for a dozen years; and
at last, in the shock of the French Revolution, it had rushed down a
total ruin. In its fall was involved the English and Yorkshire firm of
Moore, closely connected with the Antwerp house, and of which one of the
partners, resident in Antwerp, Robert Moore, had married Hortense
Gérard, with the prospect of his bride inheriting her father Constantine
Gérard's share in the business. She inherited, as we have seen, but his
share in the liabilities of the firm; and these liabilities, though duly
set aside by a composition with creditors, some said her son Robert
accepted, in his turn, as a legacy, and that he aspired one day to
discharge them, and to rebuild the fallen house of Gérard and Moore on a
scale at least equal to its former greatness. It was even supposed that
he took by-past circumstances much to heart; and if a childhood passed
at the side of a saturnine mother, under foreboding of coming evil, and
a manhood drenched and blighted by the pitiless descent of the storm,
could painfully impress the mind, his probably was impressed in no
golden characters.

If, however, he had a great end of restoration in view, it was not in
his power to employ great means for its attainment. He was obliged to be
content with the day of small things. When he came to Yorkshire,
he - whose ancestors had owned warehouses in this seaport, and factories
in that inland town, had possessed their town-house and their
country-seat - saw no way open to him but to rent a cloth-mill in an
out-of-the-way nook of an out-of-the-way district; to take a cottage
adjoining it for his residence, and to add to his possessions, as
pasture for his horse, and space for his cloth-tenters, a few acres of
the steep, rugged land that lined the hollow through which his
mill-stream brawled. All this he held at a somewhat high rent  for these
war times were hard, and everything was dear  of the trustees of the
Fieldhead estate, then the property of a minor.

At the time this history commences, Robert Moore had lived but two years
in the district, during which period he had at least proved himself
possessed of the quality of activity. The dingy cottage was converted
into a neat, tasteful residence. Of part of the rough land he had made
garden-ground, which he cultivated with singular, even with Flemish,
exactness and care. As to the mill, which was an old structure, and
fitted up with old machinery, now become inefficient and out of date, he
had from the first evinced the strongest contempt for all its
arrangements and appointments. His aim had been to effect a radical
reform, which he had executed as fast as his very limited capital would
allow; and the narrowness of that capital, and consequent check on his
progress, was a restraint which galled his spirit sorely. Moore ever
wanted to push on. "Forward" was the device stamped upon his soul; but
poverty curbed him. Sometimes  figuratively  he foamed at the mouth when
the reins were drawn very tight.

In this state of feeling, it is not to be expected that he would
deliberate much as to whether his advance was or was not prejudicial to
others. Not being a native, nor for any length of time a resident of the
neighbourhood, he did not sufficiently care when the new inventions
threw the old workpeople out of employ. He never asked himself where
those to whom he no longer paid weekly wages found daily bread; and in
this negligence he only resembled thousands besides, on whom the
starving poor of Yorkshire seemed to have a closer claim.

The period of which I write was an overshadowed one in British history,
and especially in the history of the northern provinces. War was then
at its height. Europe was all involved therein. England, if not weary,
was worn with long resistance - yes, and half her people were weary too,
and cried out for peace on any terms. National honour was become a mere
empty name, of no value in the eyes of many, because their sight was dim
with famine; and for a morsel of meat they would have sold their
birthright.

The "Orders in Council," provoked by Napoleon's Milan and Berlin
decrees, and forbidding neutral powers to trade with France, had, by
offending America, cut off the principal market of the Yorkshire woollen
trade, and brought it consequently to the verge of ruin. Minor foreign
markets were glutted, and would receive no more. The Brazils, Portugal,
Sicily, were all overstocked by nearly two years' consumption. At this
crisis certain inventions in machinery were introduced into the staple
manufactures of the north, which, greatly reducing the number of hands
necessary to be employed, threw thousands out of work, and left them
without legitimate means of sustaining life. A bad harvest supervened.
Distress reached its climax. Endurance, overgoaded, stretched the hand
of fraternity to sedition. The throes of a sort of moral earthquake were
felt heaving under the hills of the northern counties. But, as is usual
in such cases, nobody took much notice. When a food-riot broke out in a
manufacturing town, when a gig-mill was burnt to the ground, or a
manufacturer's house was attacked, the furniture thrown into the
streets, and the family forced to flee for their lives, some local
measures were or were not taken by the local magistracy. A ringleader
was detected, or more frequently suffered to elude detection; newspaper
paragraphs were written on the subject, and there the thing stopped. As
to the sufferers, whose sole inheritance was labour, and who had lost
that inheritance - who could not get work, and consequently could not get
wages, and consequently could not get bread - they were left to suffer
on, perhaps inevitably left. It would not do to stop the progress of
invention, to damage science by discouraging its improvements; the war
could not be terminated; efficient relief could not be raised. There was
no help then; so the unemployed underwent their destiny - ate the bread
and drank the waters of affliction.

Misery generates hate. These sufferers hated the machines which they
believed took their bread from them; they hated the buildings which
contained those machines; they hated the manufacturers who owned those
buildings. In the parish of Briarfield, with which we have at present to
do, Hollow's Mill was the place held most abominable; Gérard Moore, in
his double character of semi-foreigner and thorough-going progressist,
the man most abominated. And it perhaps rather agreed with Moore's
temperament than otherwise to be generally hated, especially when he
believed the thing for which he was hated a right and an expedient
thing; and it was with a sense of warlike excitement he, on this night,
sat in his counting-house waiting the arrival of his frame-laden wagons.
Malone's coming and company were, it may be, most unwelcome to him. He
would have preferred sitting alone; for he liked a silent, sombre,
unsafe solitude. His watchman's musket would have been company enough
for him; the full-flowing beck in the den would have delivered
continuously the discourse most genial to his ear.

          

With the queerest look in the world had the manufacturer for some ten
minutes been watching the Irish curate, as the latter made free with the
punch, when suddenly that steady gray eye changed, as if another vision
came between it and Malone. Moore raised his hand.

"Chut!" he said in his French fashion, as Malone made a noise with his
glass. He listened a moment, then rose, put his hat on, and went out at
the counting-house door.

The night was still, dark, and stagnant: the water yet rushed on full
and fast; its flow almost seemed a flood in the utter silence. Moore's
ear, however, caught another sound, very distant but yet dissimilar,
broken and rugged - in short, a sound of heavy wheels crunching a stony
road. He returned to the counting-house and lit a lantern, with which he
walked down the mill-yard, and proceeded to open the gates. The big
wagons were coming on; the dray-horses' huge hoofs were heard splashing
in the mud and water. Moore hailed them.

"Hey, Joe Scott! Is all right?"

Probably Joe Scott was yet at too great a distance to hear the inquiry.
He did not answer it.

"Is all right, I say?" again asked Moore, when the elephant-like
leader's nose almost touched his.

Some one jumped out from the foremost wagon into the road; a voice cried
aloud, "Ay, ay, divil; all's raight! We've  smashed 'em."

And there was a run. The wagons stood still; they were now deserted.

"Joe Scott!" No Joe Scott answered. "Murgatroyd! Pighills! Sykes!" No
reply. Mr. Moore lifted his lantern and looked into the vehicles. There
was neither man nor machinery; they were empty and abandoned.

Now Mr. Moore loved his machinery. He had risked the last of his capital
on the purchase of these frames and shears which to-night had been
expected. Speculations most important to his interests depended on the
results to be wrought by them. Where were they?

The words "we've  smashed 'em" rang in his ears. How did the catastrophe
affect him? By the light of the lantern he held were his features
visible, relaxing to a singular smile - the smile the man of determined
spirit wears when he reaches a juncture in his life where this
determined spirit is to feel a demand on its strength, when the strain
is to be made, and the faculty must bear or break. Yet he remained
silent, and even motionless; for at the instant he neither knew what to
say nor what to do. He placed the lantern on the ground, and stood with
his arms folded, gazing down and reflecting.

An impatient trampling of one of the horses made him presently look up.
His eye in the moment caught the gleam of something white attached to a
part of the harness. Examined by the light of the lantern this proved to
be a folded paper - a billet. It bore no address without; within was the
superscription: - 

"To the Divil of Hollow's Miln."

We will not copy the rest of the orthography, which was very peculiar,
but translate it into legible English. It ran thus: - 

"Your hellish machinery is shivered to smash on Stilbro' Moor, and your
men are lying bound hand and foot in a ditch by the roadside. Take this
as a warning from men that are starving, and have starving wives and
children to go home to when they have done this deed. If you get new
machines, or if you otherwise go on as you have done, you shall hear
from us again. Beware!"

"Hear from you again? Yes, I'll hear from you again, and you shall hear
from me. I'll speak to you directly. On Stilbro' Moor you shall hear
from me in a moment."

Having led the wagons within the gates, he hastened towards the cottage.
Opening the door, he spoke a few words quickly but quietly to two
females who ran to meet him in the passage. He calmed the seeming alarm
of one by a brief palliative account of what had taken place; to the
other he said, "Go into the mill, Sarah - there is the key - and ring the
mill-bell as loud as you can. Afterwards you will get another lantern
and help me to light up the front."

Returning to his horses, he unharnessed, fed, and stabled them with
equal speed and care, pausing occasionally, while so occupied, as if to
listen for the mill-bell. It clanged out presently, with irregular but
loud and alarming din. The hurried, agitated peal seemed more urgent
than if the summons had been steadily given by a practised hand. On that
still night, at that unusual hour, it was heard a long way round. The
guests in the kitchen of the Redhouse were startled by the clamour, and
declaring that "there must be summat more nor common to do at Hollow's
Miln," they called for lanterns, and hurried to the spot in a body. And
scarcely had they thronged into the yard with their gleaming lights,
when the tramp of horses was heard, and a little man in a shovel hat,
sitting erect on the back of a shaggy pony, "rode lightly in," followed
by an aide-de-camp mounted on a larger steed.

Mr. Moore, meantime, after stabling his dray-horses, had saddled his
hackney, and with the aid of Sarah, the servant, lit up his mill, whose
wide and long front now glared one great illumination, throwing a
sufficient light on the yard to obviate all fear of confusion arising
from obscurity. Already a deep hum of voices became audible. Mr. Malone
had at length issued from the counting-house, previously taking the
precaution to dip his head and face in the stone water-jug; and this
precaution, together with the sudden alarm, had nearly restored to him
the possession of those senses which the punch had partially scattered.
He stood with his hat on the back of his head, and his shillelah grasped
in his dexter fist, answering much at random the questions of the
newly-arrived party from the Redhouse. Mr. Moore now appeared, and was
immediately confronted by the shovel hat and the shaggy pony.

"Well, Moore, what is your business with us? I thought you would want us
to-night - me and the hetman here  patting his pony's neck , and Tom and
his charger. When I heard your mill-bell I could sit still no longer, so
I left Boultby to finish his supper alone. But where is the enemy? I do
not see a mask or a smutted face present; and there is not a pane of
glass broken in your windows. Have you had an attack, or do you expect
one?"

"Oh, not at all! I have neither had one nor expect one," answered Moore
coolly. "I only ordered the bell to be rung because I want two or three
neighbours to stay here in the Hollow while I and a couple or so more go
over to Stilbro' Moor."

"To Stilbro' Moor! What to do? To meet the wagons?"

"The wagons are come home an hour ago."

"Then all's right. What more would you have?"

"They came home empty; and Joe Scott and company are left on the moor,
and so are the frames. Read that scrawl."

Mr. Helstone received and perused the document of which the contents
have before been given.

"Hum! They've  only served you as they serve others. But, however, the
poor fellows in the ditch will be expecting help with some impatience.
This is a wet night for such a berth. I and Tom will go with you. Malone
may stay behind and take care of the mill. What is the matter with him?
His eyes seem starting out of his head."

"He has been eating a mutton chop."

"Indeed! - Peter Augustus, be on your guard. Eat no more mutton chops
to-night. You are left here in command of these premises - an honourable
post!"

"Is anybody to stay with me?"

"As many of the present assemblage as choose. - My lads, how many of you
will remain here, and how many will go a little way with me and Mr.
Moore on the Stilbro' road, to meet some men who have been waylaid and
assaulted by frame-breakers?"

The small number of three volunteered to go; the rest preferred staying
behind. As Mr. Moore mounted his horse, the rector asked him in a low
voice whether he had locked up the mutton chops, so that Peter Augustus
could not get at them? The manufacturer nodded an affirmative, and the
rescue-party set out.




CHAPTER III.

MR. YORKE.


Cheerfulness, it would appear, is a matter which depends fully as much
on the state of things within as on the state of things without and
around us. I make this trite remark, because I happen to know that
Messrs. Helstone and Moore trotted forth from the mill-yard gates, at
the head of their very small company, in the best possible spirits. When
a ray from a lantern  the three pedestrians of the party carried each
one  fell on Mr. Moore's face, you could see an unusual, because a
lively, spark dancing in his eyes, and a new-found vivacity mantling on
his dark physiognomy; and when the rector's visage was illuminated, his
hard features were revealed all agrin and ashine with glee. Yet a
drizzling night, a somewhat perilous expedition, you would think were
not circumstances calculated to enliven those exposed to the wet and
engaged in the adventure. If any member or members of the crew who had
been at work on Stilbro' Moor had caught a view of this party, they
would have had great pleasure in shooting either of the leaders from
behind a wall: and the leaders knew this; and the fact is, being both
men of steely nerves and steady-beating hearts, were elate with the
knowledge.

I am aware, reader, and you need not remind me, that it is a dreadful
thing for a parson to be warlike; I am aware that he should be a man of
peace. I have some faint outline of an idea of what a clergyman's
mission is amongst mankind, and I remember distinctly whose servant he
is, whose message he delivers, whose example he should follow; yet, with
all this, if you are a parson-hater, you need not expect me to go along
with you every step of your dismal, downward-tending, unchristian road;
you need not expect me to join in your deep anathemas, at once so narrow
and so sweeping, in your poisonous rancour, so intense and so absurd,
against "the cloth;" to lift up my eyes and hands with a Supplehough,
or to inflate my lungs with a Barraclough, in horror and denunciation of
the diabolical rector of Briarfield.

He was not diabolical at all. The evil simply was - he had missed his
vocation. He should have been a soldier, and circumstances had made him
a priest. For the rest, he was a conscientious, hard-headed,
hard-handed, brave, stern, implacable, faithful little man; a man almost
without sympathy, ungentle, prejudiced, and rigid, but a man true to
principle, honourable, sagacious, and sincere. It seems to me, reader,
that you cannot always cut out men to fit their profession, and that you
ought not to curse them because their profession sometimes hangs on them
ungracefully. Nor will I curse Helstone, clerical Cossack as he was. Yet
he was cursed, and by many of his own parishioners, as by others he
was adored - which is the frequent fate of men who show partiality in
friendship and bitterness in enmity, who are equally attached to
principles and adherent to prejudices.

Helstone and Moore being both in excellent spirits, and united for the
present in one cause, you would expect that, as they rode side by side,
they would converse amicably. Oh no! These two men, of hard, bilious
natures both, rarely came into contact but they chafed each other's
moods. Their frequent bone of contention was the war. Helstone was a
high Tory  there were Tories in those days , and Moore was a bitter
Whig - a Whig, at least, as far as opposition to the war-party was
concerned, that being the question which affected his own interest; and
only on that question did he profess any British politics at all. He
liked to infuriate Helstone by declaring his belief in the invincibility
of Bonaparte, by taunting England and Europe with the impotence of their
efforts to withstand him, and by coolly advancing the opinion that it
was as well to yield to him soon as late, since he must in the end crush
every antagonist, and reign supreme.

Helstone could not bear these sentiments. It was only on the
consideration of Moore being a sort of outcast and alien, and having but
half measure of British blood to temper the foreign gall which corroded
his veins, that he brought himself to listen to them without indulging
the wish he felt to cane the speaker. Another thing, too, somewhat
allayed his disgust - namely, a fellow-feeling for the dogged tone with
which these opinions were asserted, and a respect for the consistency
of Moore's crabbed contumacy.

As the party turned into the Stilbro' road, they met what little wind
there was; the rain dashed in their faces. Moore had been fretting his
companion previously, and now, braced up by the raw breeze, and perhaps
irritated by the sharp drizzle, he began to goad him.

"Does your Peninsular news please you still?" he asked.

"What do you mean?" was the surly demand of the rector.

"I mean, have you still faith in that Baal of a Lord Wellington?"

"And what do you mean now?"

"Do you still believe that this wooden-faced and pebble-hearted idol of
England has power to send fire down from heaven to consume the French
holocaust you want to offer up?"

"I believe Wellington will flog Bonaparte's marshals into the sea the
day it pleases him to lift his arm."

"But, my dear sir, you can't  be serious in what you say. Bonaparte's
marshals are great men, who act under the guidance of an omnipotent
master-spirit. Your Wellington is the most humdrum of commonplace
martinets, whose slow, mechanical movements are further cramped by an
ignorant home government."

"Wellington is the soul of England. Wellington is the right champion of
a good cause, the fit representative of a powerful, a resolute, a
sensible, and an honest nation."

"Your good cause, as far as I understand it, is simply the restoration
of that filthy, feeble Ferdinand to a throne which he disgraced. Your
fit representative of an honest people is a dull-witted drover, acting
for a duller-witted farmer; and against these are arrayed victorious
supremacy and invincible genius."

"Against legitimacy is arrayed usurpation; against modest,
single-minded, righteous, and brave resistance to encroachment is
arrayed boastful, double-tongued, selfish, and treacherous ambition to
possess. God defend the right!"

"God often defends the powerful."

"What! I suppose the handful of Israelites standing dryshod on the
Asiatic side of the Red Sea was more powerful than the host of the
Egyptians drawn up on the African side? Were they more numerous? Were
they better appointed? Were they more mighty, in a word - eh? Don't 
speak, or you'll tell a lie, Moore; you know you will. They were a poor,
overwrought band of bondsmen. Tyrants had oppressed them through four
hundred years; a feeble mixture of women and children diluted their thin
ranks; their masters, who roared to follow them through the divided
flood, were a set of pampered Ethiops, about as strong and brutal as the
lions of Libya. They were armed, horsed, and charioted; the poor Hebrew
wanderers were afoot. Few of them, it is likely, had better weapons than
their shepherds' crooks or their masons' building-tools; their meek and
mighty leader himself had only his rod. But bethink you, Robert Moore,
right was with them; the God of battles was on their side. Crime and the
lost archangel generalled the ranks of Pharaoh, and which triumphed? We
know that well. 'The Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore' - yea,
'the depths covered them, they sank to the bottom as a stone.' The right
hand of the Lord became glorious in power; the right hand of the Lord
dashed in pieces the enemy!"

"You are all right; only you forget the true parallel. France is Israel,
and Napoleon is Moses. Europe, with her old overgorged empires and
rotten dynasties, is corrupt Egypt; gallant France is the Twelve Tribes,
and her fresh and vigorous Usurper the Shepherd of Horeb."

"I scorn to answer you."

Moore accordingly answered himself - at least, he subjoined to what he
had just said an additional observation in a lower voice.

"Oh, in Italy he was as great as any Moses! He was the right thing
there, fit to head and organize measures for the regeneration of
nations. It puzzles me to this day how the conqueror of Lodi should have
condescended to become an emperor, a vulgar, a stupid humbug; and still
more how a people who had once called themselves republicans should have
sunk again to the grade of mere slaves. I despise France! If England had
gone as far on the march of civilization as France did, she would hardly
have retreated so shamelessly."

"You don't  mean to say that besotted imperial France is any worse than
bloody republican France?" demanded Helstone fiercely.

"I mean to say nothing, but I can think what I please, you know, Mr.
Helstone, both about France and England; and about revolutions, and
regicides, and restorations in general; and about the divine right of
kings, which you often stickle for in your sermons, and the duty of
non-resistance, and the sanity of war, and - - "

Mr. Moore's sentence was here cut short by the rapid rolling up of a
gig, and its sudden stoppage in the middle of the road. Both he and the
rector had been too much occupied with their discourse to notice its
approach till it was close upon them.

"Nah, maister; did th' wagons hit home?" demanded a voice from the
vehicle.

"Can that be Joe Scott?"

"Ay, ay!" returned another voice; for the gig contained two persons, as
was seen by the glimmer of its lamp. The men with the lanterns had now
fallen into the rear, or rather, the equestrians of the rescue-party had
outridden the pedestrians. "Ay, Mr. Moore, it's Joe Scott. I'm bringing
him back to you in a bonny pickle. I fand him on the top of the moor
yonder, him and three others. What will you give me for restoring him to
you?"

"Why, my thanks, I believe; for I could better have afforded to lose a
better man. That is you, I suppose, Mr. Yorke, by your voice?"

"Ay, lad, it's me. I was coming home from Stilbro' market, and just as I
got to the middle of the moor, and was whipping on as swift as the wind
 for these, they say, are not safe times, thanks to a bad government! ,
I heard a groan. I pulled up. Some would have whipt on faster; but I've 
naught to fear that I know of. I don't  believe there's a lad in these
parts would harm me - at least, I'd give them as good as I got if they
offered to do it. I said, 'Is there aught wrong anywhere?' "Deed is
there,' somebody says, speaking out of the ground, like. 'What's to do?
Be sharp and tell me,' I ordered. 'Nobbut four on us ligging in a
ditch,' says Joe, as quiet as could be. I telled 'em more shame to 'em,
and bid them get up and move on, or I'd lend them a lick of the
gig-whip; for my notion was they were all fresh. 'We'd ha' done that an
hour sin', but we're teed wi' a bit o' band,' says Joe. So in a while I
got down and loosed 'em wi' my penknife; and Scott would ride wi' me, to
tell me all how it happened; and t' others are coming on as fast as
their feet will bring them."

"Well, I am greatly obliged to you, Mr. Yorke."

"Are you, my lad? You know you're not. However, here are the rest
approaching. And here, by the Lord, is another set with lights in their
pitchers, like the army of Gideon; and as we've  th' parson wi',
us - good-evening, Mr. Helstone - we'se do."

Mr. Helstone returned the salutation of the individual in the gig very
stiffly indeed. That individual proceeded, - 

"We're eleven strong men, and there's both horses and chariots amang us.
If we could only fall in wi' some of these starved ragamuffins of
frame-breakers we could win a grand victory. We could iv'ry one be a
Wellington - that would please ye, Mr. Helstone - and sich paragraphs as
we could contrive for t' papers! Briarfield suld be famous. But we'se
hev a column and a half i' th' Stilbro' Courier ower this job, as it
is, I dare say. I'se expect no less."

"And I'll promise you no less, Mr. Yorke, for I'll write the article
myself," returned the rector.

"To be sure - sartainly! And mind ye recommend weel that them 'at brake
t' bits o' frames, and teed Joe Scott's legs wi' band, suld be hung
without benefit o' clergy. It's a hanging matter, or suld be. No doubt
o' that."

"If I judged them I'd give them short shrift!" cried Moore. "But I mean
to let them quite alone this bout, to give them rope enough, certain
that in the end they will hang themselves."

"Let them alone, will ye, Moore? Do you promise that?"

"Promise! No. All I mean to say is, I shall give myself no particular
trouble to catch them; but if one falls in my way - - "

"You'll snap him up, of course. Only you would rather they would do
something worse than merely stop a wagon before you reckon with them.
Well, we'll say no more on the subject at present. Here we are at my
door, gentlemen, and I hope you and the men will step in. You will none
of you be the worse of a little refreshment."

Moore and Helstone opposed this proposition as unnecessary. It was,
however, pressed on them so courteously, and the night, besides, was so
inclement, and the gleam from the muslin-curtained windows of the house
before which they had halted looked so inviting, that at length they
yielded. Mr. Yorke, after having alighted from his gig, which he left in
charge of a man who issued from an outbuilding on his arrival, led the
way in.

It will have been remarked that Mr. Yorke varied a little in his
phraseology. Now he spoke broad Yorkshire, and anon he expressed himself
in very pure English. His manner seemed liable to equal alternations. He
could be polite and affable, and he could be blunt and rough. His
station then you could not easily determine by his speech and demeanour.
Perhaps the appearance of his residence may decide it.

The men he recommended to take the kitchen way, saying that he would
'see them served wi' summat to taste presently." The gentlemen were
ushered in at the front entrance. They found themselves in a matted
hall, lined almost to the ceiling with pictures. Through this they were
conducted to a large parlour, with a magnificent fire in the grate - the
most cheerful of rooms it appeared as a whole, and when you came to
examine details, the enlivening effect was not diminished. There was no
splendour, but there was taste everywhere, unusual taste - the taste, you
would have said, of a travelled man, a scholar, and a gentleman. A
series of Italian views decked the walls. Each of these was a specimen
of true art. A connoisseur had selected them; they were genuine and
valuable. Even by candle-light the bright clear skies, the soft
distances, with blue air quivering between the eye and the hills, the
fresh tints, and well-massed lights and shadows, charmed the view. The
subjects were all pastoral, the scenes were all sunny. There was a
guitar and some music on a sofa; there were cameos, beautiful
miniatures; a set of Grecian-looking vases on the mantelpiece; there
were books well arranged in two elegant bookcases.

Mr. Yorke bade his guests be seated. He then rang for wine. To the
servant who brought it he gave hospitable orders for the refreshment of
the men in the kitchen. The rector remained standing; he seemed not to
like his quarters; he would not touch the wine his host offered him.

"E'en as you will," remarked Mr. Yorke. "I reckon you're thinking of
Eastern customs, Mr. Helstone, and you'll not eat nor drink under my
roof, feared we suld be forced to be friends; but I am not so particular
or superstitious. You might sup the contents of that decanter, and you
might give me a bottle of the best in your own cellar, and I'd hold
myself free to oppose you at every turn still - in every vestry-meeting
and justice-meeting where we encountered one another."

"It is just what I should expect of you, Mr. Yorke."

"Does it agree wi' ye now, Mr. Helstone, to be riding out after rioters,
of a wet night, at your age?"

"It always agrees with me to be doing my duty; and in this case my duty
is a thorough pleasure. To hunt down vermin is a noble occupation, fit
for an archbishop."

"Fit for ye, at ony rate. But where's t' curate? He's happen gone to
visit some poor body in a sick gird, or he's happen hunting down vermin
in another direction."

"He is doing garrison-duty at Hollow's Mill."

"You left him a sup o' wine, I hope, Bob"  turning to Mr. Moore , "to
keep his courage up?"

He did not pause for an answer, but continued, quickly, still addressing
Moore, who had thrown himself into an old-fashioned chair by the
fireside - "Move it, Robert! Get up, my lad! That place is mine. Take the
sofa, or three other chairs, if you will, but not this. It belangs to
me, and nob'dy else."

"Why are you so particular to that chair, Mr. Yorke?" asked Moore,
lazily vacating the place in obedience to orders.

"My father war afore me, and that's all t' answer I sall gie thee; and
it's as good a reason as Mr. Helstone can give for the main feck o' his
notions."

"Moore, are you ready to go?" inquired the rector.

"Nay; Robert's not ready, or rather, I'm not ready to part wi' him. He's
an ill lad, and wants correcting."

"Why, sir? What have I done?"

"Made thyself enemies on every hand."

"What do I care for that? What difference does it make to me whether
your Yorkshire louts hate me or like me?"

"Ay, there it is. The lad is a mak' of an alien amang us. His father
would never have talked i' that way. - Go back to Antwerp, where you were
born and bred, mauvaise tete!"

"Mauvaise tete vous-meme; je ne fais que mon devoir; quant a vos
lourdauds de paysans, je m'en moque!"

"En ravanche, mon garçon, nos lourdauds de paysans se moqueront de toi;
sois en certain," replied Yorke, speaking with nearly as pure a French
accent as Gérard Moore.

"C'est bon! c'est bon! Et puisque cela m'est égal, que mes amis ne s'en
inquietent pas."

"Tes amis! Ou sont-ils, tes amis?"

"Je fais écho, ou sont-ils? et je suis fort aise que l'écho seul y
répond. Au diable les amis! Je me souviens encore du moment ou mon pere
et mes oncles Gérard appellerent autour d'eux leurs amis, et Dieu sait
si les amis se sont empressés d'accourir a leur secours! Tenez, M.
Yorke, ce mot, ami, m'irrite trop; ne m'en parlez plus."

"Comme tu voudras."

And here Mr. Yorke held his peace; and while he sits leaning back in his
three-cornered carved oak chair, I will snatch my opportunity to sketch
the portrait of this French-speaking Yorkshire gentleman.




CHAPTER IV.

MR. YORKE   continued  .


A Yorkshire gentleman he was, par excellence , in every point; about
fifty-five years old, but looking at first sight still older, for his
hair was silver white. His forehead was broad, not high; his face fresh
and hale; the harshness of the north was seen in his features, as it was
heard in his voice; every trait was thoroughly English - not a Norman
line anywhere; it was an inelegant, unclassic, unaristocratic mould of
visage. Fine people would perhaps have called it vulgar; sensible people
would have termed it characteristic; shrewd people would have delighted
in it for the pith, sagacity, intelligence, the rude yet real
originality marked in every lineament, latent in every furrow. But it
was an indocile, a scornful, and a sarcastic face - the face of a man
difficult to lead, and impossible to drive. His stature was rather tall,
and he was well made and wiry, and had a stately integrity of port;
there was not a suspicion of the clown about him anywhere.

I did not find it easy to sketch Mr. Yorke's person, but it is more
difficult to indicate his mind. If you expect to be treated to a
Perfection, reader, or even to a benevolent, philanthropic old gentleman
in him, you are mistaken. He has spoken with some sense and with some
good feeling to Mr. Moore, but you are not thence to conclude that he
always spoke and thought justly and kindly.

Mr. Yorke, in the first place, was without the organ of veneration - a
great want, and which throws a man wrong on every point where veneration
is required. Secondly, he was without the organ of comparison - a
deficiency which strips a man of sympathy; and thirdly, he had too
little of the organs of benevolence and ideality, which took the glory
and softness from his nature, and for him diminished those divine
qualities throughout the universe.

The want of veneration made him intolerant to those above him - kings and
nobles and priests, dynasties and parliaments and establishments, with
all their doings, most of their enactments, their forms, their rights,
their claims, were to him an abomination, all rubbish; he found no use
or pleasure in them, and believed it would be clear gain, and no damage
to the world, if its high places were razed, and their occupants crushed
in the fall. The want of veneration, too, made him dead at heart to the
electric delight of admiring what is admirable; it dried up a thousand
pure sources of enjoyment; it withered a thousand vivid pleasures. He
was not irreligious, though a member of no sect; but his religion could
not be that of one who knows how to venerate. He believed in God and
heaven; but his God and heaven were those of a man in whom awe,
imagination, and tenderness lack.

The weakness of his powers of comparison made him inconsistent; while he
professed some excellent general doctrines of mutual toleration and
forbearance, he cherished towards certain classes a bigoted antipathy.
He spoke of "parsons" and all who belonged to parsons, of "lords" and
the appendages of lords, with a harshness, sometimes an insolence, as
unjust as it was insufferable. He could not place himself in the
position of those he vituperated; he could not compare their errors with
their temptations, their defects with their disadvantages; he could not
realize the effect of such and such circumstances on himself similarly
situated, and he would often express the most ferocious and tyrannical
wishes regarding those who had acted, as he thought, ferociously and
tyrannically. To judge by his threats, he would have employed arbitrary,
even cruel, means to advance the cause of freedom and equality.
Equality! yes, Mr. Yorke talked about equality, but at heart he was a
proud man - very friendly to his workpeople, very good to all who were
beneath him, and submitted quietly to be beneath him, but haughty as
Beelzebub to whomsoever the world deemed  for he deemed no man  his
superior. Revolt was in his blood: he could not bear control; his
father, his grandfather before him, could not bear it, and his children
after him never could.

The want of general benevolence made him very impatient of imbecility,
and of all faults which grated on his strong, shrewd nature; it left no
check to his cutting sarcasm. As he was not merciful, he would sometimes
wound and wound again, without noticing how much he hurt, or caring how
deep he thrust.

As to the paucity of ideality in his mind, that can scarcely be called a
fault: a fine ear for music, a correct eye for colour and form, left him
the quality of taste; and who cares for imagination? Who does not think
it a rather dangerous, senseless attribute, akin to weakness, perhaps
partaking of frenzy - a disease rather than a gift of the mind?

Probably all think it so but those who possess, or fancy they possess,
it. To hear them speak, you would believe that their hearts would be
cold if that elixir did not flow about them, that their eyes would be
dim if that flame did not refine their vision, that they would be lonely
if this strange companion abandoned them. You would suppose that it
imparted some glad hope to spring, some fine charm to summer, some
tranquil joy to autumn, some consolation to winter, which you do not
feel. An illusion, of course; but the fanatics cling to their dream, and
would not give it for gold.

As Mr. Yorke did not possess poetic imagination himself, he considered
it a most superfluous quality in others. Painters and musicians he could
tolerate, and even encourage, because he could relish the results of
their art; he could see the charm of a fine picture, and feel the
pleasure of good music; but a quiet poet - whatever force struggled,
whatever fire glowed, in his breast - if he could not have played the man
in the counting-house, of the tradesman in the Piece Hall, might have
lived despised, and died scorned, under the eyes of Hiram Yorke.

And as there are many Hiram Yorkes in the world, it is well that the
true poet, quiet externally though he may be, has often a truculent
spirit under his placidity, and is full of shrewdness in his meekness,
and can measure the whole stature of those who look down on him, and
correctly ascertain the weight and value of the pursuits they disdain
him for not having followed. It is happy that he can have his own bliss,
his own society with his great friend and goddess Nature, quite
independent of those who find little pleasure in him, and in whom he
finds no pleasure at all. It is just that while the world and
circumstances often turn a dark, cold side to him - and properly, too,
because he first turns a dark, cold, careless side to them - he should be
able to maintain a festal brightness and cherishing glow in his bosom,
which makes all bright and genial for him; while strangers, perhaps,
deem his existence a Polar winter never gladdened by a sun. The true
poet is not one whit to be pitied, and he is apt to laugh in his sleeve
when any misguided sympathizer whines over his wrongs. Even when
utilitarians sit in judgment on him, and pronounce him and his art
useless, he hears the sentence with such a hard derision, such a broad,
deep, comprehensive, and merciless contempt of the unhappy Pharisees who
pronounce it, that he is rather to be chidden than condoled with. These,
however, are not Mr. Yorke's reflections, and it is with Mr. Yorke we
have at present to do.

I have told you some of his faults, reader: as to his good points, he
was one of the most honourable and capable men in Yorkshire; even those
who disliked him were forced to respect him. He was much beloved by the
poor, because he was thoroughly kind and very fatherly to them. To his
workmen he was considerate and cordial. When he dismissed them from an
occupation, he would try to set them on to something else, or, if that
was impossible, help them to remove with their families to a district
where work might possibly be had. It must also be remarked that if, as
sometimes chanced, any individual amongst his "hands" showed signs of
insubordination, Yorke - who, like many who abhor being controlled, knew
how to control with vigour - had the secret of crushing rebellion in the
germ, of eradicating it like a bad weed, so that it never spread or
developed within the sphere of his authority. Such being the happy state
of his own affairs, he felt himself at liberty to speak with the utmost
severity of those who were differently situated, to ascribe whatever was
unpleasant in their position entirely to their own fault, to sever
himself from the masters, and advocate freely the cause of the
operatives.

Mr. Yorke's family was the first and oldest in the district; and he,
though not the wealthiest, was one of the most influential men. His
education had been good. In his youth, before the French Revolution, he
had travelled on the Continent. He was an adept in the French and
Italian languages. During a two years' sojourn in Italy he had collected
many good paintings and tasteful rarities, with which his residence was
now adorned. His manners, when he liked, were those of a finished
gentleman of the old school; his conversation, when he was disposed to
please, was singularly interesting and original; and if he usually
expressed himself in the Yorkshire dialect, it was because he chose to
do so, preferring his native Doric to a more refined vocabulary, "A
Yorkshire burr," he affirmed, "was as much better than a cockney's lisp
as a bull's bellow than a raton's squeak."

Mr. Yorke knew every one, and was known by every one, for miles round;
yet his intimate acquaintances were very few. Himself thoroughly
original, he had no taste for what was ordinary: a racy, rough
character, high or low, ever found acceptance with him; a refined,
insipid personage, however exalted in station, was his aversion. He
would spend an hour any time in talking freely with a shrewd workman of
his own, or with some queer, sagacious old woman amongst his cottagers,
when he would have grudged a moment to a commonplace fine gentleman or
to the most fashionable and elegant, if frivolous, lady. His preferences
on these points he carried to an extreme, forgetting that there may be
amiable and even admirable characters amongst those who cannot be
original. Yet he made exceptions to his own rule. There was a certain
order of mind, plain, ingenuous, neglecting refinement, almost devoid of
intellectuality, and quite incapable of appreciating what was
intellectual in him, but which, at the same time, never felt disgust at
his rudeness, was not easily wounded by his sarcasm, did not closely
analyze his sayings, doings, or opinions, with which he was peculiarly
at ease, and, consequently, which he peculiarly preferred. He was lord
amongst such characters. They, while submitting implicitly to his
influence, never acknowledged, because they never reflected on, his
superiority; they were quite tractable, therefore, without running the
smallest danger of being servile; and their unthinking, easy, artless
insensibility was as acceptable, because as convenient, to Mr. Yorke as
that of the chair he sat on, or of the floor he trod.

It will have been observed that he was not quite uncordial with Mr.
Moore. He had two or three reasons for entertaining a faint partiality
to that gentleman. It may sound odd, but the first of these was that
Moore spoke English with a foreign, and French with a perfectly pure,
accent; and that his dark, thin face, with its fine though rather wasted
lines, had a most anti-British and anti-Yorkshire look. These points
seem frivolous, unlikely to influence a character like Yorke's; but the
fact is they recalled old, perhaps pleasurable, associations - they
brought back his travelling, his youthful days. He had seen, amidst
Italian cities and scenes, faces like Moore's; he had heard, in Parisian
cafés and theatres, voices like his. He was young then, and when he
looked at and listened to the alien, he seemed young again.

Secondly, he had known Moore's father, and had had dealings with him.
That was a more substantial, though by no means a more agreeable tie;
for as his firm had been connected with Moore's in business, it had
also, in some measure, been implicated in its losses.

Thirdly, he had found Robert himself a sharp man of business. He saw
reason to anticipate that he would, in the end, by one means or another,
make money; and he respected both his resolution and acuteness - perhaps,
also, his hardness. A fourth circumstance which drew them together was
that of Mr. Yorke being one of the guardians of the minor on whose
estate Hollow's Mill was situated; consequently Moore, in the course of
his alterations and improvements, had frequent occasion to consult him.

As to the other guest now present in Mr. Yorke's parlour, Mr. Helstone,
between him and his host there existed a double antipathy - the antipathy
of nature and that of circumstances. The free-thinker hated the
formalist; the lover of liberty detested the disciplinarian. Besides, it
was said that in former years they had been rival suitors of the same
lady.

Mr. Yorke, as a general rule, was, when young, noted for his preference
of sprightly and dashing women: a showy shape and air, a lively wit, a
ready tongue, chiefly seemed to attract him. He never, however, proposed
to any of these brilliant belles whose society he sought; and all at
once he seriously fell in love with and eagerly wooed a girl who
presented a complete contrast to those he had hitherto noticed - a girl
with the face of a Madonna; a girl of living marble - stillness
personified. No matter that, when he spoke to her, she only answered him
in monosyllables; no matter that his sighs seemed unheard, that his
glances were unreturned, that she never responded to his opinions,
rarely smiled at his jests, paid him no respect and no attention; no
matter that she seemed the opposite of everything feminine he had ever
in his whole life been known to admire. For him Mary Cave was perfect,
because somehow, for some reason - no doubt he had a reason - he loved
her.

Mr. Helstone, at that time curate of Briarfield, loved Mary too - or, at
any rate, he fancied her. Several others admired her, for she was
beautiful as a monumental angel; but the clergyman was preferred for his
office's sake - that office probably investing him with some of the
illusion necessary to allure to the commission of matrimony, and which
Miss Cave did not find in any of the young wool-staplers, her other
adorers. Mr. Helstone neither had, nor professed to have, Mr. Yorke's
absorbing passion for her. He had none of the humble reverence which
seemed to subdue most of her suitors; he saw her more as she really was
than the rest did. He was, consequently, more master of her and himself.
She accepted him at the first offer, and they were married.

Nature never intended Mr. Helstone to make a very good husband,
especially to a quiet wife. He thought so long as a woman was silent
nothing ailed her, and she wanted nothing. If she did not complain of
solitude, solitude, however continued, could not be irksome to her. If
she did not talk and put herself forward, express a partiality for this,
an aversion to that, she had no partialities or aversions, and it was
useless to consult her tastes. He made no pretence of comprehending
women, or comparing them with men. They were a different, probably a
very inferior, order of existence. A wife could not be her husband's
companion, much less his confidante, much less his stay. His wife,
after a year or two, was of no great importance to him in any shape; and
when she one day, as he thought, suddenly - for he had scarcely noticed
her decline - but, as others thought, gradually, took her leave of him
and of life, and there was only a still, beautiful-featured mould of
clay left, cold and white, in the conjugal couch, he felt his
bereavement - who shall say how little? Yet, perhaps, more than he seemed
to feel it; for he was not a man from whom grief easily wrung tears.

His dry-eyed and sober mourning scandalized an old housekeeper, and
likewise a female attendant, who had waited upon Mrs. Helstone in her
sickness, and who, perhaps, had had opportunities of learning more of
the deceased lady's nature, of her capacity for feeling and loving, than
her husband knew. They gossiped together over the corpse, related
anecdotes, with embellishments of her lingering decline, and its real or
supposed cause. In short, they worked each other up to some indignation
against the austere little man, who sat examining papers in an adjoining
room, unconscious of what opprobrium he was the object.

Mrs. Helstone was hardly under the sod when rumours began to be rife in
the neighbourhood that she had died of a broken heart. These magnified
quickly into reports of hard usage, and, finally, details of harsh
treatment on the part of her husband - reports grossly untrue, but not
the less eagerly received on that account. Mr. Yorke heard them, partly
believed them. Already, of course, he had no friendly feeling to his
successful rival. Though himself a married man now, and united to a
woman who seemed a complete contrast to Mary Cave in all respects, he
could not forget the great disappointment of his life; and when he heard
that what would have been so precious to him had been neglected, perhaps
abused, by another, he conceived for that other a rooted and bitter
animosity.

Of the nature and strength of this animosity Mr. Helstone was but half
aware. He neither knew how much Yorke had loved Mary Cave, what he had
felt on losing her, nor was he conscious of the calumnies concerning his
treatment of her, familiar to every ear in the neighbourhood but his
own. He believed political and religious differences alone separated him
and Mr. Yorke. Had he known how the case really stood, he would hardly
have been induced by any persuasion to cross his former rival's
threshold.

          

Mr. Yorke did not resume his lecture of Robert Moore. The conversation
ere long recommenced in a more general form, though still in a somewhat
disputative tone. The unquiet state of the country, the various
depredations lately committed on mill-property in the district, supplied
abundant matter for disagreement, especially as each of the three
gentlemen present differed more or less in his views on these subjects.
Mr. Helstone thought the masters aggrieved, the workpeople unreasonable;
he condemned sweepingly the widespread spirit of disaffection against
constituted authorities, the growing indisposition to bear with patience
evils he regarded as inevitable. The cures he prescribed were vigorous
government interference, strict magisterial vigilance; when necessary,
prompt military coercion.

Mr. Yorke wished to know whether this interference, vigilance, and
coercion would feed those who were hungry, give work to those who wanted
work, and whom no man would hire. He scouted the idea of inevitable
evils. He said public patience was a camel, on whose back the last atom
that could be borne had already been laid, and that resistance was now a
duty; the widespread spirit of disaffection against constituted
authorities he regarded as the most promising sign of the times; the
masters, he allowed, were truly aggrieved, but their main grievances had
been heaped on them by a "corrupt, base, and bloody" government  these
were Mr. Yorke's epithets . Madmen like Pitt, demons like Castlereagh,
mischievous idiots like Perceval, were the tyrants, the curses of the
country, the destroyers of her trade. It was their infatuated
perseverance in an unjustifiable, a hopeless, a ruinous war, which had
brought the nation to its present pass. It was their monstrously
oppressive taxation, it was the infamous "Orders in Council" - the
originators of which deserved impeachment and the scaffold, if ever
public men did - that hung a millstone about England's neck.

"But where was the use of talking?" he demanded. "What chance was there
of reason being heard in a land that was king-ridden, priest-ridden,
peer-ridden; where a lunatic was the nominal monarch, an unprincipled
debauchee the real ruler; where such an insult to common sense as
hereditary legislators was tolerated; where such a humbug as a bench of
bishops, such an arrogant abuse as a pampered, persecuting established
church was endured and venerated; where a standing army was maintained,
and a host of lazy parsons and their pauper families were kept on the
fat of the land?"

Mr. Helstone, rising up and putting on his shovel-hat, observed in
reply, "that in the course of his life he had met with two or three
instances where sentiments of this sort had been very bravely maintained
so long as health, strength, and worldly prosperity had been the allies
of him who professed them; but there came a time," he said, "to all men,
'when the keepers of the house should tremble; when they should be
afraid of that which is high, and fear should be in the way;' and that
time was the test of the advocate of anarchy and rebellion, the enemy of
religion and order. Ere now," he affirmed, "he had been called upon to
read those prayers our church has provided for the sick by the miserable
dying-bed of one of her most rancorous foes; he had seen such a one
stricken with remorse, solicitous to discover a place for repentance,
and unable to find any, though he sought it carefully with tears. He
must forewarn Mr. Yorke that blasphemy against God and the king was a
deadly sin, and that there was such a thing as 'judgment to come.'"

Mr. Yorke "believed fully that there was such a thing as judgment to
come. If it were otherwise, it would be difficult to imagine how all the
scoundrels who seemed triumphant in this world, who broke innocent
hearts with impunity, abused unmerited privileges, were a scandal to
honourable callings, took the bread out of the mouths of the poor,
browbeat the humble, and truckled meanly to the rich and proud, were to
be properly paid off in such coin as they had earned. But," he added,
"whenever he got low-spirited about such-like goings-on, and their
seeming success in this mucky lump of a planet, he just reached down t'
owd book"  pointing to a great Bible in the bookcase , "opened it like
at a chance, and he was sure to light of a verse blazing wi' a blue
brimstone low that set all straight. He knew," he said, "where some folk
war bound for, just as weel as if an angel wi' great white wings had
come in ower t' door-stone and told him."

"Sir," said Mr. Helstone, collecting all his dignity - 'sir, the great
knowledge of man is to know himself, and the bourne whither his own
steps tend."

"Ay, ay. You'll recollect, Mr. Helstone, that Ignorance was carried away
from the very gates of heaven, borne through the air, and thrust in at a
door in the side of the hill which led down to hell."

"Nor have I forgotten, Mr. Yorke, that Vain-Confidence, not seeing the
way before him, fell into a deep pit, which was on purpose there made by
the prince of the grounds, to catch vainglorious fools withal, and was
dashed to pieces with his fall."

"Now," interposed Mr. Moore, who had hitherto sat a silent but amused
spectator of this worldly combat, and whose indifference to the party
politics of the day, as well as to the gossip of the neighbourhood, made
him an impartial, if apathetic, judge of the merits of such an
encounter, "you have both sufficiently blackballed each other, and
proved how cordially you detest each other, and how wicked you think
each other. For my part, my hate is still running in such a strong
current against the fellows who have broken my frames that I have none
to spare for my private acquaintance, and still less for such a vague
thing as a sect or a government. But really, gentlemen, you both seem
very bad by your own showing - worse than ever I suspected you to be. - I
dare not stay all night with a rebel and blasphemer like you, Yorke; and
I hardly dare ride home with a cruel and tyrannical ecclesiastic like
Mr. Helstone."

"I am going, however, Mr. Moore," said the rector sternly. "Come with me
or not, as you please."

"Nay, he shall not have the choice; he shall go with you," responded
Yorke. "It's midnight, and past; and I'll have nob'dy staying up i' my
house any longer. Ye mun all go."

He rang the bell.

"Deb," said he to the servant who answered it, "clear them folk out o'
t' kitchen, and lock t' doors, and be off to bed. - Here is your way,
gentlemen," he continued to his guests; and, lighting them through the
passage, he fairly put them out at his front door.

They met their party hurrying out pell-mell by the back way. Their
horses stood at the gate; they mounted, and rode off, Moore laughing at
their abrupt dismissal, Helstone deeply indignant thereat.




CHAPTER V.

HOLLOW'S COTTAGE.


Moore's good spirits were still with him when he rose next morning. He
and Joe Scott had both spent the night in the mill, availing themselves
of certain sleeping accommodations producible from recesses in the front
and back counting-houses. The master, always an early riser, was up
somewhat sooner even than usual. He awoke his man by singing a French
song as he made his toilet.

"Ye're not custen dahn, then, maister?" cried Joe.

"Not a stiver, mon garçon - which means, my lad. Get up, and we'll take a
turn through the mill before the hands come in, and I'll explain my
future plans. We'll have the machinery yet, Joseph. You never heard of
Bruce, perhaps?"

"And th' arrand  spider ? Yes, but I hev. I've  read th' history o'
Scotland, and happen knaw as mich on't  as ye; and I understand ye to
mean to say ye'll persevere."

"I do."

"Is there mony o' your mak' i' your country?" inquired Joe, as he folded
up his temporary bed, and put it away.

"In my country! Which is my country?"

"Why, France - isn't  it?"

"Not it, indeed! The circumstance of the French having seized Antwerp,
where I was born, does not make me a Frenchman."

"Holland, then?"

"I am not a Dutchman. Now you are confounding Antwerp with Amsterdam."

"Flanders?"

"I scorn the insinuation, Joe! I a Flamand! Have I a Flemish face - the
clumsy nose standing out, the mean forehead falling back, the pale blue
eyes 'a fleur de tete'? Am I all body and no legs, like a Flamand? But
you don't  know what they are like, those Netherlanders. Joe, I'm an
Anversois. My mother was an Anversoise, though she came of French
lineage, which is the reason I speak French."

"But your father war Yorkshire, which maks ye a bit Yorkshire too; and
onybody may see ye're akin to us, ye're so keen o' making brass, and
getting forrards."

"Joe, you're an impudent dog; but I've  always been accustomed to a
boorish sort of insolence from my youth up. The 'classe ouvriere' - that
is, the working people in Belgium - bear themselves brutally towards
their employers; and by brutally , Joe, I mean brutalement - which,
perhaps, when properly translated, should be roughly ."

"We allus speak our minds i' this country; and them young parsons and
grand folk fro' London is shocked at wer 'incivility;' and we like weel
enough to gi'e 'em summat to be shocked at, 'cause it's sport to us to
watch 'em turn up the whites o' their een, and spreed out their bits o'
hands, like as they're flayed wi' bogards, and then to hear 'em say,
nipping off their words short like, 'Dear! dear! Whet seveges! How very
corse!'"

"You are savages, Joe. You don't  suppose you're civilized, do you?"

"Middling, middling, maister. I reckon 'at us manufacturing lads i' th'
north is a deal more intelligent, and knaws a deal more nor th' farming
folk i' th' south. Trade sharpens wer wits; and them that's mechanics
like me is forced to think. Ye know, what wi' looking after machinery
and sich like, I've  getten into that way that when I see an effect, I
look straight out for a cause, and I oft lig hold on't  to purpose; and
then I like reading, and I'm curious to knaw what them that reckons to
govern us aims to do for us and wi' us. And there's many 'cuter nor me;
there's many a one amang them greasy chaps 'at smells o' oil, and amang
them dyers wi' blue and black skins, that has a long head, and that can
tell what a fooil of a law is, as well as ye or old Yorke, and a deal
better nor soft uns like Christopher Sykes o' Whinbury, and greet
hectoring nowts like yond' Irish Peter, Helstone's curate."

"You think yourself a clever fellow, I know, Scott."

"Ay! I'm fairish. I can tell cheese fro' chalk, and I'm varry weel aware
that I've  improved sich opportunities as I have had, a deal better nor
some 'at reckons to be aboon me; but there's thousands i' Yorkshire
that's as good as me, and a two-three that's better."

"You're a great man - you're a sublime fellow; but you're a prig, a
conceited noodle with it all, Joe! You need not to think that because
you've  picked up a little knowledge of practical mathematics, and
because you have found some scantling of the elements of chemistry at
the bottom of a dyeing vat, that therefore you're a neglected man of
science; and you need not to suppose that because the course of trade
does not always run smooth, and you, and such as you, are sometimes
short of work and of bread, that therefore your class are martyrs, and
that the whole form of government under which you live is wrong. And,
moreover, you need not for a moment to insinuate that the virtues have
taken refuge in cottages and wholly abandoned slated houses. Let me tell
you, I particularly abominate that sort of trash, because I know so well
that human nature is human nature everywhere, whether under tile or
thatch, and that in every specimen of human nature that breathes, vice
and virtue are ever found blended, in smaller or greater proportions,
and that the proportion is not determined by station. I have seen
villains who were rich, and I have seen villains who were poor, and I
have seen villains who were neither rich nor poor, but who had realized
Agar's wish, and lived in fair and modest competency. The clock is going
to strike six. Away with you, Joe, and ring the mill bell."

It was now the middle of the month of February; by six o'clock therefore
dawn was just beginning to steal on night, to penetrate with a pale ray
its brown obscurity, and give a demi-translucence to its opaque shadows.
Pale enough that ray was on this particular morning: no colour tinged
the east, no flush warmed it. To see what a heavy lid day slowly lifted,
what a wan glance she flung along the hills, you would have thought the
sun's fire quenched in last night's floods. The breath of this morning
was chill as its aspect; a raw wind stirred the mass of night-cloud, and
showed, as it slowly rose, leaving a colourless, silver-gleaming ring
all round the horizon, not blue sky, but a stratum of paler vapour
beyond. It had ceased to rain, but the earth was sodden, and the pools
and rivulets were full.

The mill-windows were alight, the bell still rung loud, and now the
little children came running in, in too great a hurry, let us hope, to
feel very much nipped by the inclement air; and indeed, by contrast,
perhaps the morning appeared rather favourable to them than otherwise,
for they had often come to their work that winter through snow-storms,
through heavy rain, through hard frost.

Mr. Moore stood at the entrance to watch them pass. He counted them as
they went by. To those who came rather late he said a word of reprimand,
which was a little more sharply repeated by Joe Scott when the lingerers
reached the work-rooms. Neither master nor overlooker spoke savagely.
They were not savage men either of them, though it appeared both were
rigid, for they fined a delinquent who came considerably too late. Mr.
Moore made him pay his penny down ere he entered, and informed him that
the next repetition of the fault would cost him twopence.

Rules, no doubt, are necessary in such cases, and coarse and cruel
masters will make coarse and cruel rules, which, at the time we treat of
at least, they used sometimes to enforce tyrannically; but though I
describe imperfect characters  every character in this book will be
found to be more or less imperfect, my pen refusing to draw anything in
the model line , I have not undertaken to handle degraded or utterly
infamous ones. Child-torturers, slave masters and drivers, I consign to
the hands of jailers. The novelist may be excused from sullying his page
with the record of their deeds.

Instead, then, of harrowing up my reader's soul and delighting his organ
of wonder with effective descriptions of stripes and scourgings, I am
happy to be able to inform him that neither Mr. Moore nor his overlooker
ever struck a child in their mill. Joe had, indeed, once very severely
flogged a son of his own for telling a lie and persisting in it; but,
like his employer, he was too phlegmatic, too calm, as well as too
reasonable a man, to make corporal chastisement other than the exception
to his treatment of the young.

Mr. Moore haunted his mill, his mill-yard, his dye-house, and his
warehouse till the sickly dawn strengthened into day. The sun even
rose - at least a white disc, clear, tintless, and almost chill-looking
as ice, peeped over the dark crest of a hill, changed to silver the
livid edge of the cloud above it, and looked solemnly down the whole
length of the den, or narrow dale, to whose strait bounds we are at
present limited. It was eight o'clock; the mill lights were all
extinguished; the signal was given for breakfast; the children, released
for half an hour from toil, betook themselves to the little tin cans
which held their coffee, and to the small baskets which contained their
allowance of bread. Let us hope they have enough to eat; it would be a
pity were it otherwise.

And now at last Mr. Moore quitted the mill-yard, and bent his steps to
his dwelling-house. It was only a short distance from the factory, but
the hedge and high bank on each side of the lane which conducted to it
seemed to give it something of the appearance and feeling of seclusion.
It was a small, whitewashed place, with a green porch over the door;
scanty brown stalks showed in the garden soil near this porch, and
likewise beneath the windows - stalks budless and flowerless now, but
giving dim prediction of trained and blooming creepers for summer days.
A grass plat and borders fronted the cottage. The borders presented only
black mould yet, except where, in sheltered nooks, the first shoots of
snowdrop or crocus peeped, green as emerald, from the earth. The spring
was late; it had been a severe and prolonged winter; the last deep snow
had but just disappeared before yesterday's rains; on the hills, indeed,
white remnants of it yet gleamed, flecking the hollows and crowning the
peaks; the lawn was not verdant, but bleached, as was the grass on the
bank, and under the hedge in the lane. Three trees, gracefully grouped,
rose beside the cottage. They were not lofty, but having no rivals near,
they looked well and imposing where they grew. Such was Mr. Moore's
home - a snug nest for content and contemplation, but one within which
the wings of action and ambition could not long lie folded.

Its air of modest comfort seemed to possess no particular attraction for
its owner. Instead of entering the house at once he fetched a spade from
a little shed and began to work in the garden. For about a quarter of an
hour he dug on uninterrupted. At length, however, a window opened, and a
female voice called to him, - 

"Eh, bien! Tu ne déjeunes pas ce matin?"

The answer, and the rest of the conversation, was in French; but as this
is an English book, I shall translate it into English.

"Is breakfast ready, Hortense?"

"Certainly; it has been ready half an hour."

"Then I am ready too. I have a canine hunger."

He threw down his spade, and entered the house. The narrow passage
conducted him to a small parlour, where a breakfast of coffee and bread
and butter, with the somewhat un-English accompaniment of stewed pears,
was spread on the table. Over these viands presided the lady who had
spoken from the window. I must describe her before I go any farther.

She seemed a little older than Mr. Moore - perhaps she was thirty-five,
tall, and proportionately stout; she had very black hair, for the
present twisted up in curl-papers, a high colour in her cheeks, a small
nose, a pair of little black eyes. The lower part of her face was large
in proportion to the upper; her forehead was small and rather
corrugated; she had a fretful though not an ill-natured expression of
countenance; there was something in her whole appearance one felt
inclined to be half provoked with and half amused at. The strangest
point was her dress - a stuff petticoat and a striped cotton camisole.
The petticoat was short, displaying well a pair of feet and ankles which
left much to be desired in the article of symmetry.

You will think I have depicted a remarkable slattern, reader. Not at
all. Hortense Moore  she was Mr. Moore's sister  was a very orderly,
economical person. The petticoat, camisole, and curl-papers were her
morning costume, in which, of forenoons, she had always been accustomed
to "go her household ways" in her own country. She did not choose to
adopt English fashions because she was obliged to live in England; she
adhered to her old Belgian modes, quite satisfied that there was a merit
in so doing.

Mademoiselle had an excellent opinion of herself - an opinion not wholly
undeserved, for she possessed some good and sterling qualities; but she
rather over-estimated the kind and degree of these qualities, and quite
left out of the account sundry little defects which accompanied them.
You could never have persuaded her that she was a prejudiced and
narrow-minded person, that she was too susceptible on the subject of her
own dignity and importance, and too apt to take offence about trifles;
yet all this was true. However, where her claims to distinction were not
opposed, and where her prejudices were not offended, she could be kind
and friendly enough. To her two brothers  for there was another Gérard
Moore besides Robert  she was very much attached. As the sole remaining
representatives of their decayed family, the persons of both were almost
sacred in her eyes. Of Louis, however, she knew less than of Robert. He
had been sent to England when a mere boy, and had received his education
at an English school. His education not being such as to adapt him for
trade, perhaps, too, his natural bent not inclining him to mercantile
pursuits, he had, when the blight of hereditary prospects rendered it
necessary for him to push his own fortune, adopted the very arduous and
very modest career of a teacher. He had been usher in a school, and was
said now to be tutor in a private family. Hortense, when she mentioned
Louis, described him as having what she called "des moyens," but as
being too backward and quiet. Her praise of Robert was in a different
strain, less qualified: she was very proud of him; she regarded him as
the greatest man in Europe; all he said and did was remarkable in her
eyes, and she expected others to behold him from the same point of view;
nothing could be more irrational, monstrous, and infamous than
opposition from any quarter to Robert, unless it were opposition to
herself.

Accordingly, as soon as the said Robert was seated at the
breakfast-table, and she had helped him to a portion of stewed pears,
and cut him a good-sized Belgian tartine, she began to pour out a flood
of amazement and horror at the transaction of last night, the
destruction of the frames.

"Quelle idée! to destroy them. Quelle action honteuse! On voyait bien
que les ouvriers de ce pays étaient a la fois betes et méchants. C'était
absolument comme les domestiques anglais, les servantes surtout: rien
d'insupportable comme cette Sara, par exemple!"

"She looks clean and industrious," Mr. Moore remarked.

"Looks! I don't  know how she looks, and I do not say that she is
altogether dirty or idle, mais elle est d'une insolence! She disputed
with me a quarter of an hour yesterday about the cooking of the beef;
she said I boiled it to rags, that English people would never be able to
eat such a dish as our bouilli, that the bouillon was no better than
greasy warm water, and as to the choucroute, she affirms she cannot
touch it! That barrel we have in the cellar - delightfully prepared by my
own hands - she termed a tub of hog-wash, which means food for pigs. I am
harassed with the girl, and yet I cannot part with her lest I should get
a worse. You are in the same position with your workmen, pauvre cher
frere!"

"I am afraid you are not very happy in England, Hortense."

"It is my duty to be happy where you are, brother; but otherwise there
are certainly a thousand things which make me regret our native town.
All the world here appears to me ill-bred  mal-élevé . I find my habits
considered ridiculous. If a girl out of your mill chances to come into
the kitchen and find me in my jupon and camisole preparing dinner  for
you know I cannot trust Sarah to cook a single dish , she sneers. If I
accept an invitation out to tea, which I have done once or twice, I
perceive I am put quite into the background; I have not that attention
paid me which decidedly is my due. Of what an excellent family are the
Gérards, as we know, and the Moores also! They have a right to claim a
certain respect, and to feel wounded when it is withheld from them. In
Antwerp I was always treated with distinction; here, one would think
that when I open my lips in company I speak English with a ridiculous
accent, whereas I am quite assured that I pronounce it perfectly."

"Hortense, in Antwerp we were known rich; in England we were never known
but poor."

"Precisely, and thus mercenary are mankind. Again, dear brother, last
Sunday, if you recollect, was very wet; accordingly I went to church in
my neat black sabots, objects one would not indeed wear in a fashionable
city, but which in the country I have ever been accustomed to use for
walking in dirty roads. Believe me, as I paced up the aisle, composed
and tranquil, as I am always, four ladies, and as many gentlemen,
laughed and hid their faces behind their prayer-books."

"Well, well! don't  put on the sabots again. I told you before I thought
they were not quite the thing for this country."

"But, brother, they are not common sabots, such as the peasantry wear. I
tell you, they are sabots noirs, tres propres, tres convenables. At Mons
and Leuze - cities not very far removed from the elegant capital of
Brussels - it is very seldom that the respectable people wear anything
else for walking in winter. Let any one try to wade the mud of the
Flemish chaussées in a pair of Paris brodequins, on m'en dirait des
nouvelles!"

"Never mind Mons and Leuze and the Flemish chaussées; do at Rome as the
Romans do. And as to the camisole and jupon, I am not quite sure about
them either. I never see an English lady dressed in such garments. Ask
Caroline Helstone."

"Caroline! I ask Caroline? I consult her about my dress? It is she 
who on all points should consult me . She is a child."

"She is eighteen, or at least seventeen - old enough to know all about
gowns, petticoats, and chaussures."

"Do not spoil Caroline, I entreat you, brother. Do not make her of more
consequence than she ought to be. At present she is modest and
unassuming: let us keep her so."

"With all my heart. Is she coming this morning?"

"She will come at ten, as usual, to take her French lesson."

"You don't  find that she sneers at you, do you?"

"She does not. She appreciates me better than any one else here; but
then she has more intimate opportunities of knowing me. She sees that I
have education, intelligence, manner, principles - all, in short, which
belongs to a person well born and well bred."

"Are you at all fond of her?"

"For fond I cannot say. I am not one who is prone to take violent
fancies, and, consequently, my friendship is the more to be depended on.
I have a regard for her as my relative; her position also inspires
interest, and her conduct as my pupil has hitherto been such as rather
to enhance than diminish the attachment that springs from other causes."

"She behaves pretty well at lessons?"

"To me she behaves very well; but you are conscious, brother, that I
have a manner calculated to repel over-familiarity, to win esteem, and
to command respect. Yet, possessed of penetration, I perceive clearly
that Caroline is not perfect, that there is much to be desired in her."

"Give me a last cup of coffee, and while I am drinking it amuse me with
an account of her faults."

"Dear brother, I am happy to see you eat your breakfast with relish,
after the fatiguing night you have passed. Caroline, then, is defective;
but with my forming hand and almost motherly care she may improve. There
is about her an occasional something - a reserve, I think - which I do not
quite like, because it is not sufficiently girlish and submissive; and
there are glimpses of an unsettled hurry in her nature, which put me
out. Yet she is usually most tranquil, too dejected and thoughtful
indeed sometimes. In time, I doubt not, I shall make her uniformly
sedate and decorous, without being unaccountably pensive. I ever
disapprove what is not intelligible."

"I don't  understand your account in the least. What do you mean by
'unsettled hurries,' for instance?"

"An example will, perhaps, be the most satisfactory explanation. I
sometimes, you are aware, make her read French poetry by way of
practice in pronunciation. She has in the course of her lessons gone
through much of Corneille and Racine, in a very steady, sober spirit,
such as I approve. Occasionally she showed, indeed, a degree of languor
in the perusal of those esteemed authors, partaking rather of apathy
than sobriety; and apathy is what I cannot tolerate in those who have
the benefit of my instructions - besides, one should not be apathetic in
studying standard works. The other day I put into her hands a volume of
short fugitive pieces. I sent her to the window to learn one by heart,
and when I looked up I saw her turning the leaves over impatiently, and
curling her lip, absolutely with scorn, as she surveyed the little poems
cursorily. I chid her. 'Ma cousine,' said she, 'tout cela m'ennuie a la
mort.' I told her this was improper language. 'Dieu!' she exclaimed, 'il
n'y a donc pas deux lignes de poësie dans toute la littérature
française?' I inquired what she meant. She begged my pardon with proper
submission. Ere long she was still. I saw her smiling to herself over
the book. She began to learn assiduously. In half an hour she came and
stood before me, presented the volume, folded her hands, as I always
require her to do, and commenced the repetition of that short thing by
Chénier, 'La Jeune Captive.' If you had heard the manner in which she
went through this, and in which she uttered a few incoherent comments
when she had done, you would have known what I meant by the phrase
'unsettled hurry.' One would have thought Chénier was more moving than
all Racine and all Corneille. You, brother, who have so much sagacity,
will discern that this disproportionate preference argues an
ill-regulated mind; but she is fortunate in her preceptress. I will give
her a system, a method of thought, a set of opinions; I will give her
the perfect control and guidance of her feelings."

"Be sure you do, Hortense. Here she comes. That was her shadow passed
the window, I believe."

"Ah! truly. She is too early - half an hour before her time. - My child,
what brings you here before I have breakfasted?"

This question was addressed to an individual who now entered the room, a
young girl, wrapped in a winter mantle, the folds of which were gathered
with some grace round an apparently slender figure.

"I came in haste to see how you were, Hortense, and how Robert was too.
I was sure you would be both grieved by what happened last night. I did
not hear till this morning. My uncle told me at breakfast."

"Ah! it is unspeakable. You sympathize with us? Your uncle sympathizes
with us?"

"My uncle is very angry - but he was with Robert, I believe, was he
not? - Did he not go with you to Stilbro' Moor?"

"Yes, we set out in very martial style, Caroline; but the prisoners we
went to rescue met us half-way."

"Of course nobody was hurt?"

"Why, no; only Joe Scott's wrists were a little galled with being
pinioned too tightly behind his back."

"You were not there? You were not with the wagons when they were
attacked?"

"No. One seldom has the fortune to be present at occurrences at which
one would particularly wish to assist."

"Where are you going this morning? I saw Murgatroyd saddling your horse
in the yard."

"To Whinbury. It is market day."

"Mr. Yorke is going too. I met him in his gig. Come home with him."

"Why?"

"Two are better than one, and nobody dislikes Mr. Yorke - at least, poor
people do not dislike him."

"Therefore he would be a protection to me, who am hated?"

"Who are misunderstood . That, probably, is the word. Shall you be
late? - Will he be late, Cousin Hortense?"

"It is too probable. He has often much business to transact at Whinbury.
Have you brought your exercise-book, child?"

"Yes. - What time will you return, Robert?"

"I generally return at seven. Do you wish me to be at home earlier?"

"Try rather to be back by six. It is not absolutely dark at six now, but
by seven daylight is quite gone."

"And what danger is to be apprehended, Caroline, when daylight is 
gone? What peril do you conceive comes as the companion of darkness for
me?"

"I am not sure that I can define my fears, but we all have a certain
anxiety at present about our friends. My uncle calls these times
dangerous. He says, too, that mill-owners are unpopular."

"And I am one of the most unpopular? Is not that the fact? You are
reluctant to speak out plainly, but at heart you think me liable to
Pearson's fate, who was shot at - not, indeed, from behind a hedge, but
in his own house, through his staircase window, as he was going to bed."

"Anne Pearson showed me the bullet in the chamber-door," remarked
Caroline gravely, as she folded her mantle and arranged it and her muff
on a side-table. "You know," she continued, "there is a hedge all the
way along the road from here to Whinbury, and there are the Fieldhead
plantations to pass; but you will be back by six - or before?"

"Certainly he will," affirmed Hortense. "And now, my child, prepare your
lessons for repetition, while I put the peas to soak for the purée at
dinner."

With this direction she left the room.

"You suspect I have many enemies, then, Caroline," said Mr. Moore, "and
doubtless you know me to be destitute of friends?"

"Not destitute, Robert. There is your sister, your brother Louis, whom I
have never seen; there is Mr. Yorke, and there is my uncle - besides, of
course, many more."

Robert smiled. "You would be puzzled to name your 'many more,'" said he.
"But show me your exercise-book. What extreme pains you take with the
writing! My sister, I suppose, exacts this care. She wants to form you
in all things after the model of a Flemish school-girl. What life are
you destined for, Caroline? What will you do with your French, drawing,
and other accomplishments, when they are acquired?"

"You may well say, when they are acquired; for, as you are aware, till
Hortense began to teach me, I knew precious little. As to the life I am
destined for, I cannot tell. I suppose to keep my uncle's house
till - - " She hesitated.

"Till what? Till he dies?"

"No. How harsh to say that! I never think of his dying. He is only
fifty-five. But till - in short, till events offer other occupations for
me."

"A remarkably vague prospect! Are you content with it?"

"I used to be, formerly. Children, you know, have little reflection, or
rather their reflections run on ideal themes. There are moments now 
when I am not quite satisfied."

"Why?"

"I am making no money - earning nothing."

"You come to the point, Lina. You too, then, wish to make money?"

"I do. I should like an occupation; and if I were a boy, it would not be
so difficult to find one. I see such an easy, pleasant way of learning a
business, and making my way in life."

"Go on. Let us hear what way."

"I could be apprenticed to your trade - the cloth-trade. I could learn it
of you, as we are distant relations. I would do the counting-house work,
keep the books, and write the letters, while you went to market. I know
you greatly desire to be rich, in order to pay your father's debts;
perhaps I could help you to get rich."

"Help me ? You should think of yourself."

"I do think of myself; but must one for ever think only of oneself?"

"Of whom else do I think? Of whom else dare I think? The poor ought to
have no large sympathies; it is their duty to be narrow."

"No, Robert - - "

"Yes, Caroline. Poverty is necessarily selfish, contracted, grovelling,
anxious. Now and then a poor man's heart, when certain beams and dews
visit it, may smell like the budding vegetation in yonder garden on this
spring day, may feel ripe to evolve in foliage, perhaps blossom; but he
must not encourage the pleasant impulse; he must invoke Prudence to
check it, with that frosty breath of hers, which is as nipping as any
north wind."

"No cottage would be happy then."

"When I speak of poverty, I do not so much mean the natural, habitual
poverty of the working-man, as the embarrassed penury of the man in
debt. My grub-worm is always a straitened, struggling, care-worn
tradesman."

"Cherish hope, not anxiety. Certain ideas have become too fixed in your
mind. It may be presumptuous to say it, but I have the impression that
there is something wrong in your notions of the best means of attaining
happiness, as there is in - - " Second hesitation.

"I am all ear, Caroline."

"In  courage! let me speak the truth  - in your manner - mind, I say only
 manner - to these Yorkshire workpeople."

"You have often wanted to tell me that, have you not?"

"Yes; often - very often."

"The faults of my manner are, I think, only negative. I am not proud.
What has a man in my position to be proud of? I am only taciturn,
phlegmatic, and joyless."

"As if your living cloth-dressers were all machines like your frames and
shears. In your own house you seem different."

"To those of my own house I am no alien, which I am to these English
clowns. I might act the benevolent with them, but acting is not my
 forte . I find them irrational, perverse; they hinder me when I long to
hurry forward. In treating them justly I fulfil my whole duty towards
them."

"You don't  expect them to love you, of course?"

"Nor wish it."

"Ah!" said the monitress, shaking her head and heaving a deep sigh. With
this ejaculation, indicative that she perceived a screw to be loose
somewhere, but that it was out of her reach to set it right, she bent
over her grammar, and sought the rule and exercise for the day.

"I suppose I am not an affectionate man, Caroline. The attachment of a
very few suffices me."

"If you please, Robert, will you mend me a pen or two before you go?"

"First let me rule your book, for you always contrive to draw the lines
aslant. There now. And now for the pens. You like a fine one, I think?"

"Such as you generally make for me and Hortense; not your own broad
points."

"If I were of Louis's calling I might stay at home and dedicate this
morning to you and your studies, whereas I must spend it in Skyes's
wool-warehouse."

"You will be making money."

"More likely losing it."

As he finished mending the pens, a horse, saddled and bridled, was
brought up to the garden-gate.

"There, Fred is ready for me; I must go. I'll take one look to see what
the spring has done in the south border, too, first."

He quitted the room, and went out into the garden ground behind the
mill. A sweet fringe of young verdure and opening flowers - snowdrop,
crocus, even primrose - bloomed in the sunshine under the hot wall of the
factory Moore plucked here and there a blossom and leaf, till he had
collected a little bouquet. He returned to the parlour, pilfered a
thread of silk from his sister's work-basket, tied the flowers, and laid
them on Caroline's desk.

"Now, good-morning."

"Thank you, Robert. It is pretty; it looks, as it lies there, like
sparkles of sunshine and blue sky. Good-morning."

He went to the door, stopped, opened his lips as if to speak, said
nothing, and moved on. He passed through the wicket, and mounted his
horse. In a second he had flung himself from his saddle again,
transferred the reins to Murgatroyd, and re-entered the cottage.

"I forgot my gloves," he said, appearing to take something from the
side-table; then, as an impromptu thought, he remarked, "You have no
binding engagement at home perhaps, Caroline?"

"I never have. Some children's socks, which Mrs. Ramsden has ordered, to
knit for the Jew's basket; but they will keep."

"Jew's basket be - sold! Never was utensil better named. Anything more
Jewish than it - its contents and their prices - cannot be conceived. But
I see something, a very tiny curl, at the corners of your lip, which
tells me that you know its merits as well as I do. Forget the Jew's
basket, then, and spend the day here as a change. Your uncle won't  break
his heart at your absence?"

She smiled. "No."

"The old Cossack! I dare say not," muttered Moore.

"Then stay and dine with Hortense; she will be glad of your company. I
shall return in good time. We will have a little reading in the evening.
The moon rises at half-past eight, and I will walk up to the rectory
with you at nine. Do you agree?"

She nodded her head, and her eyes lit up.

Moore lingered yet two minutes. He bent over Caroline's desk and glanced
at her grammar, he fingered her pen, he lifted her bouquet and played
with it; his horse stamped impatient; Fred Murgatroyd hemmed and coughed
at the gate, as if he wondered what in the world his master was doing.
"Good-morning," again said Moore, and finally vanished.

Hortense, coming in ten minutes after, found, to her surprise, that
Caroline had not yet commenced her exercise.




CHAPTER VI.

CORIOLANUS.


Mademoiselle Moore had that morning a somewhat absent-minded pupil.
Caroline forgot, again and again, the explanations which were given to
her. However, she still bore with unclouded mood the chidings her
inattention brought upon her. Sitting in the sunshine near the window,
she seemed to receive with its warmth a kind influence, which made her
both happy and good. Thus disposed, she looked her best, and her best
was a pleasing vision.

To her had not been denied the gift of beauty. It was not absolutely
necessary to know her in order to like her; she was fair enough to
please, even at the first view. Her shape suited her age: it was
girlish, light, and pliant; every curve was neat, every limb
proportionate; her face was expressive and gentle; her eyes were
handsome, and gifted at times with a winning beam that stole into the
heart, with a language that spoke softly to the affections. Her mouth
was very pretty; she had a delicate skin, and a fine flow of brown hair,
which she knew how to arrange with taste; curls became her, and she
possessed them in picturesque profusion. Her style of dress announced
taste in the wearer - very unobtrusive in fashion, far from costly in
material, but suitable in colour to the fair complexion with which it
contrasted, and in make to the slight form which it draped. Her present
winter garb was of merino - the same soft shade of brown as her hair; the
little collar round her neck lay over a pink ribbon, and was fastened
with a pink knot. She wore no other decoration.

So much for Caroline Helstone's appearance. As to her character or
intellect, if she had any, they must speak for themselves in due time.

Her connections are soon explained. She was the child of parents
separated soon after her birth, in consequence of disagreement of
disposition. Her mother was the half-sister of Mr. Moore's father; thus,
though there was no mixture of blood, she was, in a distant sense, the
cousin of Robert, Louis, and Hortense. Her father was the brother of Mr.
Helstone - a man of the character friends desire not to recall, after
death has once settled all earthly accounts. He had rendered his wife
unhappy. The reports which were known to be true concerning him had
given an air of probability to those which were falsely circulated
respecting his better-principled brother. Caroline had never known her
mother, as she was taken from her in infancy, and had not since seen
her; her father died comparatively young, and her uncle, the rector, had
for some years been her sole guardian. He was not, as we are aware, much
adapted, either by nature or habits, to have the charge of a young girl.
He had taken little trouble about her education; probably he would have
taken none if she, finding herself neglected, had not grown anxious on
her own account, and asked, every now and then, for a little attention,
and for the means of acquiring such amount of knowledge as could not be
dispensed with. Still, she had a depressing feeling that she was
inferior, that her attainments were fewer than were usually possessed by
girls of her age and station; and very glad was she to avail herself of
the kind offer made by her cousin Hortense, soon after the arrival of
the latter at Hollow's Mill, to teach her French and fine needle-work.
Mdlle. Moore, for her part, delighted in the task, because it gave her
importance; she liked to lord it a little over a docile yet quick pupil.
She took Caroline precisely at her own estimate, as an
irregularly-taught, even ignorant girl; and when she found that she made
rapid and eager progress, it was to no talent, no application, in the
scholar she ascribed the improvement, but entirely to her own superior
method of teaching. When she found that Caroline, unskilled in routine,
had a knowledge of her own, desultory but varied, the discovery caused
her no surprise, for she still imagined that from her conversation had
the girl unawares gleaned these treasures. She thought it even when
forced to feel that her pupil knew much on subjects whereof she knew
little. The idea was not logical, but Hortense had perfect faith in it.

Mademoiselle, who prided herself on possessing "un esprit positif," and
on entertaining a decided preference for dry studies, kept her young
cousin to the same as closely as she could. She worked her unrelentingly
at the grammar of the French language, assigning her, as the most
improving exercise she could devise, interminable "analyses logiques."
These "analyses" were by no means a source of particular pleasure to
Caroline; she thought she could have learned French just as well without
them, and grudged excessively the time spent in pondering over
"propositions, principales, et incidents;" in deciding the "incidente
determinative," and the "incidente applicative;" in examining whether
the proposition was "pleine," "elliptique," or "implicite." Sometimes
she lost herself in the maze, and when so lost she would, now and then
 while Hortense was rummaging her drawers upstairs - an unaccountable
occupation in which she spent a large portion of each day, arranging,
disarranging, rearranging, and counter-arranging , carry her book to
Robert in the counting-house, and get the rough place made smooth by his
aid. Mr. Moore possessed a clear, tranquil brain of his own. Almost as
soon as he looked at Caroline's little difficulties they seemed to
dissolve beneath his eye. In two minutes he would explain all, in two
words give the key to the puzzle. She thought if Hortense could only
teach like him, how much faster she might learn! Repaying him by an
admiring and grateful smile, rather shed at his feet than lifted to his
face, she would leave the mill reluctantly to go back to the cottage,
and then, while she completed the exercise, or worked out the sum  for
Mdlle. Moore taught her arithmetic too , she would wish nature had made
her a boy instead of a girl, that she might ask Robert to let her be his
clerk, and sit with him in the counting-house, instead of sitting with
Hortense in the parlour.

Occasionally - but this happened very rarely - she spent the evening at
Hollow's Cottage. Sometimes during these visits Moore was away attending
a market; sometimes he was gone to Mr. Yorke's; often he was engaged
with a male visitor in another room; but sometimes, too, he was at home,
disengaged, free to talk with Caroline. When this was the case, the
evening hours passed on wings of light; they were gone before they were
counted. There was no room in England so pleasant as that small parlour
when the three cousins occupied it. Hortense, when she was not teaching,
or scolding, or cooking, was far from ill-humoured; it was her custom to
relax towards evening, and to be kind to her young English kinswoman.
There was a means, too, of rendering her delightful, by inducing her to
take her guitar and sing and play. She then became quite good-natured.
And as she played with skill, and had a well-toned voice, it was not
disagreeable to listen to her. It would have been absolutely agreeable,
except that her formal and self-important character modulated her
strains, as it impressed her manners and moulded her countenance.

Mr. Moore, released from the business yoke, was, if not lively himself,
a willing spectator of Caroline's liveliness, a complacent listener to
her talk, a ready respondent to her questions. He was something
agreeable to sit near, to hover round, to address and look at. Sometimes
he was better than this - almost animated, quite gentle and friendly.

The drawback was that by the next morning he was sure to be frozen up
again; and however much he seemed, in his quiet way, to enjoy these
social evenings, he rarely contrived their recurrence. This circumstance
puzzled the inexperienced head of his cousin. "If I had a means of
happiness at my command," she thought, "I would employ that means often.
I would keep it bright with use, and not let it lie for weeks aside,
till it gets rusty."

Yet she was careful not to put in practice her own theory. Much as she
liked an evening visit to the cottage, she never paid one unasked.
Often, indeed, when pressed by Hortense to come, she would refuse,
because Robert did not second, or but slightly seconded the request.
This morning was the first time he had ever, of his own unprompted will,
given her an invitation; and then he had spoken so kindly that in
hearing him she had received a sense of happiness sufficient to keep her
glad for the whole day.

The morning passed as usual. Mademoiselle, ever breathlessly busy, spent
it in bustling from kitchen to parlour, now scolding Sarah, now looking
over Caroline's exercise or hearing her repetition-lesson. However
faultlessly these tasks were achieved, she never commended: it was a
maxim with her that praise is inconsistent with a teacher's dignity, and
that blame, in more or less unqualified measure, is indispensable to it.
She thought incessant reprimand, severe or slight, quite necessary to
the maintenance of her authority; and if no possible error was to be
found in the lesson, it was the pupil's carriage, or air, or dress, or
mien, which required correction.

The usual affray took place about the dinner, which meal, when Sarah at
last brought it into the room, she almost flung upon the table, with a
look that expressed quite plainly, "I never dished such stuff i' my life
afore; it's not fit for dogs." Notwithstanding Sarah's scorn, it was a
savoury repast enough. The soup was a sort of purée of dried peas, which
mademoiselle had prepared amidst bitter lamentations that in this
desolate country of England no haricot beans were to be had. Then came a
dish of meat - nature unknown, but supposed to be
miscellaneous - singularly chopped up with crumbs of bread, seasoned
uniquely though not unpleasantly, and baked in a mould - a queer but by
no means unpalatable dish. Greens, oddly bruised, formed the
accompanying vegetable; and a pâté of fruit, conserved after a recipe
devised by Madame Gérard Moore's "grand'mere," and from the taste of
which it appeared probable that "mélasse" had been substituted for
sugar, completed the dinner.

Caroline had no objection to this Belgian cookery - indeed she rather
liked it for a change; and it was well she did so, for had she evinced
any disrelish thereof, such manifestation would have injured her in
mademoiselle's good graces for ever; a positive crime might have been
more easily pardoned than a symptom of distaste for the foreign
comestibles.

Soon after dinner Caroline coaxed her governess-cousin upstairs to
dress. This manouvre required management. To have hinted that the
jupon, camisole, and curl-papers were odious objects, or indeed other
than quite meritorious points, would have been a felony. Any premature
attempt to urge their disappearance was therefore unwise, and would be
likely to issue in the persevering wear of them during the whole day.
Carefully avoiding rocks and quicksands, however, the pupil, on pretence
of requiring a change of scene, contrived to get the teacher aloft; and,
once in the bedroom, she persuaded her that it was not worth while
returning thither, and that she might as well make her toilet now; and
while mademoiselle delivered a solemn homily on her own surpassing merit
in disregarding all frivolities of fashion, Caroline denuded her of the
camisole, invested her with a decent gown, arranged her collar, hair,
etc., and made her quite presentable. But Hortense would put the
finishing touches herself, and these finishing touches consisted in a
thick handkerchief tied round the throat, and a large, servant-like
black apron, which spoiled everything. On no account would mademoiselle
have appeared in her own house without the thick handkerchief and the
voluminous apron. The first was a positive matter of morality - it was
quite improper not to wear a fichu; the second was the ensign of a good
housewife - she appeared to think that by means of it she somehow
effected a large saving in her brother's income. She had, with her own
hands, made and presented to Caroline similar equipments; and the only
serious quarrel they had ever had, and which still left a soreness in
the elder cousin's soul, had arisen from the refusal of the younger one
to accept of and profit by these elegant presents.

"I wear a high dress and a collar," said Caroline, "and I should feel
suffocated with a handkerchief in addition; and my short aprons do quite
as well as that very long one. I would rather make no change."

Yet Hortense, by dint of perseverance, would probably have compelled her
to make a change, had not Mr. Moore chanced to overhear a dispute on the
subject, and decided that Caroline's little aprons would suffice, and
that, in his opinion, as she was still but a child, she might for the
present dispense with the fichu, especially as her curls were long, and
almost touched her shoulders.

There was no appeal against Robert's opinion, therefore his sister was
compelled to yield; but she disapproved entirely of the piquant neatness
of Caroline's costume, and the ladylike grace of her appearance.
Something more solid and homely she would have considered "beaucoup plus
convenable."

The afternoon was devoted to sewing. Mademoiselle, like most Belgian
ladies, was specially skilful with her needle. She by no means thought
it waste of time to devote unnumbered hours to fine embroidery,
sight-destroying lace-work, marvellous netting and knitting, and, above
all, to most elaborate stocking-mending. She would give a day to the
mending of two holes in a stocking any time, and think her "mission"
nobly fulfilled when she had accomplished it. It was another of
Caroline's troubles to be condemned to learn this foreign style of
darning, which was done stitch by stitch, so as exactly to imitate the
fabric of the stocking itself - a wearifu' process, but considered by
Hortense Gérard, and by her ancestresses before her for long generations
back, as one of the first "duties of a woman." She herself had had a
needle, cotton, and a fearfully torn stocking put into her hand while
she yet wore a child's coif on her little black head; her "hauts faits"
in the darning line had been exhibited to company ere she was six years
old; and when she first discovered that Caroline was profoundly ignorant
of this most essential of attainments, she could have wept with pity
over her miserably-neglected youth.

No time did she lose in seeking up a hopeless pair of hose, of which the
heels were entirely gone, and in setting the ignorant English girl to
repair the deficiency. This task had been commenced two years ago, and
Caroline had the stockings in her work-bag yet. She did a few rows every
day, by way of penance for the expiation of her sins. They were a
grievous burden to her; she would much have liked to put them in the
fire; and once Mr. Moore, who had observed her sitting and sighing over
them, had proposed a private incremation in the counting-house; but to
this proposal Caroline knew it would have been impolitic to accede - the
result could only be a fresh pair of hose, probably in worse condition.
She adhered, therefore, to the ills she knew.

All the afternoon the two ladies sat and sewed, till the eyes and
fingers, and even the spirits of one of them, were weary. The sky since
dinner had darkened; it had begun to rain again, to pour fast. Secret
fears began to steal on Caroline that Robert would be persuaded by Mr.
Sykes or Mr. Yorke to remain at Whinbury till it cleared, and of that
there appeared no present chance. Five o'clock struck, and time stole
on; still the clouds streamed. A sighing wind whispered in the
roof-trees of the cottage; day seemed already closing; the parlour fire
shed on the clear hearth a glow ruddy as at twilight.

"It will not be fair till the moon rises," pronounced Mademoiselle
Moore, "consequently I feel assured that my brother will not return till
then. Indeed I should be sorry if he did. We will have coffee. It would
be vain to wait for him."

"I am tired. May I leave my work now, cousin?"

"You may, since it grows too dark to see to do it well. Fold it up; put
it carefully in your bag; then step into the kitchen and desire Sarah to
bring in the gouter, or tea, as you call it."

"But it has not yet struck six. He may still come."

"He will not, I tell you. I can calculate his movements. I understand my
brother."

Suspense is irksome, disappointment bitter. All the world has, some
time or other, felt that. Caroline, obedient to orders, passed into the
kitchen. Sarah was making a dress for herself at the table.

"You are to bring in coffee," said the young lady in a spiritless tone;
and then she leaned her arm and head against the kitchen mantelpiece,
and hung listlessly over the fire.

"How low you seem, miss! But it's all because your cousin keeps you so
close to work. It's a shame!"

"Nothing of the kind, Sarah," was the brief reply.

"Oh! but I know it is. You're fit to cry just this minute, for nothing
else but because you've  sat still the whole day. It would make a kitten
dull to be mewed up so."

"Sarah, does your master often come home early from market when it is
wet?"

"Never, hardly; but just to-day, for some reason, he has made a
difference."

"What do you mean?"

"He is come. I am certain I saw Murgatroyd lead his horse into the yard
by the back-way, when I went to get some water at the pump five minutes
since. He was in the counting-house with Joe Scott, I believe."

"You are mistaken."

"What should I be mistaken for? I know his horse surely?"

"But you did not see himself?"

"I heard him speak, though. He was saying something to Joe Scott about
having settled all concerning ways and means, and that there would be a
new set of frames in the mill before another week passed, and that this
time he would get four soldiers from Stilbro' barracks to guard the
wagon."

"Sarah, are you making a gown?"

"Yes. Is it a handsome one?"

"Beautiful! Get the coffee ready. I'll finish cutting out that sleeve
for you, and I'll give you some trimming for it. I have some narrow
satin ribbon of a colour that will just match it."

"You're very kind, miss."

"Be quick; there's a good girl. But first put your master's shoes on the
hearth: he will take his boots off when he comes in. I hear him; he is
coming."

"Miss, you are cutting the stuff wrong."

"So I am; but it is only a snip. There is no harm done."

The kitchen door opened; Mr. Moore entered, very wet and cold. Caroline
half turned from her dressmaking occupation, but renewed it for a
moment, as if to gain a minute's time for some purpose. Bent over the
dress, her face was hidden; there was an attempt to settle her features
and veil their expression, which failed. When she at last met Mr. Moore,
her countenance beamed.

"We had ceased to expect you. They asserted you would not come," she
said.

"But I promised to return soon. You expected me, I suppose?"

"No, Robert; I dared not when it rained so fast. And you are wet and
chilled. Change everything. If you took cold, I should - we should blame
ourselves in some measure."

"I am not wet through: my riding-coat is waterproof. Dry shoes are all I
require. There - the fire is pleasant after facing the cold wind and rain
for a few miles."

He stood on the kitchen hearth; Caroline stood beside him. Mr. Moore,
while enjoying the genial glow, kept his eyes directed towards the
glittering brasses on the shelf above. Chancing for an instant to look
down, his glance rested on an uplifted face, flushed, smiling, happy,
shaded with silky curls, lit with fine eyes. Sarah was gone into the
parlour with the tray; a lecture from her mistress detained her there.
Moore placed his hand a moment on his young cousin's shoulder, stooped,
and left a kiss on her forehead.

"Oh!" said she, as if the action had unsealed her lips, "I was miserable
when I thought you would not come. I am almost too happy now. Are you
happy, Robert? Do you like to come home?"

"I think I do - to-night, at least."

"Are you certain you are not fretting about your frames, and your
business, and the war?"

"Not just now."

"Are you positive you don't  feel Hollow's Cottage too small for you, and
narrow, and dismal?"

"At this moment, no."

"Can you affirm that you are not bitter at heart because rich and great
people forget you?"

"No more questions. You are mistaken if you think I am anxious to curry
favour with rich and great people. I only want means - a position - a
career."

"Which your own talent and goodness shall win you. You were made to be
great; you shall be great."

"I wonder now, if you spoke honestly out of your heart, what recipe you
would give me for acquiring this same greatness; but I know it - better
than you know it yourself. Would it be efficacious? Would it work?
Yes - poverty, misery, bankruptcy. Oh, life is not what you think it,
Lina!"

"But you are what I think you."

"I am not."

"You are better, then?"

"Far worse."

"No; far better. I know you are good."

"How do you know it?"

"You look so, and I feel you are so."

"Where do you feel it?"

"In my heart."

"Ah! You judge me with your heart, Lina: you should judge me with your
head."

"I do; and then I am quite proud of you. Robert, you cannot tell all my
thoughts about you."

Mr. Moore's dark face mustered colour; his lips smiled, and yet were
compressed; his eyes laughed, and yet he resolutely knit his brow.

"Think meanly of me, Lina," said he. "Men, in general, are a sort of
scum, very different to anything of which you have an idea. I make no
pretension to be better than my fellows."

"If you did, I should not esteem you so much. It is because you are
modest that I have such confidence in your merit."

"Are you flattering me?" he demanded, turning sharply upon her, and
searching her face with an eye of acute penetration.

"No," she said softly, laughing at his sudden quickness. She seemed to
think it unnecessary to proffer any eager disavowal of the charge.

"You don't  care whether I think you flatter me or not?"

"No."

"You are so secure of your own intentions?"

"I suppose so."

"What are they, Caroline?"

"Only to ease my mind by expressing for once part of what I think, and
then to make you better satisfied with yourself."

"By assuring me that my kinswoman is my sincere friend?"

"Just so. I am your sincere friend, Robert."

"And I am - what chance and change shall make me, Lina."

"Not my enemy, however?"

The answer was cut short by Sarah and her mistress entering the kitchen
together in some commotion. They had been improving the time which Mr.
Moore and Miss Helstone had spent in dialogue by a short dispute on the
subject of "café au lait," which Sarah said was the queerest mess she
ever saw, and a waste of God's good gifts, as it was "the nature of
coffee to be boiled in water," and which mademoiselle affirmed to be "un
breuvage royal," a thousand times too good for the mean person who
objected to it.

The former occupants of the kitchen now withdrew into the parlour.
Before Hortense followed them thither, Caroline had only time again to
question, "Not my enemy, Robert?" And Moore, Quaker-like, had replied
with another query, "Could I be?" And then, seating himself at the
table, had settled Caroline at his side.

Caroline scarcely heard mademoiselle's explosion of wrath when she
rejoined them; the long declamation about the "conduite indigne de cette
méchante créature" sounded in her ear as confusedly as the agitated
rattling of the china. Robert laughed a little at it, in very subdued
sort, and then, politely and calmly entreating his sister to be
tranquil, assured her that if it would yield her any satisfaction, she
should have her choice of an attendant amongst all the girls in his
mill. Only he feared they would scarcely suit her, as they were most of
them, he was informed, completely ignorant of household work; and pert
and self-willed as Sarah was, she was, perhaps, no worse than the
majority of the women of her class.

Mademoiselle admitted the truth of this conjecture: according to her,
"ces paysannes anglaises étaient tout insupportables." What would she
not give for some "bonne cuisiniere anversoise," with the high cap,
short petticoat, and decent sabots proper to her class - something
better, indeed, than an insolent coquette in a flounced gown, and
absolutely without cap!  For Sarah, it appears, did not partake the
opinion of St. Paul that "it is a shame for a woman to go with her head
uncovered;" but, holding rather a contrary doctrine, resolutely refused
to imprison in linen or muslin the plentiful tresses of her yellow hair,
which it was her wont to fasten up smartly with a comb behind, and on
Sundays to wear curled in front. 

"Shall I try and get you an Antwerp girl?" asked Mr. Moore, who, stern
in public, was on the whole very kind in private.

"Merci du cadeau!" was the answer. "An Antwerp girl would not stay here
ten days, sneered at as she would be by all the young coquines in your
factory;" then softening, "You are very good, dear brother - excuse my
petulance - but truly my domestic trials are severe, yet they are
probably my destiny; for I recollect that our revered mother experienced
similar sufferings, though she had the choice of all the best servants
in Antwerp. Domestics are in all countries a spoiled and unruly set."

Mr. Moore had also certain reminiscences about the trials of his revered
mother. A good mother she had been to him, and he honoured her memory;
but he recollected that she kept a hot kitchen of it in Antwerp, just as
his faithful sister did here in England. Thus, therefore, he let the
subject drop, and when the coffee-service was removed, proceeded to
console Hortense by fetching her music-book and guitar; and having
arranged the ribbon of the instrument round her neck with a quiet
fraternal kindness he knew to be all-powerful in soothing her most
ruffled moods, he asked her to give him some of their mother's favourite
songs.

Nothing refines like affection. Family jarring vulgarizes; family union
elevates. Hortense, pleased with her brother, and grateful to him,
looked, as she touched her guitar, almost graceful, almost handsome; her
everyday fretful look was gone for a moment, and was replaced by a
'sourire plein de bonté." She sang the songs he asked for, with feeling;
they reminded her of a parent to whom she had been truly attached; they
reminded her of her young days. She observed, too, that Caroline
listened with naive interest; this augmented her good-humour; and the
exclamation at the close of the song, "I wish I could sing and play like
Hortense!" achieved the business, and rendered her charming for the
evening.

It is true a little lecture to Caroline followed, on the vanity of
 wishing and the duty of trying . "As Rome," it was suggested, "had
not been built in a day, so neither had Mademoiselle Gérard Moore's
education been completed in a week, or by merely wishing to be clever.
It was effort that had accomplished that great work. She was ever
remarkable for her perseverance, for her industry. Her masters had
remarked that it was as delightful as it was uncommon to find so much
talent united with so much solidity, and so on." Once on the theme of
her own merits, mademoiselle was fluent.

Cradled at last in blissful self-complacency, she took her knitting, and
sat down tranquil. Drawn curtains, a clear fire, a softly-shining lamp,
gave now to the little parlour its best, its evening charm. It is
probable that the three there present felt this charm. They all looked
happy.

"What shall we do now, Caroline?" asked Mr. Moore, returning to his seat
beside his cousin.

"What shall we do, Robert?" repeated she playfully. "You decide."

"Not play at chess?"

"No."

"Nor draughts, nor backgammon?"

"No, no; we both hate silent games that only keep one's hands employed,
don't  we?"

"I believe we do. Then shall we talk scandal?"

"About whom? Are we sufficiently interested in anybody to take a
pleasure in pulling their character to pieces?"

"A question that comes to the point. For my part, unamiable as it
sounds, I must say no."

"And I too. But it is strange, though we want no third - fourth, I mean
 she hastily and with contrition glanced at Hortense , living person
among us - so selfish we are in our happiness - though we don't  want to
think of the present existing world, it would be pleasant to go back to
the past, to hear people that have slept for generations in graves that
are perhaps no longer graves now, but gardens and fields, speak to us
and tell us their thoughts, and impart their ideas."

"Who shall be the speaker? What language shall he utter? French?"

"Your French forefathers don't  speak so sweetly, nor so solemnly, nor so
impressively as your English ancestors, Robert. To-night you shall be
entirely English. You shall read an English book."

"An old English book?"

"Yes, an old English book - one that you like; and I will choose a part
of it that is toned quite in harmony with something in you. It shall
waken your nature, fill your mind with music; it shall pass like a
skilful hand over your heart, and make its strings sound. Your heart is
a lyre, Robert; but the lot of your life has not been a minstrel to
sweep it, and it is often silent. Let glorious William come near and
touch it. You will see how he will draw the English power and melody out
of its chords."

"I must read Shakespeare?"

"You must have his spirit before you; you must hear his voice with your
mind's ear; you must take some of his soul into yours."

"With a view to making me better? Is it to operate like a sermon?"

"It is to stir you, to give you new sensations. It is to make you feel
your life strongly - not only your virtues, but your vicious, perverse
points."

"Dieu! que dit-elle?" cried Hortense, who hitherto had been counting
stitches in her knitting, and had not much attended to what was said,
but whose ear these two strong words caught with a tweak.

"Never mind her, sister; let her talk. Now just let her say anything she
pleases to-night. She likes to come down hard upon your brother
sometimes. It amuses me, so let her alone."

Caroline, who, mounted on a chair, had been rummaging the bookcase,
returned with a book.

"Here's Shakespeare," she said, "and there's 'Coriolanus.' Now, read,
and discover by the feelings the reading will give you at once how low
and how high you are."

"Come, then, sit near me, and correct when I mispronounce."

"I am to be the teacher then, and you my pupil?"

"Ainsi, soit-il!"

"And Shakespeare is our science, since we are going to study?"

"It appears so."

"And you are not going to be French, and sceptical, and sneering? You
are not going to think it a sign of wisdom to refuse to admire?"

"I don't  know."

"If you do, Robert, I'll take Shakespeare away; and I'll shrivel up
within myself, and put on my bonnet and go home."

"Sit down. Here I begin."

"One minute, if you please, brother," interrupted mademoiselle. "When
the gentleman of a family reads, the ladies should always
sew. - Caroline, dear child, take your embroidery. You may get three
sprigs done to-night."

Caroline looked dismayed. "I can't  see by lamp-light; my eyes are tired,
and I can't  do two things well at once. If I sew, I cannot listen; if I
listen, I cannot sew."

"Fi, donc! Quel enfantillage!" began Hortense. Mr. Moore, as usual,
suavely interposed.

"Permit her to neglect the embroidery for this evening. I wish her whole
attention to be fixed on my accent; and to ensure this, she must follow
the reading with her eyes - she must look at the book."

He placed it between them, reposed his arm on the back of Caroline's
chair, and thus began to read.

The very first scene in "Coriolanus" came with smart relish to his
intellectual palate, and still as he read he warmed. He delivered the
haughty speech of Caius Marcius to the starving citizens with unction;
he did not say he thought his irrational pride right, but he seemed to
feel it so. Caroline looked up at him with a singular smile.

"There's a vicious point hit already," she said. "You sympathize with
that proud patrician who does not sympathize with his famished
fellow-men, and insults them. There, go on." He proceeded. The warlike
portions did not rouse him much; he said all that was out of date, or
should be; the spirit displayed was barbarous; yet the encounter
single-handed between Marcius and Tullus Aufidius he delighted in. As he
advanced, he forgot to criticise; it was evident he appreciated the
power, the truth of each portion; and, stepping out of the narrow line
of private prejudices, began to revel in the large picture of human
nature, to feel the reality stamped upon the characters who were
speaking from that page before him.

He did not read the comic scenes well; and Caroline, taking the book out
of his hand, read these parts for him. From her he seemed to enjoy them,
and indeed she gave them with a spirit no one could have expected of
her, with a pithy expression with which she seemed gifted on the spot,
and for that brief moment only. It may be remarked, in passing, that the
general character of her conversation that evening, whether serious or
sprightly, grave or gay, was as of something untaught, unstudied,
intuitive, fitful - when once gone, no more to be reproduced as it had
been than the glancing ray of the meteor, than the tints of the dew-gem,
than the colour or form of the sunset cloud, than the fleeting and
glittering ripple varying the flow of a rivulet.

Coriolanus in glory, Coriolanus in disaster, Coriolanus banished,
followed like giant shades one after the other. Before the vision of the
banished man Moore's spirit seemed to pause. He stood on the hearth of
Aufidius's hall, facing the image of greatness fallen, but greater than
ever in that low estate. He saw "the grim appearance," the dark face
"bearing command in it," "the noble vessel with its tackle torn." With
the revenge of Caius Marcius, Moore perfectly sympathized; he was not
scandalized by it; and again Caroline whispered, "There I see another
glimpse of brotherhood in error."

The march on Rome, the mother's supplication, the long resistance, the
final yielding of bad passions to good, which ever must be the case in a
nature worthy the epithet of noble, the rage of Aufidius at what he
considered his ally's weakness, the death of Coriolanus, the final
sorrow of his great enemy - all scenes made of condensed truth and
strength - came on in succession and carried with them in their deep,
fast flow the heart and mind of reader and listener.

"Now, have you felt Shakespeare?" asked Caroline, some ten minutes after
her cousin had closed the book.

"I think so."

"And have you felt anything in Coriolanus like you?"

"Perhaps I have."

"Was he not faulty as well as great?"

Moore nodded.

"And what was his fault? What made him hated by the citizens? What
caused him to be banished by his countrymen?"

"What do you think it was?"

"I ask again - 

 'Whether was it pride,
 Which out of daily fortune ever taints
 The happy man? whether defect of judgment,
 To fail in the disposing of those chances
 Which he was lord of? or whether nature,
 Not to be other than one thing, not moving
 From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace
 Even with the same austerity and garb
 As he controlled the war?'"

"Well, answer yourself, Sphinx."

"It was a spice of all; and you must not be proud to your workpeople;
you must not neglect chances of soothing them; and you must not be of an
inflexible nature, uttering a request as austerely as if it were a
command."

"That is the moral you tack to the play. What puts such notions into
your head?"

"A wish for your good, a care for your safety, dear Robert, and a fear,
caused by many things which I have heard lately, that you will come to
harm."

"Who tells you these things?"

"I hear my uncle talk about you. He praises your hard spirit, your
determined cast of mind, your scorn of low enemies, your resolution not
'to truckle to the mob,' as he says."

"And would you have me truckle to them?"

"No, not for the world. I never wish you to lower yourself; but somehow
I cannot help thinking it unjust to include all poor working-people
under the general and insulting name of 'the mob,' and continually to
think of them and treat them haughtily."

"You are a little democrat, Caroline. If your uncle knew, what would he
say?"

"I rarely talk to my uncle, as you know, and never about such things. He
thinks everything but sewing and cooking above women's comprehension,
and out of their line."

"And do you fancy you comprehend the subjects on which you advise me?"

"As far as they concern you, I comprehend them. I know it would be
better for you to be loved by your workpeople than to be hated by them,
and I am sure that kindness is more likely to win their regard than
pride. If you were proud and cold to me and Hortense, should we love
you? When you are cold to me, as you are sometimes, can I venture to
be affectionate in return?"

"Now, Lina, I've  had my lesson both in languages and ethics, with a
touch on politics; it is your turn. Hortense tells me you were much
taken by a little piece of poetry you learned the other day, a piece by
poor André Chénier - 'La Jeune Captive.' Do you remember it still?"

"I think so."

"Repeat it, then. Take your time and mind your accent; especially let us
have no English u 's."

Caroline, beginning in a low, rather tremulous voice, but gaining
courage as she proceeded, repeated the sweet verses of Chénier. The last
three stanzas she rehearsed well.

 "Mon beau voyage encore est si loin de sa fin!
 Je pars, et des ormeaux qui bordent le chemin
 J'ai passé le premiers a peine.
 Au banquet de la vie a peine commencé,
 Un instant seulement mes levres ont pressé
 La coupe en mes mains encore pleine.

 "Je ne suis qu'au printemps - je veux voir la moisson;
 Et comme le soleil, de saison en saison,
 Je veux achever mon année,
 Brillante sur ma tige, et l'honneur du jardin
 Je n'ai vu luire encore que les feux du matin,
 Je veux achever ma journée!"

Moore listened at first with his eyes cast down, but soon he furtively
raised them. Leaning back in his chair he could watch Caroline without
her perceiving where his gaze was fixed. Her cheek had a colour, her
eyes a light, her countenance an expression this evening which would
have made even plain features striking; but there was not the grievous
defect of plainness to pardon in her case. The sunshine was not shed on
rough barrenness; it fell on soft bloom. Each lineament was turned with
grace; the whole aspect was pleasing. At the present moment - animated,
interested, touched - she might be called beautiful. Such a face was
calculated to awaken not only the calm sentiment of esteem, the distant
one of admiration, but some feeling more tender, genial,
intimate - friendship, perhaps, affection, interest. When she had
finished, she turned to Moore, and met his eye.

"Is that pretty well repeated?" she inquired, smiling like any happy,
docile child.

"I really don't  know."

"Why don't  you know? Have you not listened?"

"Yes - and looked. You are fond of poetry, Lina?"

"When I meet with real poetry, I cannot rest till I have learned it by
heart, and so made it partly mine."

Mr. Moore now sat silent for several minutes. It struck nine o'clock.
Sarah entered, and said that Mr. Helstone's servant was come for Miss
Caroline.

"Then the evening is gone already," she observed, "and it will be long,
I suppose, before I pass another here."

Hortense had been for some time nodding over her knitting; fallen into a
doze now, she made no response to the remark.

"You would have no objection to come here oftener of an evening?"
inquired Robert, as he took her folded mantle from the side-table, where
it still lay, and carefully wrapped it round her.

"I like to come here; but I have no desire to be intrusive. I am not
hinting to be asked; you must understand that."

"Oh! I understand thee, child. You sometimes lecture me for wishing to
be rich, Lina; but if I were rich, you should live here always - at any
rate, you should live with me wherever my habitation might be."

"That would be pleasant; and if you were poor - ever so poor - it would
still be pleasant. Good-night, Robert."

"I promised to walk with you up to the rectory."

"I know you did; but I thought you had forgotten, and I hardly knew how
to remind you, though I wished to do it. But would you like to go? It is
a cold night, and as Fanny is come, there is no necessity - - "

"Here is your muff; don't  wake Hortense - come."

The half mile to the rectory was soon traversed. They parted in the
garden without kiss, scarcely with a pressure of hands; yet Robert sent
his cousin in excited and joyously troubled. He had been singularly kind
to her that day - not in phrase, compliment, profession, but in manner,
in look, and in soft and friendly tones.

For himself, he came home grave, almost morose. As he stood leaning on
his own yard-gate, musing in the watery moonlight all alone, the hushed,
dark mill before him, the hill-environed hollow round, he exclaimed,
abruptly, - 

"This won't  do! There's weakness - there's downright ruin in all this.
However," he added, dropping his voice, "the frenzy is quite temporary.
I know it very well; I have had it before. It will be gone to-morrow."




CHAPTER VII.

The Curates at Tea.


Caroline Helstone was just eighteen years old, and at eighteen the true
narrative of life is yet to be commenced. Before that time we sit
listening to a tale, a marvellous fiction, delightful sometimes, and sad
sometimes, almost always unreal. Before that time our world is heroic,
its inhabitants half-divine or semi-demon; its scenes are dream-scenes;
darker woods and stranger hills, brighter skies, more dangerous waters,
sweeter flowers, more tempting fruits, wider plains, drearier deserts,
sunnier fields than are found in nature, overspread our enchanted globe.
What a moon we gaze on before that time! How the trembling of our hearts
at her aspect bears witness to its unutterable beauty! As to our sun, it
is a burning heaven - the world of gods.

At that time, at eighteen, drawing near the confines of illusive, void
dreams, Elf-land lies behind us, the shores of Reality rise in front.
These shores are yet distant; they look so blue, soft, gentle, we long
to reach them. In sunshine we see a greenness beneath the azure, as of
spring meadows; we catch glimpses of silver lines, and imagine the roll
of living waters. Could we but reach this land, we think to hunger and
thirst no more; whereas many a wilderness, and often the flood of death,
or some stream of sorrow as cold and almost as black as death, is to be
crossed ere true bliss can be tasted. Every joy that life gives must be
earned ere it is secured; and how hardly earned, those only know who
have wrestled for great prizes. The heart's blood must gem with red
beads the brow of the combatant, before the wreath of victory rustles
over it.

At eighteen we are not aware of this. Hope, when she smiles on us, and
promises happiness to-morrow, is implicitly believed; Love, when he
comes wandering like a lost angel to our door, is at once admitted,
welcomed, embraced. His quiver is not seen; if his arrows penetrate,
their wound is like a thrill of new life. There are no fears of poison,
none of the barb which no leech's hand can extract. That perilous
passion - an agony ever in some of its phases; with many, an agony
throughout - is believed to be an unqualified good. In short, at eighteen
the school of experience is to be entered, and her humbling, crushing,
grinding, but yet purifying and invigorating lessons are yet to be
learned.

Alas, Experience! No other mentor has so wasted and frozen a face as
yours, none wears a robe so black, none bears a rod so heavy, none with
hand so inexorable draws the novice so sternly to his task, and forces
him with authority so resistless to its acquirement. It is by your
instructions alone that man or woman can ever find a safe track through
life's wilds; without it, how they stumble, how they stray! On what
forbidden grounds do they intrude, down what dread declivities are they
hurled!

Caroline, having been convoyed home by Robert, had no wish to pass what
remained of the evening with her uncle. The room in which he sat was
very sacred ground to her; she seldom intruded on it; and to-night she
kept aloof till the bell rang for prayers. Part of the evening church
service was the form of worship observed in Mr. Helstone's household. He
read it in his usual nasal voice, clear, loud, and monotonous. The rite
over, his niece, according to her wont, stepped up to him.

"Good-night, uncle."

"Hey! You've  been gadding abroad all day - visiting, dining out, and what
not!"

"Only at the cottage."

"And have you learned your lessons?"

"Yes."

"And made a shirt?"

"Only part of one."

"Well, that will do. Stick to the needle, learn shirt-making and
gown-making and piecrust-making, and you'll be a clever woman some day.
Go to bed now. I'm busy with a pamphlet here."

Presently the niece was enclosed in her small bedroom, the door bolted,
her white dressing-gown assumed, her long hair loosened and falling
thick, soft, and wavy to her waist; and as, resting from the task of
combing it out, she leaned her check on her hand and fixed her eyes on
the carpet, before her rose, and close around her drew, the visions we
see at eighteen years.

Her thoughts were speaking with her, speaking pleasantly, as it seemed,
for she smiled as she listened. She looked pretty meditating thus; but a
brighter thing than she was in that apartment - the spirit of youthful
Hope. According to this flattering prophet, she was to know
disappointment, to feel chill no more; she had entered on the dawn of a
summer day - no false dawn, but the true spring of morning - and her sun
would quickly rise. Impossible for her now to suspect that she was the
sport of delusion; her expectations seemed warranted, the foundation on
which they rested appeared solid.

"When people love, the next step is they marry," was her argument. "Now,
I love Robert, and I feel sure that Robert loves me. I have thought so
many a time before; to-day I felt it. When I looked up at him after
repeating Chénier's poem, his eyes  what handsome eyes he has!  sent the
truth through my heart. Sometimes I am afraid to speak to him, lest I
should be too frank, lest I should seem forward - for I have more than
once regretted bitterly overflowing, superfluous words, and feared I had
said more than he expected me to say, and that he would disapprove what
he might deem my indiscretion; now, to-night I could have ventured to
express any thought, he was so indulgent. How kind he was as we walked
up the lane! He does not flatter or say foolish things; his love-making
 friendship, I mean; of course I don't  yet account him my lover, but I
hope he will be so some day  is not like what we read of in books, - it
is far better - original, quiet, manly, sincere. I do like him; I would
be an excellent wife to him if he did marry me; I would tell him of his
faults  for he has a few faults , but I would study his comfort, and
cherish him, and do my best to make him happy. Now, I am sure he will
not be cold to-morrow. I feel almost certain that to-morrow evening he
will either come here, or ask me to go there."

She recommenced combing her hair, long as a mermaid's. Turning her head
as she arranged it she saw her own face and form in the glass. Such
reflections are soberizing to plain people: their own eyes are not
enchanted with the image; they are confident then that the eyes of
others can see in it no fascination. But the fair must naturally draw
other conclusions: the picture is charming, and must charm. Caroline saw
a shape, a head, that, daguerreotyped in that attitude and with that
expression, would have been lovely. She could not choose but derive
from the spectacle confirmation to her hopes. It was then in
undiminished gladness she sought her couch.

And in undiminished gladness she rose the next day. As she entered her
uncle's breakfast-room, and with soft cheerfulness wished him
good-morning, even that little man of bronze himself thought, for an
instant, his niece was growing "a fine girl." Generally she was quiet
and timid with him - very docile, but not communicative; this morning,
however, she found many things to say. Slight topics alone might be
discussed between them; for with a woman - a girl - Mr. Helstone would
touch on no other. She had taken an early walk in the garden, and she
told him what flowers were beginning to spring there; she inquired when
the gardener was to come and trim the borders; she informed him that
certain starlings were beginning to build their nests in the
church-tower  Briarfield church was close to Briarfield rectory ; she
wondered the tolling of the bells in the belfry did not scare them.

Mr. Helstone opined that "they were like other fools who had just
paired - insensible to inconvenience just for the moment." Caroline, made
perhaps a little too courageous by her temporary good spirits, here
hazarded a remark of a kind she had never before ventured to make on
observations dropped by her revered relative.

"Uncle," said she, "whenever you speak of marriage you speak of it
scornfully. Do you think people shouldn't  marry?"

"It is decidedly the wisest plan to remain single, especially for
women."

"Are all marriages unhappy?"

"Millions of marriages are unhappy. If everybody confessed the truth,
perhaps all are more or less so."

"You are always vexed when you are asked to come and marry a couple.
Why?"

"Because one does not like to act as accessory to the commission of a
piece of pure folly."

Mr. Helstone spoke so readily, he seemed rather glad of the opportunity
to give his niece a piece of his mind on this point. Emboldened by the
impunity which had hitherto attended her questions, she went a little
further.

"But why," said she, 'should it be pure folly? If two people like each
other, why shouldn't  they consent to live together?"

"They tire of each other - they tire of each other in a month. A
yokefellow is not a companion; he or she is a fellow-sufferer."

It was by no means naive simplicity which inspired Caroline's next
remark; it was a sense of antipathy to such opinions, and of displeasure
at him who held them.

"One would think you had never been married, uncle. One would think you
were an old bachelor."

"Practically, I am so."

"But you have been married. Why were you so inconsistent as to marry?"

"Every man is mad once or twice in his life."

"So you tired of my aunt, and my aunt of you, and you were miserable
together?"

Mr. Helstone pushed out his cynical lip, wrinkled his brown forehead,
and gave an inarticulate grunt.

"Did she not suit you? Was she not good-tempered? Did you not get used
to her? Were you not sorry when she died?"

"Caroline," said Mr. Helstone, bringing his hand slowly down to within
an inch or two of the table, and then smiting it suddenly on the
mahogany, "understand this: it is vulgar and puerile to confound
generals with particulars. In every case there is the rule and there are
the exceptions. Your questions are stupid and babyish. Ring the bell, if
you have done breakfast."

The breakfast was taken away, and that meal over, it was the general
custom of uncle and niece to separate, and not to meet again till
dinner; but to-day the niece, instead of quitting the room, went to the
window-seat, and sat down there. Mr. Helstone looked round uneasily once
or twice, as if he wished her away; but she was gazing from the window,
and did not seem to mind him: so he continued the perusal of his morning
paper - a particularly interesting one it chanced to be, as new movements
had just taken place in the Peninsula, and certain columns of the
journal were rich in long dispatches from General Lord Wellington. He
little knew, meantime, what thoughts were busy in his niece's
mind - thoughts the conversation of the past half-hour had revived but
not generated; tumultuous were they now, as disturbed bees in a hive,
but it was years since they had first made their cells in her brain.

She was reviewing his character, his disposition, repeating his
sentiments on marriage. Many a time had she reviewed them before, and
sounded the gulf between her own mind and his; and then, on the other
side of the wide and deep chasm, she had seen, and she now saw, another
figure standing beside her uncle's - a strange shape, dim, sinister,
scarcely earthly - the half-remembered image of her own father, James
Helstone, Matthewson Helstone's brother.

Rumours had reached her ear of what that father's character was; old
servants had dropped hints; she knew, too, that he was not a good man,
and that he was never kind to her. She recollected - a dark recollection
it was - some weeks that she had spent with him in a great town
somewhere, when she had had no maid to dress her or take care of her;
when she had been shut up, day and night, in a high garret-room, without
a carpet, with a bare uncurtained bed, and scarcely any other furniture;
when he went out early every morning, and often forgot to return and
give her her dinner during the day, and at night, when he came back, was
like a madman, furious, terrible, or - still more painful - like an idiot,
imbecile, senseless. She knew she had fallen ill in this place, and that
one night, when she was very sick he had come raving into the room, and
said he would kill her, for she was a burden to him. Her screams had
brought aid; and from the moment she was then rescued from him she had
never seen him, except as a dead man in his coffin.

That was her father. Also she had a mother, though Mr. Helstone never
spoke to her of that mother, though she could not remember having seen
her; but that she was alive she knew. This mother was then the
drunkard's wife. What had their marriage been? Caroline, turning from
the lattice, whence she had been watching the starlings  though without
seeing them , in a low voice, and with a sad, bitter tone, thus broke
the silence of the room, - 

"You term marriage miserable, I suppose, from what you saw of my father
and mother's. If my mother suffered what I suffered when I was with
papa, she must have had a dreadful life."

Mr. Helstone, thus addressed, wheeled about in his chair, and looked
over his spectacles at his niece. He was taken aback.

Her father and mother! What had put it into her head to mention her
father and mother, of whom he had never, during the twelve years she had
lived with him, spoken to her? That the thoughts were self-matured, that
she had any recollections or speculations about her parents, he could
not fancy.

"Your father and mother? Who has been talking to you about them?"

"Nobody; but I remember something of what papa was, and I pity mamma.
Where is she?"

This "Where is she?" had been on Caroline's lips hundreds of times
before, but till now she had never uttered it.

"I hardly know," returned Mr. Helstone; "I was little acquainted with
her. I have not heard from her for years: but wherever she is, she
thinks nothing of you; she never inquires about you. I have reason to
believe she does not wish to see you. Come, it is school-time. You go to
your cousin at ten, don't  you? The clock has struck."

Perhaps Caroline would have said more; but Fanny, coming in, informed
her master that the churchwardens wanted to speak to him in the vestry.
He hastened to join them, and his niece presently set out for the
cottage.

The road from the rectory to Hollow's Mill inclined downwards; she ran,
therefore, almost all the way. Exercise, the fresh air, the thought of
seeing Robert, at least of being on his premises, in his vicinage,
revived her somewhat depressed spirits quickly. Arriving in sight of the
white house, and within hearing of the thundering mill and its rushing
watercourse, the first thing she saw was Moore at his garden gate. There
he stood, in his belted Holland blouse, a light cap covering his head,
which undress costume suited him. He was looking down the lane, not in
the direction of his cousin's approach. She stopped, withdrawing a
little behind a willow, and studied his appearance.

"He has not his peer," she thought. "He is as handsome as he is
intelligent. What a keen eye he has! What clearly-cut, spirited
features - thin and serious, but graceful! I do like his face, I do like
his aspect, I do like him so much - better than any of those shuffling
curates, for instance - better than anybody; bonny Robert!"

She sought "bonny Robert's" presence speedily. For his part, when she
challenged his sight, I believe he would have passed from before her
eyes like a phantom, if he could; but being a tall fact, and no fiction,
he was obliged to stand the greeting. He made it brief. It was
cousin-like, brother-like, friend-like, anything but lover-like. The
nameless charm of last night had left his manner: he was no longer the
same man: or, at any rate, the same heart did not beat in his breast.
Rude disappointment, sharp cross! At first the eager girl would not
believe in the change, though she saw and felt it. It was difficult to
withdraw her hand from his, till he had bestowed at least something like
a kind pressure; it was difficult to turn her eyes from his eyes, till
his looks had expressed something more and fonder than that cool
welcome.

A lover masculine so disappointed can speak and urge explanation, a
lover feminine can say nothing; if she did, the result would be shame
and anguish, inward remorse for self-treachery. Nature would brand such
demonstration as a rebellion against her instincts, and would
vindictively repay it afterwards by the thunderbolt of self-contempt
smiting suddenly in secret. Take the matter as you find it: ask no
questions, utter no remonstrances; it is your best wisdom. You expected
bread, and you have got a stone: break your teeth on it, and don't 
shriek because the nerves are martyrized; do not doubt that your mental
stomach - if you have such a thing - is strong as an ostrich's; the stone
will digest. You held out your hand for an egg, and fate put into it a
scorpion. Show no consternation: close your fingers firmly upon the
gift; let it sting through your palm. Never mind; in time, after your
hand and arm have swelled and quivered long with torture, the squeezed
scorpion will die, and you will have learned the great lesson how to
endure without a sob. For the whole remnant of your life, if you survive
the test - some, it is said, die under it - you will be stronger, wiser,
less sensitive. This you are not aware of, perhaps, at the time, and so
cannot borrow courage of that hope. Nature, however, as has been
intimated, is an excellent friend in such cases, sealing the lips,
interdicting utterance, commanding a placid dissimulation - a
dissimulation often wearing an easy and gay mien at first, settling down
to sorrow and paleness in time, then passing away, and leaving a
convenient stoicism, not the less fortifying because it is half-bitter.

Half-bitter! Is that wrong? No; it should be bitter: bitterness is
strength - it is a tonic. Sweet, mild force following acute suffering you
find nowhere; to talk of it is delusion. There may be apathetic
exhaustion after the rack. If energy remains, it will be rather a
dangerous energy - deadly when confronted with injustice.

Who has read the ballad of "Puir Mary Lee" - that old Scotch ballad,
written I know not in what generation nor by what hand? Mary had been
ill-used - probably in being made to believe that truth which was
falsehood. She is not complaining, but she is sitting alone in the
snowstorm, and you hear her thoughts. They are not the thoughts of a
model heroine under her circumstances, but they are those of a
deeply-feeling, strongly-resentful peasant-girl. Anguish has driven her
from the ingle-nook of home to the white-shrouded and icy hills.
Crouched under the "cauld drift," she recalls every image of
horror - "the yellow-wymed ask," "the hairy adder," "the auld moon-bowing
tyke," "the ghaist at e'en,", "the sour bullister," "the milk on the
taed's back." She hates these, but "waur she hates Robin-a-Ree."

 "Oh, ance I lived happily by yon bonny burn - 
 The warld was in love wi' me;
 But now I maun sit 'neath the cauld drift and mourn,
 And curse black Robin-a-Ree!

 "Then whudder awa, thou bitter biting blast,
 And sough through the scrunty tree,
 And smoor me up in the snaw fu' fast,
 And n'er let the sun me see!

 "Oh, never melt awa, thou wreath o' snaw,
 That's sae kind in graving me;
 But hide me frae the scorn and guffaw
 O' villains like Robin-a-Ree!"

But what has been said in the last page or two is not germane to
Caroline Helstone's feelings, or to the state of things between her and
Robert Moore. Robert had done her no wrong; he had told her no lie; it
was she that was to blame, if any one was. What bitterness her mind
distilled should and would be poured on her own head. She had loved
without being asked to love - a natural, sometimes an inevitable chance,
but big with misery.

Robert, indeed, had sometimes seemed to be fond of her; but why? Because
she had made herself so pleasing to him, he could not, in spite of all
his efforts, help testifying a state of feeling his judgment did not
approve nor his will sanction. He was about to withdraw decidedly from
intimate communication with her, because he did not choose to have his
affections inextricably entangled, nor to be drawn, despite his reason,
into a marriage he believed imprudent. Now, what was she to do? To give
way to her feelings, or to vanquish them? To pursue him, or to turn
upon herself? If she is weak, she will try the first expedient - will
lose his esteem and win his aversion; if she has sense, she will be her
own governor, and resolve to subdue and bring under guidance the
disturbed realm of her emotions. She will determine to look on life
steadily, as it is; to begin to learn its severe truths seriously, and
to study its knotty problems closely, conscientiously.

It appeared she had a little sense, for she quitted Robert quietly,
without complaint or question, without the alteration of a muscle or the
shedding of a tear, betook herself to her studies under Hortense as
usual, and at dinner-time went home without lingering.

When she had dined, and found herself in the rectory drawing-room alone,
having left her uncle over his temperate glass of port wine, the
difficulty that occurred to and embarrassed her was, "How am I to get
through this day?"

Last night she had hoped it would be spent as yesterday was, that the
evening would be again passed with happiness and Robert. She had learned
her mistake this morning; and yet she could not settle down, convinced
that no chance would occur to recall her to Hollow's Cottage, or to
bring Moore again into her society.

He had walked up after tea more than once to pass an hour with her
uncle. The door-bell had rung, his voice had been heard in the passage
just at twilight, when she little expected such a pleasure; and this had
happened twice after he had treated her with peculiar reserve; and
though he rarely talked to her in her uncle's presence, he had looked at
her relentingly as he sat opposite her work-table during his stay. The
few words he had spoken to her were comforting; his manner on bidding
her good-night was genial. Now, he might come this evening, said False
Hope. She almost knew it was False Hope which breathed the whisper, and
yet she listened.

She tried to read - her thoughts wandered; she tried to sew - every stitch
she put in was an ennui , the occupation was insufferably tedious; she
opened her desk and attempted to write a French composition - she wrote
nothing but mistakes.

Suddenly the door-bell sharply rang; her heart leaped; she sprang to the
drawing-room door, opened it softly, peeped through the aperture. Fanny
was admitting a visitor - a gentleman - a tall man - just the height of
Robert. For one second she thought it was Robert - for one second she
exulted; but the voice asking for Mr. Helstone undeceived her. That
voice was an Irish voice, consequently not Moore's, but the
curate's - Malone's. He was ushered into the dining-room, where,
doubtless, he speedily helped his rector to empty the decanters.

It was a fact to be noted, that at whatever house in Briarfield,
Whinbury, or Nunnely one curate dropped in to a meal - dinner or tea, as,
the case might be - another presently followed, often two more. Not that
they gave each other the rendezvous, but they were usually all on the
run at the same time; and when Donne, for instance, sought Malone at his
lodgings and found him not, he inquired whither he had posted, and
having learned of the landlady his destination, hastened with all speed
after him. The same causes operated in the same way with Sweeting. Thus
it chanced on that afternoon that Caroline's ears were three times
tortured with the ringing of the bell and the advent of undesired
guests; for Donne followed Malone, and Sweeting followed Donne; and more
wine was ordered up from the cellar into the dining-room  for though old
Helstone chid the inferior priesthood when he found them "carousing," as
he called it, in their own tents, yet at his hierarchical table he ever
liked to treat them to a glass of his best , and through the closed
doors Caroline heard their boyish laughter, and the vacant cackle of
their voices. Her fear was lest they should stay to tea, for she had no
pleasure in making tea for that particular trio. What distinctions
people draw! These three were men - young men - educated men, like Moore;
yet, for her, how great the difference! Their society was a bore - his a
delight.

Not only was she destined to be favoured with their clerical company,
but Fortune was at this moment bringing her four other guests - lady
guests, all packed in a pony-phaeton now rolling somewhat heavily along
the road from Whinbury: an elderly lady and three of her buxom daughters
were coming to see her "in a friendly way," as the custom of that
neighbourhood was. Yes, a fourth time the bell clanged. Fanny brought
the present announcement to the drawing-room, - 

"Mrs. Sykes and the three Misses Sykes."

When Caroline was going to receive company, her habit was to wring her
hands very nervously, to flush a little, and come forward hurriedly yet
hesitatingly, wishing herself meantime at Jericho. She was, at such
crises, sadly deficient in finished manner, though she had once been at
school a year. Accordingly, on this occasion, her small white hands
sadly maltreated each other, while she stood up, waiting the entrance of
Mrs. Sykes.

In stalked that lady, a tall, bilious gentlewoman, who made an ample and
not altogether insincere profession of piety, and was greatly given to
hospitality towards the clergy. In sailed her three daughters, a showy
trio, being all three well-grown, and more or less handsome.

In English country ladies there is this point to be remarked. Whether
young or old, pretty or plain, dull or sprightly, they all  or almost
all  have a certain expression stamped on their features, which seems to
say, "I know - I do not boast of it, but I know that I am the standard
of what is proper; let every one therefore whom I approach, or who
approaches me, keep a sharp lookout, for wherein they differ from me - be
the same in dress, manner, opinion, principle, or practice - therein they
are wrong."

Mrs. and Misses Sykes, far from being exceptions to this observation,
were pointed illustrations of its truth. Miss Mary - a well-looked,
well-meant, and, on the whole, well-dispositioned girl - wore her
complacency with some state, though without harshness. Miss Harriet - a
beauty - carried it more overbearingly; she looked high and cold. Miss
Hannah, who was conceited, dashing, pushing, flourished hers consciously
and openly. The mother evinced it with the gravity proper to her age and
religious fame.

The reception was got through somehow. Caroline "was glad to see them"
 an unmitigated fib , hoped they were well, hoped Mrs. Sykes's cough was
better  Mrs. Sykes had had a cough for the last twenty years , hoped the
Misses Sykes had left their sisters at home well; to which inquiry the
Misses Sykes, sitting on three chairs opposite the music-stool, whereon
Caroline had undesignedly come to anchor, after wavering for some
seconds between it and a large arm-chair, into which she at length
recollected she ought to induct Mrs. Sykes - and indeed that lady saved
her the trouble by depositing herself therein - the Misses Sykes replied
to Caroline by one simultaneous bow, very majestic and mighty awful. A
pause followed. This bow was of a character to ensure silence for the
next five minutes, and it did. Mrs. Sykes then inquired after Mr.
Helstone, and whether he had had any return of rheumatism, and whether
preaching twice on a Sunday fatigued him, and if he was capable of
taking a full service now; and on being assured he was, she and all her
daughters, combining in chorus, expressed their opinion that he was "a
wonderful man of his years."

Pause second.

Miss Mary, getting up the steam in her turn, asked whether Caroline had
attended the Bible Society meeting which had been held at Nunnely last
Thursday night. The negative answer which truth compelled Caroline to
utter - for last Thursday evening she had been sitting at home, reading a
novel which Robert had lent her - elicited a simultaneous expression of
surprise from the lips of the four ladies.

"We were all there," said Miss Mary - "mamma and all of us. We even
persuaded papa to go. Hannah would insist upon it. But he fell asleep
while Mr. Langweilig, the German Moravian minister, was speaking. I felt
quite ashamed, he nodded so."

"And there was Dr. Broadbent," cried Hannah - 'such a beautiful speaker!
You couldn't  expect it of him, for he is almost a vulgar-looking man."

"But such a dear man," interrupted Mary.

"And such a good man, such a useful man," added her mother.

"Only like a butcher in appearance," interposed the fair, proud Harriet.
"I couldn't  bear to look at him. I listened with my eyes shut."

Miss Helstone felt her ignorance and incompetency. Not having seen Dr.
Broadbent, she could not give her opinion. Pause third came on. During
its continuance, Caroline was feeling at her heart's core what a
dreaming fool she was, what an unpractical life she led, how little
fitness there was in her for ordinary intercourse with the ordinary
world. She was feeling how exclusively she had attached herself to the
white cottage in the Hollow, how in the existence of one inmate of that
cottage she had pent all her universe. She was sensible that this would
not do, and that some day she would be forced to make an alteration. It
could not be said that she exactly wished to resemble the ladies before
her, but she wished to become superior to her present self, so as to
feel less scared by their dignity.

The sole means she found of reviving the flagging discourse was by
asking them if they would all stay to tea; and a cruel struggle it cost
her to perform this piece of civility. Mrs. Sykes had begun, "We are
much obliged to you, but - - " when in came Fanny once more.

"The gentlemen will stay the evening, ma'am," was the message she
brought from Mr. Helstone.

"What gentlemen have you?" now inquired Mrs. Sykes. Their names were
specified; she and her daughters interchanged glances. The curates were
not to them what they were to Caroline. Mr. Sweeting was quite a
favourite with them; even Mr. Malone rather so, because he was a
clergyman. "Really, since you have company already, I think we will
stay," remarked Mrs. Sykes. "We shall be quite a pleasant little party.
I always like to meet the clergy."

And now Caroline had to usher them upstairs, to help them to unshawl,
smooth their hair, and make themselves smart; to reconduct them to the
drawing-room, to distribute amongst them books of engravings, or odd
things purchased from the Jew-basket. She was obliged to be a purchaser,
though she was but a slack contributor; and if she had possessed plenty
of money, she would rather, when it was brought to the rectory - an awful
incubus! - have purchased the whole stock than contributed a single
pin-cushion.

It ought perhaps to be explained in passing, for the benefit of those
who are not au fait to the mysteries of the "Jew-basket" and
"missionary-basket," that these meubles are willow repositories, of
the capacity of a good-sized family clothes-basket, dedicated to the
purpose of conveying from house to house a monster collection of
pin-cushions, needle-books, card-racks, workbags, articles of infant
wear, etc., etc., etc., made by the willing or reluctant hands of the
Christian ladies of a parish, and sold perforce to the heathenish
gentlemen thereof, at prices unblushingly exorbitant. The proceeds of
such compulsory sales are applied to the conversion of the Jews, the
seeking up of the ten missing tribes, or to the regeneration of the
interesting coloured population of the globe. Each lady contributor
takes it in her turn to keep the basket a month, to sew for it, and to
foist off its contents on a shrinking male public. An exciting time it
is when that turn comes round. Some active-minded woman, with a good
trading spirit, like it, and enjoy exceedingly the fun of making
hard-handed worsted-spinners cash up, to the tune of four or five
hundred per cent. above cost price, for articles quite useless to them;
other feebler souls object to it, and would rather see the prince of
darkness himself at their door any morning than that phantom basket,
brought with "Mrs. Rouse's compliments; and please, ma'am, she says it's
your turn now."

Miss Helstone's duties of hostess performed, more anxiously than
cheerily, she betook herself to the kitchen, to hold a brief
privy-council with Fanny and Eliza about the tea.

"What a lot on 'em!" cried Eliza, who was cook. "And I put off the
baking to-day because I thought there would be bread plenty to fit while
morning. We shall never have enow."

"Are there any tea-cakes?" asked the young mistress.

"Only three and a loaf. I wish these fine folk would stay at home till
they're asked; and I want to finish trimming my hat"  bonnet she meant .

"Then," suggested Caroline, to whom the importance of the emergency gave
a certain energy, "Fanny must run down to Briarfield and buy some
muffins and crumpets and some biscuits. And don't  be cross, Eliza; we
can't  help it now."

"And which tea-things are we to have?"

"Oh, the best, I suppose. I'll get out the silver service." And she ran
upstairs to the plate-closet, and presently brought down teapot,
cream-ewer, and sugar-basin.

"And mun we have th' urn?"

"Yes; and now get it ready as quickly as you can, for the sooner we have
tea over the sooner they will go - at least, I hope so. Heigh-ho! I wish
they were gone," she sighed, as she returned to the drawing-room.
"Still," she thought, as she paused at the door ere opening it, "if
Robert would but come even now how bright all would be! How
comparatively easy the task of amusing these people if he were present!
There would be an interest in hearing him talk  though he never says
much in company  and in talking in his presence. There can be no
interest in hearing any of them, or in speaking to them. How they will
gabble when the curates come in, and how weary I shall grow with
listening to them! But I suppose I am a selfish fool. These are very
respectable gentlefolks. I ought, no doubt, to be proud of their
countenance. I don't  say they are not as good as I am - far from it - but
they are different from me."

She went in.

Yorkshire people in those days took their tea round the table, sitting
well into it, with their knees duly introduced under the mahogany. It
was essential to have a multitude of plates of bread and butter, varied
in sorts and plentiful in quantity. It was thought proper, too, that on
the centre plate should stand a glass dish of marmalade. Among the
viands was expected to be found a small assortment of cheesecakes and
tarts. If there was also a plate of thin slices of pink ham garnished
with green parsley, so much the better.

Eliza, the rector's cook, fortunately knew her business as provider. She
had been put out of humour a little at first, when the invaders came so
unexpectedly in such strength; but it appeared that she regained her
cheerfulness with action, for in due time the tea was spread forth in
handsome style, and neither ham, tarts, nor marmalade were wanting among
its accompaniments.

The curates, summoned to this bounteous repast, entered joyous; but at
once, on seeing the ladies, of whose presence they had not been
forewarned, they came to a stand in the doorway. Malone headed the
party; he stopped short and fell back, almost capsizing Donne, who was
behind him. Donne, staggering three paces in retreat, sent little
Sweeting into the arms of old Helstone, who brought up the rear. There
was some expostulation, some tittering. Malone was desired to mind what
he was about, and urged to push forward, which at last he did, though
colouring to the top of his peaked forehead a bluish purple. Helstone,
advancing, set the shy curates aside, welcomed all his fair guests,
shook hands and passed a jest with each, and seated himself snugly
between the lovely Harriet and the dashing Hannah. Miss Mary he
requested to move to the seat opposite to him, that he might see her if
he couldn't  be near her. Perfectly easy and gallant, in his way, were
his manners always to young ladies, and most popular was he amongst
them; yet at heart he neither respected nor liked the sex, and such of
them as circumstances had brought into intimate relation with him had
ever feared rather than loved him.

The curates were left to shift for themselves. Sweeting, who was the
least embarrassed of the three, took refuge beside Mrs. Sykes, who, he
knew, was almost as fond of him as if he had been her son. Donne, after
making his general bow with a grace all his own, and saying in a high,
pragmatical voice, "How d'ye do, Miss Helstone?" dropped into a seat at
Caroline's elbow, to her unmitigated annoyance, for she had a peculiar
antipathy to Donne, on account of his stultified and immovable
self-conceit and his incurable narrowness of mind. Malone, grinning most
unmeaningly, inducted himself into the corresponding seat on the other
side. She was thus blessed in a pair of supporters, neither of whom, she
knew, would be of any mortal use, whether for keeping up the
conversation, handing cups, circulating the muffins, or even lifting the
plate from the slop-basin. Little Sweeting, small and boyish as he was,
would have been worth twenty of them.

Malone, though a ceaseless talker when there were only men present, was
usually tongue-tied in the presence of ladies. Three phrases, however,
he had ready cut and dried, which he never failed to produce: - 

1stly. "Have you had a walk to-day, Miss Helstone?"

2ndly. "Have you seen your cousin Moore lately?"

3rdly. "Does your class at the Sunday school keep up its number?"

These three questions being put and responded to, between Caroline and
Malone reigned silence.

With Donne it was otherwise; he was troublesome, exasperating. He had a
stock of small-talk on hand, at once the most trite and perverse that
can well be imagined - abuse of the people of Briarfield; of the natives
of Yorkshire generally; complaints of the want of high society; of the
backward state of civilization in these districts; murmurings against
the disrespectful conduct of the lower orders in the north toward their
betters; silly ridicule of the manner of living in these parts - the want
of style, the absence of elegance, as if he, Donne, had been accustomed
to very great doings indeed, an insinuation which his somewhat underbred
manner and aspect failed to bear out. These strictures, he seemed to
think, must raise him in the estimation of Miss Helstone or of any other
lady who heard him; whereas with her, at least, they brought him to a
level below contempt, though sometimes, indeed, they incensed her; for,
a Yorkshire girl herself, she hated to hear Yorkshire abused by such a
pitiful prater; and when wrought up to a certain pitch, she would turn
and say something of which neither the matter nor the manner recommended
her to Mr. Donne's good-will. She would tell him it was no proof of
refinement to be ever scolding others for vulgarity, and no sign of a
good pastor to be eternally censuring his flock. She would ask him what
he had entered the church for, since he complained there were only
cottages to visit, and poor people to preach to - whether he had been
ordained to the ministry merely to wear soft clothing and sit in king's
houses. These questions were considered by all the curates as, to the
last degree, audacious and impious.

Tea was a long time in progress; all the guests gabbled as their hostess
had expected they would. Mr. Helstone, being in excellent spirits - when,
indeed, was he ever otherwise in society, attractive female society? it
being only with the one lady of his own family that he maintained a grim
taciturnity - kept up a brilliant flow of easy prattle with his
right-hand and left-hand neighbours, and even with his vis-a-vis , Miss
Mary; though, as Mary was the most sensible, the least coquettish, of
the three, to her the elderly widower was the least attentive. At heart
he could not abide sense in women. He liked to see them as silly, as
light-headed, as vain, as open to ridicule as possible, because they
were then in reality what he held them to be, and wished them to
be - inferior, toys to play with, to amuse a vacant hour, and to be
thrown away.

Hannah was his favourite. Harriet, though beautiful, egotistical, and
self-satisfied, was not quite weak enough for him. She had some genuine
self-respect amidst much false pride, and if she did not talk like an
oracle, neither would she babble like one crazy; she would not permit
herself to be treated quite as a doll, a child, a plaything; she
expected to be bent to like a queen.

Hannah, on the contrary, demanded no respect, only flattery. If her
admirers only told her that she was an angel, she would let them
 treat her like an idiot. So very credulous and frivolous was she, so
very silly did she become when besieged with attention, flattered and
admired to the proper degree, that there were moments when Helstone
actually felt tempted to commit matrimony a second time, and to try the
experiment of taking her for his second helpmeet; but fortunately the
salutary recollection of the ennuis of his first marriage, the
impression still left on him of the weight of the millstone he had once
worn round his neck, the fixity of his feelings respecting the
insufferable evils of conjugal existence, operated as a check to his
tenderness, suppressed the sigh heaving his old iron lungs, and
restrained him from whispering to Hannah proposals it would have been
high fun and great satisfaction to her to hear.

It is probable she would have married him if he had asked her; her
parents would have quite approved the match. To them his fifty-five
years, his bend-leather heart, could have presented no obstacles; and as
he was a rector, held an excellent living, occupied a good house, and
was supposed even to have private property  though in that the world was
mistaken; every penny of the L5,000 inherited by him from his father had
been devoted to the building and endowing of a new church at his native
village in Lancashire - for he could show a lordly munificence when he
pleased, and if the end was to his liking, never hesitated about making
a grand sacrifice to attain it  - her parents, I say, would have
delivered Hannah over to his lovingkindness and his tender mercies
without one scruple; and the second Mrs. Helstone, inverting the natural
order of insect existence, would have fluttered through the honeymoon a
bright, admired butterfly, and crawled the rest of her days a sordid,
trampled worm.

Little Mr. Sweeting, seated between Mrs. Sykes and Miss Mary, both of
whom were very kind to him, and having a dish of tarts before him, and
marmalade and crumpet upon his plate, looked and felt more content than
any monarch. He was fond of all the Misses Sykes; they were all fond of
him. He thought them magnificent girls, quite proper to mate with one of
his inches. If he had a cause of regret at this blissful moment, it was
that Miss Dora happened to be absent - Dora being the one whom he
secretly hoped one day to call Mrs. David Sweeting, with whom he dreamt
of taking stately walks, leading her like an empress through the village
of Nunnely; and an empress she would have been, if size could make an
empress. She was vast, ponderous. Seen from behind, she had the air of a
very stout lady of forty; but withal she possessed a good face, and no
unkindly character.

The meal at last drew to a close. It would have been over long ago if
Mr. Donne had not persisted in sitting with his cup half full of cold
tea before him, long after the rest had finished and after he himself
had discussed such allowance of viands as he felt competent to
swallow - long, indeed, after signs of impatience had been manifested
all round the board, till chairs were pushed back, till the talk
flagged, till silence fell. Vainly did Caroline inquire repeatedly if he
would have another cup, if he would take a little hot tea, as that must
be cold, etc.; he would neither drink it nor leave it. He seemed to
think that this isolated position of his gave him somehow a certain
importance, that it was dignified and stately to be the last, that it
was grand to keep all the others waiting. So long did he linger, that
the very urn died; it ceased to hiss. At length, however, the old rector
himself, who had hitherto been too pleasantly engaged with Hannah to
care for the delay, got impatient.

"For whom are we waiting?" he asked.

"For me, I believe," returned Donne complacently, appearing to think it
much to his credit that a party should thus be kept dependent on his
movements.

"Tut!" cried Helstone. Then standing up, "Let us return thanks," said
he; which he did forthwith, and all quitted the table. Donne, nothing
abashed, still sat ten minutes quite alone, whereupon Mr. Helstone rang
the bell for the things to be removed. The curate at length saw himself
forced to empty his cup, and to relinquish the r"le which, he thought,
had given him such a felicitous distinction, drawing upon him such
flattering general notice.

And now, in the natural course of events  Caroline, knowing how it would
be, had opened the piano, and produced music-books in readiness , music
was asked for. This was Mr. Sweeting's chance for showing off. He was
eager to commence. He undertook, therefore, the arduous task of
persuading the young ladies to favour the company with an air - a song.
 Con amore he went through the whole business of begging, praying,
resisting excuses, explaining away difficulties, and at last succeeded
in persuading Miss Harriet to allow herself to be led to the instrument.
Then out came the pieces of his flute  he always carried them in his
pocket, as unfailingly as he carried his handkerchief . They were
screwed and arranged, Malone and Donne meanwhile herding together and
sneering at him, which the little man, glancing over his shoulder, saw,
but did not heed at all. He was persuaded their sarcasm all arose from
envy. They could not accompany the ladies as he could; he was about to
enjoy a triumph over them.

The triumph began. Malone, much chagrined at hearing him pipe up in most
superior style, determined to earn distinction too, if possible, and
all at once assuming the character of a swain  which character he had
endeavoured to enact once or twice before, but in which he had not
hitherto met with the success he doubtless opined his merits deserved ,
approached a sofa on which Miss Helstone was seated, and depositing his
great Irish frame near her, tried his hand  or rather tongue  at a fine
speech or two, accompanied by grins the most extraordinary and
incomprehensible. In the course of his efforts to render himself
agreeable, he contrived to possess himself of the two long sofa cushions
and a square one; with which, after rolling them about for some time
with strange gestures, he managed to erect a sort of barrier between
himself and the object of his attentions. Caroline, quite willing that
they should be sundered, soon devised an excuse for stepping over to the
opposite side of the room, and taking up a position beside Mrs. Sykes,
of which good lady she entreated some instruction in a new stitch in
ornamental knitting, a favour readily granted; and thus Peter Augustus
was thrown out.

Very sullenly did his countenance lower when he saw himself
abandoned - left entirely to his own resources, on a large sofa, with the
charge of three small cushions on his hands. The fact was, he felt
disposed seriously to cultivate acquaintance with Miss Helstone, because
he thought, in common with others, that her uncle possessed money, and
concluded that, since he had no children, he would probably leave it to
his niece. Gérard Moore was better instructed on this point: he had seen
the neat church that owed its origin to the rector's zeal and cash, and
more than once, in his inmost soul, had cursed an expensive caprice
which crossed his wishes.

The evening seemed long to one person in that room. Caroline at
intervals dropped her knitting on her lap, and gave herself up to a sort
of brain-lethargy - closing her eyes and depressing her head - caused by
what seemed to her the unmeaning hum around her, - the inharmonious,
tasteless rattle of the piano keys, the squeaking and gasping notes of
the flute, the laughter and mirth of her uncle, and Hannah, and Mary,
she could not tell whence originating, for she heard nothing comic or
gleeful in their discourse; and more than all, by the interminable
gossip of Mrs. Sykes murmured close at her ear, gossip which rang the
changes on four subjects - her own health and that of the various
members of her family; the missionary and Jew baskets and their
contents; the late meeting at Nunnely, and one which was expected to
come off next week at Whinbury.

Tired at length to exhaustion, she embraced the opportunity of Mr.
Sweeting coming up to speak to Mrs. Sykes to slip quietly out of the
apartment, and seek a moment's respite in solitude. She repaired to the
dining-room, where the clear but now low remnant of a fire still burned
in the grate. The place was empty and quiet, glasses and decanters were
cleared from the table, the chairs were put back in their places, all
was orderly. Caroline sank into her uncle's large easy-chair, half shut
her eyes, and rested herself - rested at least her limbs, her senses, her
hearing, her vision - weary with listening to nothing, and gazing on
vacancy. As to her mind, that flew directly to the Hollow. It stood on
the threshold of the parlour there, then it passed to the
counting-house, and wondered which spot was blessed by the presence of
Robert. It so happened that neither locality had that honour; for Robert
was half a mile away from both, and much nearer to Caroline than her
deadened spirit suspected. He was at this moment crossing the
churchyard, approaching the rectory garden-gate - not, however, coming to
see his cousin, but intent solely on communicating a brief piece of
intelligence to the rector.

Yes, Caroline; you hear the wire of the bell vibrate; it rings again for
the fifth time this afternoon. You start, and you are certain now that
this must be he of whom you dream. Why you are so certain you cannot
explain to yourself, but you know it. You lean forward, listening
eagerly as Fanny opens the door. Right! That is the voice - low, with
the slight foreign accent, but so sweet, as you fancy. You half rise.
"Fanny will tell him Mr. Helstone is with company, and then he will go
away." Oh! she cannot let him go. In spite of herself, in spite of her
reason, she walks half across the room; she stands ready to dart out in
case the step should retreat; but he enters the passage. "Since your
master is engaged," he says, "just show me into the dining-room. Bring
me pen and ink. I will write a short note and leave it for him."

Now, having caught these words, and hearing him advance, Caroline, if
there was a door within the dining-room, would glide through it and
disappear. She feels caught, hemmed in; she dreads her unexpected
presence may annoy him. A second since she would have flown to him;
that second past, she would flee from him. She cannot. There is no way
of escape. The dining-room has but one door, through which now enters
her cousin. The look of troubled surprise she expected to see in his
face has appeared there, has shocked her, and is gone. She has stammered
a sort of apology: - 

"I only left the drawing-room a minute for a little quiet."

There was something so diffident and downcast in the air and tone with
which she said this, any one might perceive that some saddening change
had lately passed over her prospects, and that the faculty of cheerful
self-possession had left her. Mr. Moore, probably, remembered how she
had formerly been accustomed to meet him with gentle ardour and hopeful
confidence. He must have seen how the check of this morning had
operated. Here was an opportunity for carrying out his new system with
effect, if he chose to improve it. Perhaps he found it easier to
practise that system in broad daylight, in his mill-yard, amidst busy
occupations, than in a quiet parlour, disengaged, at the hour of
eventide. Fanny lit the candles, which before had stood unlit on the
table, brought writing materials, and left the room. Caroline was about
to follow her. Moore, to act consistently, should have let her go;
whereas he stood in the doorway, and, holding out his hand, gently kept
her back. He did not ask her to stay, but he would not let her go.

"Shall I tell my uncle you are here?" asked she, still in the same
subdued voice.

"No; I can say to you all I had to say to him. You will be my
messenger?"

"Yes, Robert."

"Then you may just inform him that I have got a clue to the identity of
one, at least, of the men who broke my frames; that he belongs to the
same gang who attacked Sykes and Pearson's dressing-shop, and that I
hope to have him in custody to-morrow. You can remember that?"

"Oh yes!" These two monosyllables were uttered in a sadder tone than
ever; and as she said them she shook her head slightly and sighed. "Will
you prosecute him?"

"Doubtless."

"No, Robert."

"And why no, Caroline?"

"Because it will set all the neighbourhood against you more than ever."

"That is no reason why I should not do my duty, and defend my property.
This fellow is a great scoundrel, and ought to be incapacitated from
perpetrating further mischief."

"But his accomplices will take revenge on you. You do not know how the
people of this country bear malice. It is the boast of some of them that
they can keep a stone in their pocket seven years, turn it at the end of
that time, keep it seven years longer, and hurl it and hit their mark
'at last.'"

Moore laughed.

"A most pithy vaunt," said he - "one that redounds vastly to the credit
of your dear Yorkshire friends. But don't  fear for me, Lina. I am on my
guard against these lamb-like compatriots of yours. Don't  make yourself
uneasy about me."

"How can I help it? You are my cousin. If anything happened - - " She
stopped.

"Nothing will happen, Lina. To speak in your own language, there is a
Providence above all - is there not?"

"Yes, dear Robert. May He guard you!"

"And if prayers have efficacy, yours will benefit me. You pray for me
sometimes?"

"Not sometimes , Robert. You, and Louis, and Hortense are always 
remembered."

"So I have often imagined. It has occurred to me when, weary and vexed,
I have myself gone to bed like a heathen, that another had asked
forgiveness for my day, and safety for my night. I don't  suppose such
vicarial piety will avail much, but the petitions come out of a sincere
breast, from innocent lips. They should be acceptable as Abel's
offering; and doubtless would be, if the object deserved them."

"Annihilate that doubt. It is groundless."

"When a man has been brought up only to make money, and lives to make
it, and for nothing else, and scarcely breathes any other air than that
of mills and markets, it seems odd to utter his name in a prayer, or to
mix his idea with anything divine; and very strange it seems that a
good, pure heart should take him in and harbour him, as if he had any
claim to that sort of nest. If I could guide that benignant heart, I
believe I should counsel it to exclude one who does not profess to have
any higher aim in life than that of patching up his broken fortune, and
wiping clean from his bourgeois scutcheon the foul stain of
bankruptcy."

The hint, though conveyed thus tenderly and modestly  as Caroline
thought , was felt keenly and comprehended clearly.

"Indeed, I only think - or I will only think - of you as my cousin," was
the quick answer. "I am beginning to understand things better than I
did, Robert, when you first came to England - better than I did a week, a
day ago. I know it is your duty to try to get on, and that it won't  do
for you to be romantic; but in future you must not misunderstand me if I
seem friendly. You misunderstood me this morning, did you not?"

"What made you think so?"

"Your look - your manner."

"But look at me now - - "

"Oh! you are different now. At present I dare speak to you."

"Yet I am the same, except that I have left the tradesman behind me in
the Hollow. Your kinsman alone stands before you."

"My cousin Robert - not Mr. Moore."

"Not a bit of Mr. Moore. Caroline - - "

Here the company was heard rising in the other room. The door was
opened; the pony-carriage was ordered; shawls and bonnets were demanded;
Mr. Helstone called for his niece.

"I must go, Robert."

"Yes, you must go, or they will come in and find us here; and I, rather
than meet all that host in the passage, will take my departure through
the window. Luckily it opens like a door. One minute only - put down the
candle an instant - good-night. I kiss you because we are cousins, and,
being cousins, one - two - three kisses are allowable. Caroline,
good-night."




CHAPTER VIII.

NOAH AND MOSES.


The next day Moore had risen before the sun, and had taken a ride to
Whinbury and back ere his sister had made the café au lait or cut the
tartines for his breakfast. What business he transacted there he kept to
himself. Hortense asked no questions: it was not her wont to comment on
his movements, nor his to render an account of them. The secrets of
business - complicated and often dismal mysteries - were buried in his
breast, and never came out of their sepulchre save now and then to scare
Joe Scott, or give a start to some foreign correspondent. Indeed, a
general habit of reserve on whatever was important seemed bred in his
mercantile blood.

Breakfast over, he went to his counting-house. Henry, Joe Scott's boy,
brought in the letters and the daily papers; Moore seated himself at his
desk, broke the seals of the documents, and glanced them over. They were
all short, but not, it seemed, sweet - probably rather sour, on the
contrary, for as Moore laid down the last, his nostrils emitted a
derisive and defiant snuff, and though he burst into no soliloquy, there
was a glance in his eye which seemed to invoke the devil, and lay
charges on him to sweep the whole concern to Gehenna. However, having
chosen a pen and stripped away the feathered top in a brief spasm of
finger-fury  only finger-fury - his face was placid , he dashed off a
batch of answers, sealed them, and then went out and walked through the
mill. On coming back he sat down to read his newspaper.

The contents seemed not absorbingly interesting; he more than once laid
it across his knee, folded his arms, and gazed into the fire; he
occasionally turned his head towards the window; he looked at intervals
at his watch; in short, his mind appeared preoccupied. Perhaps he was
thinking of the beauty of the weather - for it was a fine and mild
morning for the season - and wishing to be out in the fields enjoying
it. The door of his counting-house stood wide open. The breeze and
sunshine entered freely; but the first visitant brought no spring
perfume on its wings, only an occasional sulphur-puff from the
soot-thick column of smoke rushing sable from the gaunt mill-chimney.

A dark-blue apparition  that of Joe Scott, fresh from a dyeing vat 
appeared momentarily at the open door, uttered the words "He's comed,
sir," and vanished.

Mr. Moore raised not his eyes from the paper. A large man,
broad-shouldered and massive-limbed, clad in fustian garments and gray
worsted stockings, entered, who was received with a nod, and desired to
take a seat, which he did, making the remark, as he removed his hat  a
very bad one , stowed it away under his chair, and wiped his forehead
with a spotted cotton handkerchief extracted from the hat-crown, that it
was "raight dahn warm for Febewerry." Mr. Moore assented - at least he
uttered some slight sound, which, though inarticulate, might pass for an
assent. The visitor now carefully deposited in the corner beside him an
official-looking staff which he bore in his hand; this done, he
whistled, probably by way of appearing at his ease.

"You have what is necessary, I suppose?" said Mr. Moore.

"Ay, ay! all's right."

He renewed his whistling, Mr. Moore his reading. The paper apparently
had become more interesting. Presently, however, he turned to his
cupboard, which was within reach of his long arm, opened it without
rising, took out a black bottle - the same he had produced for Malone's
benefit - a tumbler, and a jug, placed them on the table, and said to his
guest, - 

"Help yourself; there's water in that jar in the corner."

"I dunnut knaw that there's mich need, for all a body is dry  thirsty 
in a morning," said the fustian gentleman, rising and doing as
requested.

"Will you tak naught yourseln, Mr. Moore?" he inquired, as with skilled
hand he mixed a portion, and having tested it by a deep draught, sank
back satisfied and bland in his seat. Moore, chary of words, replied by
a negative movement and murmur.

"Yah'd as good," continued his visitor; "it 'uld set ye up wald a sup o'
this stuff. Uncommon good hollands. Ye get it fro' furrin parts, I'se
think?"

"Ay!"

"Tak my advice and try a glass on't . Them lads 'at's coming 'll keep ye
talking, nob'dy knows how long. Ye'll need propping."

"Have you seen Mr. Sykes this morning?" inquired Moore.

"I seed him a hauf an hour - nay, happen a quarter of an hour sin', just
afore I set off. He said he aimed to come here, and I sudn't  wonder but
ye'll have old Helstone too. I seed 'em saddling his little nag as I
passed at back o' t' rectory."

The speaker was a true prophet, for the trot of a little nag's hoofs
was, five minutes after, heard in the yard. It stopped, and a well-known
nasal voice cried aloud, "Boy"  probably addressing Harry Scott, who
usually hung about the premises from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. , "take my horse
and lead him into the stable."

Helstone came in marching nimbly and erect, looking browner, keener, and
livelier than usual.

"Beautiful morning, Moore. How do, my boy? Ha! whom have we here?"
 turning to the personage with the staff . "Sugden! What! you're going
to work directly? On my word, you lose no time. But I come to ask
explanations. Your message was delivered to me. Are you sure you are on
the right scent? How do you mean to set about the business? Have you got
a warrant?"

"Sugden has."

"Then you are going to seek him now? I'll accompany you."

"You will be spared that trouble, sir; he is coming to seek me. I'm just
now sitting in state waiting his arrival."

"And who is it? One of my parishioners?"

Joe Scott had entered unobserved. He now stood, a most sinister phantom,
half his person being dyed of the deepest tint of indigo, leaning on the
desk. His master's answer to the rector's question was a smile. Joe took
the word. Putting on a quiet but pawky look, he said, - 

"It's a friend of yours, Mr. Helstone, a gentleman you often speak of."

"Indeed! His name, Joe? You look well this morning."

"Only the Rev. Moses Barraclough; t' tub orator you call him sometimes,
I think."

"Ah!" said the rector, taking out his snuff-box, and administering to
himself a very long pinch - "ah! couldn't  have supposed it. Why, the
pious man never was a workman of yours, Moore. He's a tailor by trade."

"And so much the worse grudge I owe him, for interfering and setting my
discarded men against me."

"And Moses was actually present at the battle of Stilbro' Moor? He went
there, wooden leg and all?"

"Ay, sir," said Joe; "he went there on horseback, that his leg mightn't 
be noticed. He was the captain, and wore a mask. The rest only had their
faces blackened."

"And how was he found out?"

"I'll tell you, sir," said Joe. "T' maister's not so fond of talking.
I've  no objections. He courted Sarah, Mr. Moore's sarvant lass, and so
it seems she would have nothing to say to him; she either didn't  like
his wooden leg or she'd some notion about his being a hypocrite. Happen
 for women is queer hands; we may say that amang werseln when there's
none of 'em nigh  she'd have encouraged him, in spite of his leg and his
deceit, just to pass time like. I've  known some on 'em do as mich, and
some o' t' bonniest and mimmest-looking, too - ay, I've  seen clean, trim
young things, that looked as denty and pure as daisies, and wi' time a
body fun' 'em out to be nowt but stinging, venomed nettles."

"Joe's a sensible fellow," interjected Helstone.

"Howsiver, Sarah had another string to her bow. Fred Murgatroyd, one of
our lads, is for her; and as women judge men by their faces - and Fred
has a middling face, while Moses is none so handsome, as we all
knaw - the lass took on wi' Fred. A two-three months sin', Murgatroyd and
Moses chanced to meet one Sunday night; they'd both come lurking about
these premises wi' the notion of counselling Sarah to tak a bit of a
walk wi' them. They fell out, had a tussle, and Fred was worsted, for
he's young and small, and Barraclough, for all he has only one leg, is
almost as strong as Sugden there - indeed, anybody that hears him roaring
at a revival or a love-feast may be sure he's no weakling."

"Joe, you're insupportable," here broke in Mr. Moore. "You spin out your
explanation as Moses spins out his sermons. The long and short of it is,
Murgatroyd was jealous of Barraclough; and last night, as he and a
friend took shelter in a barn from a shower, they heard and saw Moses
conferring with some associates within. From their discourse it was
plain he had been the leader, not only at Stilbro' Moor, but in the
attack on Sykes's property. Moreover they planned a deputation to wait
on me this morning, which the tailor is to head, and which, in the most
religious and peaceful spirit, is to entreat me to put the accursed
thing out of my tent. I rode over to Whinbury this morning, got a
constable and a warrant, and I am now waiting to give my friend the
reception he deserves. Here, meantime, comes Sykes. Mr. Helstone, you
must spirit him up. He feels timid at the thoughts of prosecuting."

A gig was heard to roll into the yard. Mr. Sykes entered - a tall stout
man of about fifty, comely of feature, but feeble of physiognomy. He
looked anxious.

"Have they been? Are they gone? Have you got him? Is it over?" he asked.

"Not yet," returned Moore with phlegm. "We are waiting for them."

"They'll not come; it's near noon. Better give it up. It will excite bad
feeling - make a stir - cause perhaps fatal consequences."

" You need not appear," said Moore. "I shall meet them in the yard when
they come; you can stay here."

"But my name must be seen in the law proceedings. A wife and family, Mr.
Moore - a wife and family make a man cautious."

Moore looked disgusted. "Give way, if you please," said he; "leave me to
myself. I have no objection to act alone; only be assured you will not
find safety in submission. Your partner Pearson gave way, and conceded,
and forbore. Well, that did not prevent them from attempting to shoot
him in his own house."

"My dear sir, take a little wine and water," recommended Mr. Helstone.
The wine and water was hollands and water, as Mr. Sykes discovered when
he had compounded and swallowed a brimming tumbler thereof. It
transfigured him in two minutes, brought the colour back to his face,
and made him at least word -valiant. He now announced that he hoped he
was above being trampled on by the common people; he was determined to
endure the insolence of the working-classes no longer; he had considered
of it, and made up his mind to go all lengths; if money and spirit could
put down these rioters, they should be put down; Mr. Moore might do as
he liked, but he - Christie Sykes - would spend his last penny in law
before he would be beaten; he'd settle them, or he'd see.

"Take another glass," urged Moore.

Mr. Sykes didn't  mind if he did. This was a cold morning  Sugden had
found it a warm one ; it was necessary to be careful at this season of
the year - it was proper to take something to keep the damp out; he had a
little cough already  here he coughed in attestation of the fact ;
something of this sort  lifting the black bottle  was excellent, taken
medicinally  he poured the physic into his tumbler ; he didn't  make a
practice of drinking spirits in a morning, but occasionally it really
was prudent to take precautions.

"Quite prudent, and take them by all means," urged the host.

Mr. Sykes now addressed Mr. Helstone, who stood on the hearth, his
shovel-hat on his head, watching him significantly with his little, keen
eyes.

"You, sir, as a clergyman," said he, "may feel it disagreeable to be
present amidst scenes of hurry and flurry, and, I may say, peril. I dare
say your nerves won't  stand it. You're a man of peace, sir; but we
manufacturers, living in the world, and always in turmoil, get quite
belligerent. Really, there's an ardour excited by the thoughts of danger
that makes my heart pant. When Mrs. Sykes is afraid of the house being
attacked and broke open - as she is every night - I get quite excited. I
couldn't  describe to you, sir, my feelings. Really, if anybody was to
come - thieves or anything - I believe I should enjoy it, such is my
spirit."

The hardest of laughs, though brief and low, and by no means insulting,
was the response of the rector. Moore would have pressed upon the heroic
mill-owner a third tumbler, but the clergyman, who never transgressed,
nor would suffer others in his presence to transgress, the bounds of
decorum, checked him.

"Enough is as good as a feast, is it not, Mr. Sykes?" he said; and Mr.
Sykes assented, and then sat and watched Joe Scott remove the bottle at
a sign from Helstone, with a self-satisfied simper on his lips and a
regretful glisten in his eye. Moore looked as if he should have liked to
fool him to the top of his bent. What would a certain young kinswoman of
his have said could she have seen her dear, good, great Robert - her
Coriolanus - just now? Would she have acknowledged in that mischievous,
sardonic visage the same face to which she had looked up with such love,
which had bent over her with such gentleness last night? Was that the
man who had spent so quiet an evening with his sister and his cousin - so
suave to one, so tender to the other - reading Shakespeare and listening
to Chénier?

Yes, it was the same man, only seen on a different side - a side Caroline
had not yet fairly beheld, though perhaps she had enough sagacity
faintly to suspect its existence. Well, Caroline had, doubtless, her
defective side too. She was human. She must, then, have been very
imperfect; and had she seen Moore on his very worst side, she would
probably have said this to herself and excused him. Love can excuse
anything except meanness; but meanness kills love, cripples even natural
affection; without esteem true love cannot exist. Moore, with all his
faults, might be esteemed; for he had no moral scrofula in his mind, no
hopeless polluting taint - such, for instance, as that of falsehood;
neither was he the slave of his appetites. The active life to which he
had been born and bred had given him something else to do than to join
the futile chase of the pleasure-hunter. He was a man undegraded, the
disciple of reason, not the votary of sense. The same might be said of
old Helstone. Neither of these two would look, think, or speak a lie;
for neither of them had the wretched black bottle, which had just been
put away, any charms. Both might boast a valid claim to the proud title
of "lord of the creation," for no animal vice was lord of them; they
looked and were superior beings to poor Sykes.

A sort of gathering and trampling sound was heard in the yard, and then
a pause. Moore walked to the window; Helstone followed. Both stood on
one side, the tall junior behind the under-sized senior, looking forth
carefully, so that they might not be visible from without. Their sole
comment on what they saw was a cynical smile flashed into each other's
stern eyes.

A flourishing oratorical cough was now heard, followed by the
interjection "Whisht!" designed, as it seemed, to still the hum of
several voices. Moore opened his casement an inch or two to admit sound
more freely.

"Joseph Scott," began a snuffling voice - Scott was standing sentinel at
the counting-house door - "might we inquire if your master be within, and
is to be spoken to?"

"He's within, ay," said Joe nonchalantly.

"Would you then, if you please"  emphasis on "you" , "have the
goodness to tell him that twelve gentlemen wants to see him."

"He'd happen ax what for," suggested Joe. "I mught as weel tell him that
at t' same time."

"For a purpose," was the answer. Joe entered.

"Please, sir, there's twelve gentlemen wants to see ye, 'for a
purpose.'"

"Good, Joe; I'm their man. - Sugden, come when I whistle."

Moore went out, chuckling dryly. He advanced into the yard, one hand in
his pocket, the other in his waistcoat, his cap brim over his eyes,
shading in some measure their deep dancing ray of scorn. Twelve men
waited in the yard, some in their shirt-sleeves, some in blue aprons.
Two figured conspicuously in the van of the party. One, a little dapper
strutting man with a turned-up nose; the other a broad-shouldered
fellow, distinguished no less by his demure face and cat like, trustless
eyes than by a wooden leg and stout crutch. There was a kind of leer
about his lips; he seemed laughing in his sleeve at some person or
thing; his whole air was anything but that of a true man.

"Good-morning, Mr. Barraclough," said Moore debonairly, for him.

"Peace be unto you!" was the answer, Mr. Barraclough entirely closing
his naturally half-shut eyes as he delivered it.

"I'm obliged to you. Peace is an excellent thing; there's nothing I more
wish for myself. But that is not all you have to say to me, I suppose? I
imagine peace is not your purpose?"

"As to our purpose," began Barraclough, "it's one that may sound strange
and perhaps foolish to ears like yours, for the childer of this world is
wiser in their generation than the childer of light."

"To the point, if you please, and let me hear what it is."

"Ye'se hear, sir. If I cannot get it off, there's eleven behint can help
me. It is a grand purpose, and"  changing his voice from a half-sneer to
a whine  "it's the Looard's own purpose, and that's better."

"Do you want a subscription to a new Ranter's chapel, Mr. Barraclough?
Unless your errand be something of that sort, I cannot see what you have
to do with it."

"I hadn't  that duty on my mind, sir; but as Providence has led ye to
mention the subject, I'll make it i' my way to tak ony trifle ye may
have to spare; the smallest contribution will be acceptable."

With that he doffed his hat, and held it out as a begging-box, a brazen
grin at the same time crossing his countenance.

"If I gave you sixpence you would drink it."

Barraclough uplifted the palms of his hands and the whites of his eyes,
evincing in the gesture a mere burlesque of hypocrisy.

"You seem a fine fellow," said Moore, quite coolly and dryly; "you don't 
care for showing me that you are a double-dyed hypocrite, that your
trade is fraud. You expect indeed to make me laugh at the cleverness
with which you play your coarsely farcical part, while at the same time
you think you are deceiving the men behind you."

Moses' countenance lowered. He saw he had gone too far. He was going to
answer, when the second leader, impatient of being hitherto kept in the
background, stepped forward. This man did not look like a traitor,
though he had an exceedingly self-confident and conceited air.

"Mr. Moore," commenced he, speaking also in his throat and nose, and
enunciating each word very slowly, as if with a view to giving his
audience time to appreciate fully the uncommon elegance of the
phraseology, "it might, perhaps, justly be said that reason rather than
peace is our purpose. We come, in the first place, to request you to
hear reason; and should you refuse, it is my duty to warn you , in
very decided terms, that measures will be had resort to"  he meant
recourse  "which will probably terminate in - in bringing you to a
sense of the unwisdom, of the - the foolishness which seems to guide and
guard your proceedings as a tradesman in this manufacturing part of the
country. Hem! Sir, I would beg to allude that as a furriner, coming from
a distant coast, another quarter and hemisphere of this globe, thrown,
as I may say, a perfect outcast on these shores - the cliffs of
Albion - you have not that understanding of huz and wer ways which might
conduce to the benefit of the working-classes. If, to come at once to
partic'lars, you'd consider to give up this here miln, and go without
further protractions straight home to where you belong, it 'ud happen be
as well. I can see naught ageean such a plan. - What hev ye to say
tull't, lads?" turning round to the other members of the deputation,
who responded unanimously, "Hear, hear!"

"Brayvo, Noah o' Tim's!" murmured Joe Scott, who stood behind Mr. Moore.
"Moses'll niver beat that. Cliffs o' Albion, and t' other hemisphere! My
certy! Did ye come fro' th' Antarctic Zone, maister? Moses is dished."

Moses, however, refused to be dished. He thought he would try again.
Casting a somewhat ireful glance at "Noah o' Tim's," he launched out in
his turn; and now he spoke in a serious tone, relinquishing the sarcasm
which he found had not answered.

"Or iver you set up the pole o' your tent amang us, Mr. Moore, we lived
i' peace and quietness - yea, I may say, in all loving-kindness. I am not
myself an aged person as yet, but I can remember as far back as maybe
some twenty year, when hand-labour were encouraged and respected, and no
mischief-maker had ventured to introduce these here machines which is so
pernicious. Now, I'm not a cloth-dresser myself, but by trade a tailor.
Howsiver, my heart is of a softish nature. I'm a very feeling man, and
when I see my brethren oppressed, like my great namesake of old, I stand
up for 'em; for which intent I this day speak with you face to face, and
advises you to part wi' your infernal machinery, and tak on more hands."

"What if I don't  follow your advice, Mr. Barraclough?"

"The Looard pardon you! The Looard soften your heart, sir!"

"Are you in connection with the Wesleyans now, Mr. Barraclough?"

"Praise God! Bless His name! I'm a joined Methody!"

"Which in no respect prevents you from being at the same time a drunkard
and a swindler. I saw you one night a week ago laid dead-drunk by the
roadside, as I returned from Stilbro' market; and while you preach
peace, you make it the business of your life to stir up dissension. You
no more sympathize with the poor who are in distress than you sympathize
with me. You incite them to outrage for bad purposes of your own; so
does the individual called Noah of Tim's. You two are restless,
meddling, impudent scoundrels, whose chief motive-principle is a selfish
ambition, as dangerous as it is puerile. The persons behind you are some
of them honest though misguided men; but you two I count altogether
bad."

Barraclough was going to speak.

"Silence! You have had your say, and now I will have mine. As to being
dictated to by you, or any Jack, Jem, or Jonathan on earth, I shall not
suffer it for a moment. You desire me to quit the country; you request
me to part with my machinery. In case I refuse, you threaten me. I do 
refuse - point-blank! Here I stay, and by this mill I stand, and into it
will I convey the best machinery inventors can furnish. What will you
do? The utmost you can do - and this you will never dare to do - is to
burn down my mill, destroy its contents, and shoot me. What then?
Suppose that building was a ruin and I was a corpse - what then, you lads
behind these two scamps? Would that stop invention or exhaust science?
Not for the fraction of a second of time! Another and better gig-mill
would rise on the ruins of this, and perhaps a more enterprising owner
come in my place. Hear me! I'll make my cloth as I please, and according
to the best lights I have. In its manufacture I will employ what means I
choose. Whoever, after hearing this, shall dare to interfere with me may
just take the consequences. An example shall prove I'm in earnest."

He whistled shrill and loud. Sugden, his staff and warrant, came on the
scene.

Moore turned sharply to Barraclough. "You were at Stilbro'," said he; "I
have proof of that. You were on the moor, you wore a mask, you knocked
down one of my men with your own hand - you! a preacher of the
gospel! - Sugden, arrest him!"

Moses was captured. There was a cry and a rush to rescue, but the right
hand which all this while had lain hidden in Moore's breast,
reappearing, held out a pistol.

"Both barrels are loaded," said he. "I'm quite determined! Keep off!"

Stepping backwards, facing the foe as he went, he guarded his prey to
the counting-house. He ordered Joe Scott to pass in with Sugden and the
prisoner, and to bolt the door inside. For himself, he walked backwards
and forwards along the front of the mill, looking meditatively on the
ground, his hand hanging carelessly by his side, but still holding the
pistol. The eleven remaining deputies watched him some time, talking
under their breath to each other. At length one of them approached. This
man looked very different from either of the two who had previously
spoken; he was hard-favoured, but modest and manly-looking.

"I've  not much faith i' Moses Barraclough," said he, "and I would speak
a word to you myseln, Mr. Moore. It's out o' no ill-will that I'm here,
for my part; it's just to mak a effort to get things straightened, for
they're sorely a-crooked. Ye see we're ill off - varry ill off; wer
families is poor and pined. We're thrown out o' work wi' these frames;
we can get nought to do; we can earn nought. What is to be done? Mun we
say, wisht! and lig us down and dee? Nay; I've  no grand words at my
tongue's end, Mr. Moore, but I feel that it wad be a low principle for a
reasonable man to starve to death like a dumb cratur. I willn't  do't.
I'm not for shedding blood: I'd neither kill a man nor hurt a man; and
I'm not for pulling down mills and breaking machines - for, as ye say,
that way o' going on'll niver stop invention; but I'll talk - I'll mak as
big a din as ever I can. Invention may be all right, but I know it isn't 
right for poor folks to starve. Them that governs mun find a way to help
us; they mun make fresh orderations. Ye'll say that's hard to do. So
mich louder mun we shout out then, for so much slacker will t'
Parliament-men be to set on to a tough job."

"Worry the Parliament-men as much as you please," said Moore; "but to
worry the mill-owners is absurd, and I for one won't  stand it."

"Ye're a raight hard un!" returned the workman. "Willn't  ye gie us a bit
o' time? Willn't  ye consent to mak your changes rather more slowly?"

"Am I the whole body of clothiers in Yorkshire? Answer me that."

"Ye're yourseln."

"And only myself. And if I stopped by the way an instant, while others
are rushing on, I should be trodden down. If I did as you wish me to do,
I should be bankrupt in a month; and would my bankruptcy put bread into
your hungry children's mouths? William Farren, neither to your dictation
nor to that of any other will I submit. Talk to me no more about
machinery. I will have my own way. I shall get new frames in to-morrow.
If you broke these, I would still get more. I'll never give in. "

Here the mill-bell rang twelve o'clock. It was the dinner-hour. Moore
abruptly turned from the deputation and re-entered his counting-house.

His last words had left a bad, harsh impression; he, at least, had
"failed in the disposing of a chance he was lord of." By speaking kindly
to William Farren - who was a very honest man, without envy or hatred of
those more happily circumstanced than himself, thinking it no hardship
and no injustice to be forced to live by labour, disposed to be
honourably content if he could but get work to do - Moore might have made
a friend. It seemed wonderful how he could turn from such a man without
a conciliatory or a sympathizing expression. The poor fellow's face
looked haggard with want; he had the aspect of a man who had not known
what it was to live in comfort and plenty for weeks, perhaps months,
past, and yet there was no ferocity, no malignity in his countenance; it
was worn, dejected, austere, but still patient. How could Moore leave
him thus, with the words, "I'll never give in," and not a whisper of
good-will, or hope, or aid?

Farren, as he went home to his cottage - once, in better times, a decent,
clean, pleasant place, but now, though still clean, very dreary, because
so poor - asked himself this question. He concluded that the foreign
mill-owner was a selfish, an unfeeling, and, he thought, too, a foolish
man. It appeared to him that emigration, had he only the means to
emigrate, would be preferable to service under such a master. He felt
much cast down - almost hopeless.

On his entrance his wife served out, in orderly sort, such dinner as she
had to give him and the bairns. It was only porridge, and too little of
that. Some of the younger children asked for more when they had done
their portion - an application which disturbed William much. While his
wife quieted them as well as she could, he left his seat and went to the
door. He whistled a cheery stave, which did not, however, prevent a
broad drop or two  much more like the "first of a thunder-shower" than
those which oozed from the wound of the gladiator  from gathering on the
lids of his gray eyes, and plashing thence to the threshold. He cleared
his vision with his sleeve, and the melting mood over, a very stern one
followed.

He still stood brooding in silence, when a gentleman in black came up - a
clergyman, it might be seen at once, but neither Helstone, nor Malone,
nor Donne, nor Sweeting. He might be forty years old; he was
plain-looking, dark-complexioned, and already rather gray-haired. He
stooped a little in walking. His countenance, as he came on, wore an
abstracted and somewhat doleful air; but in approaching Farren he looked
up, and then a hearty expression illuminated the preoccupied, serious
face.

"Is it you, William? How are you?" he asked.

"Middling, Mr. Hall. How are ye ? Will ye step in and rest ye?"

Mr. Hall, whose name the reader has seen mentioned before  and who,
indeed, was vicar of Nunnely, of which parish Farren was a native, and
from whence he had removed but three years ago to reside in Briarfield,
for the convenience of being near Hollow's Mill, where he had obtained
work , entered the cottage, and having greeted the good-wife and the
children, sat down. He proceeded to talk very cheerfully about the
length of time that had elapsed since the family quitted his parish, the
changes which had occurred since; he answered questions touching his
sister Margaret, who was inquired after with much interest; he asked
questions in his turn, and at last, glancing hastily and anxiously round
through his spectacles  he wore spectacles, for he was short-sighted  at
the bare room, and at the meagre and wan faces of the circle about
him - for the children had come round his knee, and the father and mother
stood before him - he said abruptly, - 

"And how are you all? How do you get on?"

Mr. Hall, be it remarked, though an accomplished scholar, not only spoke
with a strong northern accent, but, on occasion, used freely
north-country expressions.

"We get on poorly," said William; "we're all out of work. I've  selled
most o' t' household stuff, as ye may see; and what we're to do next,
God knows."

"Has Mr. Moore turned you off?"

"He has turned us off; and I've  sich an opinion of him now that I think
if he'd tak me on again to-morrow I wouldn't  work for him."

"It is not like you to say so, William."

"I know it isn't ; but I'm getting different to mysel'; I feel I am
changing. I wadn't  heed if t' bairns and t' wife had enough to live on;
but they're pinched - they're pined - - "

"Well, my lad, and so are you; I see you are. These are grievous times;
I see suffering wherever I turn. William, sit down. Grace, sit down. Let
us talk it over."

And in order the better to talk it over, Mr. Hall lifted the least of
the children on to his knee, and placed his hand on the head of the
next least; but when the small things began to chatter to him he bade
them "Whisht!" and fixing his eyes on the grate, he regarded the handful
of embers which burned there very gravely.

"Sad times," he said, "and they last long. It is the will of God. His
will be done. But He tries us to the utmost."

Again he reflected.

"You've  no money, William, and you've  nothing you could sell to raise a
small sum?"

"No. I've  selled t' chest o' drawers, and t' clock, and t' bit of a
mahogany stand, and t' wife's bonny tea-tray and set o' cheeney 'at she
brought for a portion when we were wed."

"And if somebody lent you a pound or two, could you make any good use of
it? Could you get into a new way of doing something?"

Farren did not answer, but his wife said quickly, "Ay, I'm sure he
could, sir. He's a very contriving chap is our William. If he'd two or
three pounds he could begin selling stuff."

"Could you, William?"

"Please God," returned William deliberately, "I could buy groceries, and
bits o' tapes, and thread, and what I thought would sell, and I could
begin hawking at first."

"And you know, sir," interposed Grace, "you're sure William would
neither drink, nor idle, nor waste, in any way. He's my husband, and I
shouldn't  praise him; but I will say there's not a soberer, honester
man i' England nor he is."

"Well, I'll speak to one or two friends, and I think I can promise to
let him have L5 in a day or two - as a loan, ye mind, not a gift. He must
pay it back."

"I understand, sir. I'm quite agreeable to that."

"Meantime, there's a few shillings for you, Grace, just to keep the pot
boiling till custom comes. - Now, bairns, stand up in a row and say your
catechism, while your mother goes and buys some dinner; for you've  not
had much to-day, I'll be bound. - You begin, Ben. What is your name?"

Mr. Hall stayed till Grace came back; then he hastily took his leave,
shaking hands with both Farren and his wife. Just at the door he said to
them a few brief but very earnest words of religious consolation and
exhortation. With a mutual "God bless you, sir!" "God bless you, my
friends!" they separated.




CHAPTER IX.

BRIARMAINS.


Messrs. Helstone and Sykes began to be extremely jocose and
congratulatory with Mr. Moore when he returned to them after dismissing
the deputation. He was so quiet, however, under their compliments upon
his firmness, etc., and wore a countenance so like a still, dark day,
equally beamless and breezeless, that the rector, after glancing
shrewdly into his eyes, buttoned up his felicitations with his coat, and
said to Sykes, whose senses were not acute enough to enable him to
discover unassisted where his presence and conversation were a nuisance,
"Come, sir; your road and mine lie partly together. Had we not better
bear each other company? We'll bid Moore good-morning, and leave him to
the happy fancies he seems disposed to indulge."

"And where is Sugden?" demanded Moore, looking up.

"Ah, ha!" cried Helstone. "I've  not been quite idle while you were busy.
I've  been helping you a little; I flatter myself not injudiciously. I
thought it better not to lose time; so, while you were parleying with
that down-looking gentleman - Farren I think his name is - I opened this
back window, shouted to Murgatroyd, who was in the stable, to bring Mr.
Sykes's gig round; then I smuggled Sugden and brother Moses - wooden leg
and all - through the aperture, and saw them mount the gig  always with
our good friend Sykes's permission, of course . Sugden took the
reins - he drives like Jehu - and in another quarter of an hour
Barraclough will be safe in Stilbro' jail."

"Very good; thank you," said Moore; "and good-morning, gentlemen," he
added, and so politely conducted them to the door, and saw them clear of
his premises.

He was a taciturn, serious man the rest of the day. He did not even
bandy a repartee with Joe Scott, who, for his part, said to his master
only just what was absolutely necessary to the progress of business,
but looked at him a good deal out of the corners of his eyes, frequently
came to poke the counting-house fire for him, and once, as he was
locking up for the day  the mill was then working short time, owing to
the slackness of trade , observed that it was a grand evening, and he
"could wish Mr. Moore to take a bit of a walk up th' Hollow. It would do
him good."

At this recommendation Mr. Moore burst into a short laugh, and after
demanding of Joe what all this solicitude meant, and whether he took him
for a woman or a child, seized the keys from his hand, and shoved him by
the shoulders out of his presence. He called him back, however, ere he
had reached the yard-gate.

"Joe, do you know those Farrens? They are not well off, I suppose?"

"They cannot be well off, sir, when they've  not had work as a three
month. Ye'd see yoursel' 'at William's sorely changed - fair paired.
They've  selled most o' t' stuff out o' th' house."

"He was not a bad workman?"

"Ye never had a better, sir, sin' ye began trade."

"And decent people - the whole family?"

"Niver dacenter. Th' wife's a raight cant body, and as clean - ye mught
eat your porridge off th' house floor. They're sorely comed down. I wish
William could get a job as gardener or summat i' that way; he
understands gardening weel. He once lived wi' a Scotchman that tached
him the mysteries o' that craft, as they say."

"Now, then, you can go, Joe. You need not stand there staring at me."

"Ye've  no orders to give, sir?"

"None, but for you to take yourself off."

Which Joe did accordingly.

          

Spring evenings are often cold and raw, and though this had been a fine
day, warm even in the morning and meridian sunshine, the air chilled at
sunset, the ground crisped, and ere dusk a hoar frost was insidiously
stealing over growing grass and unfolding bud. It whitened the pavement
in front of Briarmains  Mr. Yorke's residence , and made silent havoc
among the tender plants in his garden, and on the mossy level of his
lawn. As to that great tree, strong-trunked and broad-armed, which
guarded the gable nearest the road, it seemed to defy a spring-night
frost to harm its still bare boughs; and so did the leafless grove of
walnut-trees rising tall behind the house.

In the dusk of the moonless if starry night, lights from windows shone
vividly. This was no dark or lonely scene, nor even a silent one.
Briarmains stood near the highway. It was rather an old place, and had
been built ere that highway was cut, and when a lane winding up through
fields was the only path conducting to it. Briarfield lay scarce a mile
off; its hum was heard, its glare distinctly seen. Briar Chapel, a
large, new, raw Wesleyan place of worship, rose but a hundred yards
distant; and as there was even now a prayer-meeting being held within
its walls, the illumination of its windows cast a bright reflection on
the road, while a hymn of a most extraordinary description, such as a
very Quaker might feel himself moved by the Spirit to dance to, roused
cheerily all the echoes of the vicinage. The words were distinctly
audible by snatches. Here is a quotation or two from different strains;
for the singers passed jauntily from hymn to hymn and from tune to tune,
with an ease and buoyancy all their own: - 

 "Oh! who can explain
 This struggle for life,
 This travail and pain,
 This trembling and strife?
 Plague, earthquake, and famine,
 And tumult and war,
 The wonderful coming
 Of Jesus declare!

 "For every fight
 Is dreadful and loud:
 The warrior's delight
 Is slaughter and blood,
 His foes overturning,
 Till all shall expire:
 And this is with burning,
 And fuel, and fire!"

Here followed an interval of clamorous prayer, accompanied by fearful
groans. A shout of "I've  found liberty!" "Doad o' Bill's has fun'
liberty!" rang from the chapel, and out all the assembly broke again.

 "What a mercy is this!
 What a heaven of bliss!
 How unspeakably happy am I!
 Gathered into the fold,
 With Thy people enrolled,
 With Thy people to live and to die!

 "Oh, the goodness of God
 In employing a clod
 His tribute of glory to raise;
 His standard to bear,
 And with triumph declare
 His unspeakable riches of grace!

 "Oh, the fathomless love
 That has deigned to approve
 And prosper the work of my hands.
 With my pastoral crook
 I went over the brook,
 And behold I am spread into bands!

 "Who, I ask in amaze,
 Hath begotten me these?
 And inquire from what quarter they came.
 My full heart it replies,
 They are born from the skies,
 And gives glory to God and the Lamb!"

The stanza which followed this, after another and longer interregnum of
shouts, yells, ejaculations, frantic cries, agonized groans, seemed to
cap the climax of noise and zeal.

 "Sleeping on the brink of sin,
 Tophet gaped to take us in;
 Mercy to our rescue flew,
 Broke the snare, and brought us through.

 "Here, as in a lion's den,
 Undevoured we still remain,
 Pass secure the watery flood,
 Hanging on the arm of God.

 "Here - - "

 Terrible, most distracting to the ear, was the strained shout in which
the last stanza was given. 

 "Here we raise our voices higher,
 Shout in the refiner's fire,
 Clap our hands amidst the flame,
 Glory give to Jesus' name!"

The roof of the chapel did not fly off, which speaks volumes in praise
of its solid slating.

But if Briar Chapel seemed alive, so also did Briarmains, though
certainly the mansion appeared to enjoy a quieter phase of existence
than the temple. Some of its windows too were aglow; the lower casements
opened upon the lawn; curtains concealed the interior, and partly
obscured the ray of the candles which lit it, but they did not entirely
muffle the sound of voice and laughter. We are privileged to enter that
front door, and to penetrate to the domestic sanctum.

It is not the presence of company which makes Mr. Yorke's habitation
lively, for there is none within it save his own family, and they are
assembled in that farthest room to the right, the back parlour.

This is the usual sitting-room of an evening. Those windows would be
seen by daylight to be of brilliantly-stained glass, purple and amber
the predominant hues, glittering round a gravely-tinted medallion in the
centre of each, representing the suave head of William Shakespeare, and
the serene one of John Milton. Some Canadian views hung on the
walls - green forest and blue water scenery - and in the midst of them
blazes a night-eruption of Vesuvius; very ardently it glows, contrasted
with the cool foam and azure of cataracts, and the dusky depths of
woods.

The fire illuminating this room, reader, is such as, if you be a
southern, you do not often see burning on the hearth of a private
apartment. It is a clear, hot coal fire, heaped high in the ample
chimney. Mr. Yorke will have such fires even in warm summer weather.
He sits beside it with a book in his hand, a little round stand at his
elbow supporting a candle; but he is not reading - he is watching his
children. Opposite to him sits his lady - a personage whom I might
describe minutely, but I feel no vocation to the task. I see her,
though, very plainly before me - a large woman of the gravest aspect,
care on her front and on her shoulders, but not overwhelming, inevitable
care, rather the sort of voluntary, exemplary cloud and burden people
ever carry who deem it their duty to be gloomy. Ah, well-a-day! Mrs.
Yorke had that notion, and grave as Saturn she was, morning, noon, and,
night; and hard things she thought if any unhappy wight - especially of
the female sex - who dared in her presence to show the light of a gay
heart on a sunny countenance. In her estimation, to be mirthful was to
be profane, to be cheerful was to be frivolous. She drew no
distinctions. Yet she was a very good wife, a very careful mother,
looked after her children unceasingly, was sincerely attached to her
husband; only the worst of it was, if she could have had her will, she
would not have permitted him to have any friend in the world beside
herself. All his relations were insupportable to her, and she kept them
at arm's length.

Mr. Yorke and she agreed perfectly well, yet he was naturally a social,
hospitable man, an advocate for family unity; and in his youth, as has
been said, he liked none but lively, cheerful women. Why he chose her,
how they contrived to suit each other, is a problem puzzling enough, but
which might soon be solved if one had time to go into the analysis of
the case. Suffice it here to say that Yorke had a shadowy side as well
as a sunny side to his character, and that his shadowy side found
sympathy and affinity in the whole of his wife's uniformly overcast
nature. For the rest, she was a strong-minded woman; never said a weak
or a trite thing; took stern, democratic views of society, and rather
cynical ones of human nature; considered herself perfect and safe, and
the rest of the world all wrong. Her main fault was a brooding, eternal,
immitigable suspicion of all men, things, creeds, and parties; this
suspicion was a mist before her eyes, a false guide in her path,
wherever she looked, wherever she turned.

It may be supposed that the children of such a pair were not likely to
turn out quite ordinary, commonplace beings; and they were not. You see
six of them, reader. The youngest is a baby on the mother's knee. It is
all her own yet, and that one she has not yet begun to doubt, suspect,
condemn; it derives its sustenance from her, it hangs on her, it clings
to her, it loves her above everything else in the world. She is sure of
that, because, as it lives by her, it cannot be otherwise, therefore she
loves it.

The two next are girls, Rose and Jessy; they are both now at their
father's knee; they seldom go near their mother, except when obliged to
do so. Rose, the elder, is twelve years old; she is like her father - the
most like him of the whole group - but it is a granite head copied in
ivory; all is softened in colour and line. Yorke himself has a harsh
face - his daughter's is not harsh, neither is it quite pretty; it is
simple, childlike in feature; the round cheeks bloom: as to the gray
eyes, they are otherwise than childlike; a serious soul lights them - a
young soul yet, but it will mature, if the body lives; and neither
father nor mother have a spirit to compare with it. Partaking of the
essence of each, it will one day be better than either - stronger, much
purer, more aspiring. Rose is a still, sometimes a stubborn, girl now.
Her mother wants to make of her such a woman as she is herself - a woman
of dark and dreary duties; and Rose has a mind full-set, thick-sown with
the germs of ideas her mother never knew. It is agony to her often to
have these ideas trampled on and repressed. She has never rebelled yet;
but if hard driven, she will rebel one day, and then it will be once for
all. Rose loves her father: her father does not rule her with a rod of
iron; he is good to her. He sometimes fears she will not live, so bright
are the sparks of intelligence which, at moments, flash from her glance
and gleam in her language. This idea makes him often sadly tender to
her.

He has no idea that little Jessy will die young, she is so gay and
chattering, arch, original even now; passionate when provoked, but most
affectionate if caressed; by turns gentle and rattling; exacting, yet
generous; fearless - of her mother, for instance, whose irrationally hard
and strict rule she has often defied - yet reliant on any who will help
her. Jessy, with her little piquant face, engaging prattle, and winning
ways, is made to be a pet, and her father's pet she accordingly is. It
is odd that the doll should resemble her mother feature by feature, as
Rose resembles her father, and yet the physiognomy - how different!

Mr. Yorke, if a magic mirror were now held before you, and if therein
were shown you your two daughters as they will be twenty years from this
night, what would you think? The magic mirror is here: you shall learn
their destinies - and first that of your little life, Jessy.

Do you know this place? No, you never saw it; but you recognize the
nature of these trees, this foliage - the cypress, the willow, the yew.
Stone crosses like these are not unfamiliar to you, nor are these dim
garlands of everlasting flowers. Here is the place - green sod and a gray
marble headstone. Jessy sleeps below. She lived through an April day;
much loved was she, much loving. She often, in her brief life, shed
tears, she had frequent sorrows; she smiled between, gladdening whatever
saw her. Her death was tranquil and happy in Rose's guardian arms, for
Rose had been her stay and defence through many trials. The dying and
the watching English girls were at that hour alone in a foreign
country, and the soil of that country gave Jessy a grave.

Now, behold Rose two years later. The crosses and garlands looked
strange, but the hills and woods of this landscape look still stranger.
This, indeed, is far from England; remote must be the shores which wear
that wild, luxuriant aspect. This is some virgin solitude. Unknown birds
flutter round the skirts of that forest; no European river this, on
whose banks Rose sits thinking. The little quiet Yorkshire girl is a
lonely emigrant in some region of the southern hemisphere. Will she ever
come back?

The three eldest of the family are all boys - Matthew, Mark, and Martin.
They are seated together in that corner, engaged in some game. Observe
their three heads: much alike at a first glance; at a second, different;
at a third, contrasted. Dark-haired, dark-eyed, red-cheeked are the
whole trio; small English features they all possess; all own a blended
resemblance to sire and mother; and yet a distinctive physiognomy, mark
of a separate character, belongs to each.

I shall not say much about Matthew, the first-born of the house, though
it is impossible to avoid gazing at him long, and conjecturing what
qualities that visage hides or indicates. He is no plain-looking boy:
that jet-black hair, white brow, high-coloured cheek, those quick, dark
eyes, are good points in their way. How is it that, look as long as you
will, there is but one object in the room, and that the most sinister,
to which Matthew's face seems to bear an affinity, and of which, ever
and anon, it reminds you strangely - the eruption of Vesuvius? Flame and
shadow seem the component parts of that lad's soul - no daylight in it,
and no sunshine, and no pure, cool moonbeam ever shone there. He has an
English frame, but, apparently, not an English mind - you would say, an
Italian stiletto in a sheath of British workmanship. He is crossed in
the game - look at his scowl. Mr. Yorke sees it, and what does he say? In
a low voice he pleads, "Mark and Martin, don't  anger your brother." And
this is ever the tone adopted by both parents. Theoretically, they decry
partiality - no rights of primogeniture are to be allowed in that house;
but Matthew is never to be vexed, never to be opposed; they avert
provocation from him as assiduously as they would avert fire from a
barrel of gunpowder. "Concede, conciliate," is their motto wherever he
is concerned. The republicans are fast making a tyrant of their own
flesh and blood. This the younger scions know and feel, and at heart
they all rebel against the injustice. They cannot read their parents'
motives; they only see the difference of treatment. The dragon's teeth
are already sown amongst Mr. Yorke's young olive-branches; discord will
one day be the harvest.

Mark is a bonny-looking boy, the most regular-featured of the family. He
is exceedingly calm; his smile is shrewd; he can say the driest, most
cutting things in the quietest of tones. Despite his tranquillity, a
somewhat heavy brow speaks temper, and reminds you that the smoothest
waters are not always the safest. Besides, he is too still, unmoved,
phlegmatic, to be happy. Life will never have much joy in it for Mark.
By the time he is five-and-twenty he will wonder why people ever laugh,
and think all fools who seem merry. Poetry will not exist for Mark,
either in literature or in life; its best effusions will sound to him
mere rant and jargon. Enthusiasm will be his aversion and contempt. Mark
will have no youth; while he looks juvenile and blooming, he will be
already middle-aged in mind. His body is now fourteen years of age, but
his soul is already thirty.

Martin, the youngest of the three, owns another nature. Life may, or may
not, be brief for him, but it will certainly be brilliant. He will pass
through all its illusions, half believe in them, wholly enjoy them, then
outlive them. That boy is not handsome - not so handsome as either of his
brothers. He is plain; there is a husk upon him, a dry shell, and he
will wear it till he is near twenty, then he will put it off. About that
period he will make himself handsome. He will wear uncouth manners till
that age, perhaps homely garments; but the chrysalis will retain the
power of transfiguring itself into the butterfly, and such
transfiguration will, in due season, take place. For a space he will be
vain, probably a downright puppy, eager for pleasure and desirous of
admiration, athirst, too, for knowledge. He will want all that the world
can give him, both of enjoyment and lore; he will, perhaps, take deep
draughts at each fount. That thirst satisfied, what next? I know not.
Martin might be a remarkable man. Whether he will or not, the seer is
powerless to predict: on that subject there has been no open vision.

Take Mr. Yorke's family in the aggregate: there is as much mental power
in those six young heads, as much originality, as much activity and
vigour of brain, as - divided amongst half a dozen commonplace
broods - would give to each rather more than an average amount of sense
and capacity. Mr. Yorke knows this, and is proud of his race. Yorkshire
has such families here and there amongst her hills and wolds - peculiar,
racy, vigorous; of good blood and strong brain; turbulent somewhat in
the pride of their strength, and intractable in the force of their
native powers; wanting polish, wanting consideration, wanting docility,
but sound, spirited, and true-bred as the eagle on the cliff or the
steed in the steppe.

A low tap is heard at the parlour door; the boys have been making such a
noise over their game, and little Jessy, besides, has been singing so
sweet a Scotch song to her father - who delights in Scotch and Italian
songs, and has taught his musical little daughter some of the best - that
the ring at the outer door was not observed.

"Come in," says Mrs. Yorke, in that conscientiously constrained and
solemnized voice of hers, which ever modulates itself to a funereal
dreariness of tone, though the subject it is exercised upon be but to
give orders for the making of a pudding in the kitchen, to bid the boys
hang up their caps in the hall, or to call the girls to their
sewing - "come in!" And in came Robert Moore.

Moore's habitual gravity, as well as his abstemiousness  for the case of
spirit decanters is never ordered up when he pays an evening visit , has
so far recommended him to Mrs. Yorke that she has not yet made him the
subject of private animadversions with her husband; she has not yet
found out that he is hampered by a secret intrigue which prevents him
from marrying, or that he is a wolf in sheep's clothing - discoveries
which she made at an early date after marriage concerning most of her
husband's bachelor friends, and excluded them from her board
accordingly; which part of her conduct, indeed, might be said to have
its just and sensible as well as its harsh side.

"Well, is it you?" she says to Mr. Moore, as he comes up to her and
gives his hand. "What are you roving about at this time of night for?
You should be at home."

"Can a single man be said to have a home, madam?" he asks.

"Pooh!" says Mrs. Yorke, who despises conventional smoothness quite as
much as her husband does, and practises it as little, and whose plain
speaking on all occasions is carried to a point calculated, sometimes,
to awaken admiration, but oftener alarm - "pooh! you need not talk
nonsense to me; a single man can have a home if he likes. Pray, does not
your sister make a home for you?"

"Not she," joined in Mr. Yorke. "Hortense is an honest lass. But when I
was Robert's age I had five or six sisters, all as decent and proper as
she is; but you see, Hesther, for all that it did not hinder me from
looking out for a wife."

"And sorely he has repented marrying me," added Mrs. Yorke, who liked
occasionally to crack a dry jest against matrimony, even though it
should be at her own expense. "He has repented it in sackcloth and
ashes, Robert Moore, as you may well believe when you see his
punishment"  here she pointed to her children . "Who would burden
themselves with such a set of great, rough lads as those, if they could
help it? It is not only bringing them into the world, though that is bad
enough, but they are all to feed, to clothe, to rear, to settle in life.
Young sir, when you feel tempted to marry, think of our four sons and
two daughters, and look twice before you leap."

"I am not tempted now, at any rate. I think these are not times for
marrying or giving in marriage."

A lugubrious sentiment of this sort was sure to obtain Mrs. Yorke's
approbation. She nodded and groaned acquiescence; but in a minute she
said, "I make little account of the wisdom of a Solomon of your age; it
will be upset by the first fancy that crosses you. Meantime, sit down,
sir. You can talk, I suppose, as well sitting as standing?"

This was her way of inviting her guest to take a chair. He had no sooner
obeyed her than little Jessy jumped from her father's knee and ran into
Mr. Moore's arms, which were very promptly held out to receive her.

"You talk of marrying him," said she to her mother, quite indignantly,
as she was lifted lightly to his knee, "and he is married now, or as
good. He promised that I should be his wife last summer, the first time
he saw me in my new white frock and blue sash. Didn't  he, father?"
 These children were not accustomed to say papa and mamma; their mother
would allow no such "namby-pamby." 

"Ay, my little lassie, he promised; I'll bear witness. But make him say
it over again now, Jessy. Such as he are only false loons."

"He is not false. He is too bonny to be false," said Jessy, looking up
to her tall sweetheart with the fullest confidence in his faith.

"Bonny!" cried Mr. Yorke. "That's the reason that he should be, and
proof that he is, a scoundrel."

"But he looks too sorrowful to be false," here interposed a quiet voice
from behind the father's chair. "If he was always laughing, I should
think he forgot promises soon, but Mr. Moore never laughs."

"Your sentimental buck is the greatest cheat of all, Rose," remarked Mr.
Yorke.

"He's not sentimental," said Rose.

Mr. Moore turned to her with a little surprise, smiling at the same
time.

"How do you know I am not sentimental, Rose?"

"Because I heard a lady say you were not."

"Voila, qui devient intéressant!" exclaimed Mr. Yorke, hitching his
chair nearer the fire. "A lady! That has quite a romantic twang. We must
guess who it is. - Rosy, whisper the name low to your father. Don't  let
 him hear."

"Rose, don't  be too forward to talk," here interrupted Mrs. Yorke, in
her usual kill-joy fashion, "nor Jessy either. It becomes all children,
especially girls, to be silent in the presence of their elders."

"Why have we tongues, then?" asked Jessy pertly; while Rose only looked
at her mother with an expression that seemed to say she should take that
maxim in and think it over at her leisure. After two minutes' grave
deliberation, she asked, "And why especially girls, mother?"

"Firstly, because I say so; and secondly, because discretion and reserve
are a girl's best wisdom."

"My dear madam," observed Moore, "what you say is excellent - it reminds
me, indeed, of my dear sister's observations; but really it is not
applicable to these little ones. Let Rose and Jessy talk to me freely,
or my chief pleasure in coming here is gone. I like their prattle; it
does me good."

"Does it not?" asked Jessy. "More good than if the rough lads came round
you. - You call them rough, mother, yourself."

"Yes, mignonne, a thousand times more good. I have rough lads enough
about me all day long, poulet."

"There are plenty of people," continued she, "who take notice of the
boys. All my uncles and aunts seem to think their nephews better than
their nieces, and when gentlemen come here to dine, it is always
Matthew, and Mark, and Martin that are talked to, and never Rose and me.
Mr. Moore is our friend, and we'll keep him. - But mind, Rose, he's not
so much your friend as he is mine. He is my particular acquaintance ;
remember that!" And she held up her small hand with an admonitory
gesture.

Rose was quite accustomed to be admonished by that small hand. Her will
daily bent itself to that of the impetuous little Jessy. She was guided,
overruled by Jessy in a thousand things. On all occasions of show and
pleasure Jessy took the lead, and Rose fell quietly into the background;
whereas, when the disagreeables of life - its work and privations - were
in question, Rose instinctively took upon her, in addition to her own
share, what she could of her sister's. Jessy had already settled it in
her mind that she, when she was old enough, was to be married; Rose, she
decided, must be an old maid, to live with her, look after her children,
keep her house. This state of things is not uncommon between two
sisters, where one is plain and the other pretty; but in this case, if
there was a difference in external appearance, Rose had the advantage:
her face was more regular-featured than that of the piquant little
Jessy. Jessy, however, was destined to possess, along with sprightly
intelligence and vivacious feeling, the gift of fascination, the power
to charm when, where, and whom she would. Rose was to have a fine,
generous soul, a noble intellect profoundly cultivated, a heart as true
as steel, but the manner to attract was not to be hers.

"Now, Rose, tell me the name of this lady who denied that I was
sentimental," urged Mr. Moore.

Rose had no idea of tantalization, or she would have held him a while in
doubt. She answered briefly, "I can't . I don't  know her name."

"Describe her to me. What was she like? Where did you see her?"

"When Jessy and I went to spend the day at Whinbury with Kate and Susan
Pearson, who were just come home from school, there was a party at Mrs.
Pearson's, and some grown-up ladies were sitting in a corner of the
drawing-room talking about you."

"Did you know none of them?"

"Hannah, and Harriet, and Dora, and Mary Sykes."

"Good. Were they abusing me, Rosy?"

"Some of them were. They called you a misanthrope. I remember the word.
I looked for it in the dictionary when I came home. It means a
man-hater."

"What besides?"

"Hannah Sykes said you were a solemn puppy."

"Better!" cried Mr. Yorke, laughing. "Oh, excellent! Hannah! that's the
one with the red hair - a fine girl, but half-witted."

"She has wit enough for me, it appears," said Moore. "A solemn puppy,
indeed! Well, Rose, go on."

"Miss Pearson said she believed there was a good deal of affectation
about you, and that with your dark hair and pale face you looked to her
like some sort of a sentimental noodle."

Again Mr. Yorke laughed. Mrs. Yorke even joined in this time. "You see
in what esteem you are held behind your back," said she; "yet I believe
 that Miss Pearson would like to catch you. She set her cap at you when
you first came into the country, old as she is."

"And who contradicted her, Rosy?" inquired Moore.

"A lady whom I don't  know, because she never visits here, though I see
her every Sunday at church. She sits in the pew near the pulpit. I
generally look at her, instead of looking at my prayer-book, for she is
like a picture in our dining-room, that woman with the dove in her
hand - at least she has eyes like it, and a nose too, a straight nose,
that makes all her face look, somehow, what I call clear."

"And you don't  know her!" exclaimed Jessy, in a tone of exceeding
surprise. "That's so like Rose. Mr. Moore, I often wonder in what sort
of a world my sister lives. I am sure she does not live all her time in
this. One is continually finding out that she is quite ignorant of some
little matter which everybody else knows. To think of her going solemnly
to church every Sunday, and looking all service-time at one particular
person, and never so much as asking that person's name. She means
Caroline Helstone, the rector's niece. I remember all about it. Miss
Helstone was quite angry with Anne Pearson. She said, 'Robert Moore is
neither affected nor sentimental; you mistake his character utterly, or
rather not one of you here knows anything about it.' Now, shall I tell
you what she is like? I can tell what people are like, and how they are
dressed, better than Rose can."

"Let us hear."

"She is nice; she is fair; she has a pretty white slender throat; she
has long curls, not stiff ones - they hang loose and soft, their colour
is brown but not dark; she speaks quietly, with a clear tone; she never
makes a bustle in moving; she often wears a gray silk dress; she is neat
all over - her gowns, and her shoes, and her gloves always fit her. She
is what I call a lady, and when I am as tall as she is, I mean to be
like her. Shall I suit you if I am? Will you really marry me?"

Moore stroked Jessy's hair. For a minute he seemed as if he would draw
her nearer to him, but instead he put her a little farther off.

"Oh! you won't  have me? You push me away."

"Why, Jessy, you care nothing about me. You never come to see me now at
the Hollow."

"Because you don't  ask me."

Hereupon Mr. Moore gave both the little girls an invitation to pay him a
visit next day, promising that, as he was going to Stilbro' in the
morning, he would buy them each a present, of what nature he would not
then declare, but they must come and see. Jessy was about to reply, when
one of the boys unexpectedly broke in, - 

"I know that Miss Helstone you have all been palavering about. She's an
ugly girl. I hate her. I hate all womenites. I wonder what they were
made for."

"Martin!" said his father, for Martin it was. The lad only answered by
turning his cynical young face, half-arch, half-truculent, towards the
paternal chair. "Martin, my lad, thou'rt a swaggering whelp now; thou
wilt some day be an outrageous puppy. But stick to those sentiments of
thine. See, I'll write down the words now i' my pocket-book."  The
senior took out a morocco-covered book, and deliberately wrote therein. 
"Ten years hence, Martin, if thou and I be both alive at that day, I'll
remind thee of that speech."

"I'll say the same then. I mean always to hate women. They're such
dolls; they do nothing but dress themselves finely, and go swimming
about to be admired. I'll never marry. I'll be a bachelor."

"Stick to it! stick to it! - Hesther"  addressing his wife , "I was like
him when I was his age - a regular misogamist; and, behold! by the time I
was three-and-twenty - being then a tourist in France and Italy, and the
Lord knows where - I curled my hair every night before I went to bed, and
wore a ring i' my ear, and would have worn one i' my nose if it had been
the fashion, and all that I might make myself pleasing and charming to
the ladies. Martin will do the like."

"Will I? Never! I've  more sense. What a guy you were, father! As to
dressing, I make this vow: I'll never dress more finely than as you see
me at present. - Mr. Moore, I'm clad in blue cloth from top to toe, and
they laugh at me, and call me sailor at the grammar-school. I laugh
louder at them, and say they are all magpies and parrots, with their
coats one colour, and their waistcoats another, and their trousers a
third. I'll always wear blue cloth, and nothing but blue cloth. It is
beneath a human being's dignity to dress himself in parti-coloured
garments."

"Ten years hence, Martin, no tailor's shop will have choice of colours
varied enough for thy exacting taste; no perfumer's stores essences
exquisite enough for thy fastidious senses."

Martin looked disdain, but vouchsafed no further reply. Meantime Mark,
who for some minutes had been rummaging amongst a pile of books on a
side-table, took the word. He spoke in a peculiarly slow, quiet voice,
and with an expression of still irony in his face not easy to describe.

"Mr. Moore," said he, "you think perhaps it was a compliment on Miss
Caroline Helstone's part to say you were not sentimental. I thought you
appeared confused when my sisters told you the words, as if you felt
flattered. You turned red, just like a certain vain little lad at our
school, who always thinks proper to blush when he gets a rise in the
class. For your benefit, Mr. Moore, I've  been looking up the word
'sentimental' in the dictionary, and I find it to mean 'tinctured with
sentiment.' On examining further, 'sentiment' is explained to be
thought, idea, notion. A sentimental man, then, is one who has thoughts,
ideas, notions; an unsentimental man is one destitute of thought, idea,
or notion."

And Mark stopped. He did not smile, he did not look round for
admiration. He had said his say, and was silent.

"Ma foi! mon ami," observed Mr. Moore to Yorke, "ce sont vraiment des
enfants terribles, que les v"tres!"

Rose, who had been listening attentively to Mark's speech, replied to
him, "There are different kinds of thoughts, ideas, and notions," said
she, "good and bad. Sentimental must refer to the bad, or Miss Helstone
must have taken it in that sense, for she was not blaming Mr. Moore; she
was defending him."

"That's my kind little advocate!" said Moore, taking Rose's hand.

"She was defending him," repeated Rose, "as I should have done had I
been in her place, for the other ladies seemed to speak spitefully."

"Ladies always do speak spitefully," observed Martin. "It is the nature
of womenites to be spiteful."

Matthew now, for the first time, opened his lips. "What a fool Martin
is, to be always gabbling about what he does not understand!"

"It is my privilege, as a freeman, to gabble on whatever subject I
like," responded Martin.

"You use it, or rather abuse it, to such an extent," rejoined the elder
brother, "that you prove you ought to have been a slave."

"A slave! a slave! That to a Yorke, and from a Yorke! This fellow," he
added, standing up at the table, and pointing across it to
Matthew - "this fellow forgets, what every cottier in Briarfield knows,
that all born of our house have that arched instep under which water can
flow - proof that there has not been a slave of the blood for three
hundred years."

"Mountebank!" said Matthew.

"Lads, be silent!" exclaimed Mr. Yorke. - "Martin, you are a
mischief-maker. There would have been no disturbance but for you."

"Indeed! Is that correct? Did I begin, or did Matthew? Had I spoken to
him when he accused me of gabbling like a fool?"

"A presumptuous fool!" repeated Matthew.

Here Mrs. Yorke commenced rocking herself - rather a portentous movement
with her, as it was occasionally followed, especially when Matthew was
worsted in a conflict, by a fit of hysterics.

"I don't  see why I should bear insolence from Matthew Yorke, or what
right he has to use bad language to me," observed Martin.

"He has no right, my lad; but forgive your brother until
seventy-and-seven times," said Mr. Yorke soothingly.

"Always alike, and theory and practice always adverse!" murmured Martin
as he turned to leave the room.

"Where art thou going, my son?" asked the father.

"Somewhere where I shall be safe from insult, if in this house I can
find any such place."

Matthew laughed very insolently. Martin threw a strange look at him, and
trembled through all his slight lad's frame; but he restrained himself.

"I suppose there is no objection to my withdrawing?" he inquired.

"No. Go, my lad; but remember not to bear malice."

Martin went, and Matthew sent another insolent laugh after him. Rose,
lifting her fair head from Moore's shoulder, against which, for a
moment, it had been resting, said, as she directed a steady gaze to
Matthew, "Martin is grieved, and you are glad; but I would rather be
Martin than you. I dislike your nature."

Here Mr. Moore, by way of averting, or at least escaping, a scene - which
a sob from Mrs. Yorke warned him was likely to come on - rose, and
putting Jessy off his knee, he kissed her and Rose, reminding them, at
the same time, to be sure and come to the Hollow in good time to-morrow
afternoon; then, having taken leave of his hostess, he said to Mr.
Yorke, "May I speak a word with you?" and was followed by him from the
room. Their brief conference took place in the hall.

"Have you employment for a good workman?" asked Moore.

"A nonsense question in these times, when you know that every master has
many good workmen to whom he cannot give full employment."

"You must oblige me by taking on this man, if possible."

"My lad, I can take on no more hands to oblige all England."

"It does not signify; I must find him a place somewhere."

"Who is he?"

"William Farren."

"I know William. A right-down honest man is William."

"He has been out of work three months. He has a large family. We are
sure they cannot live without wages. He was one of the deputation of
cloth-dressers who came to me this morning to complain and threaten.
William did not threaten. He only asked me to give them rather more
time - to make my changes more slowly. You know I cannot do that:
straitened on all sides as I am, I have nothing for it but to push on. I
thought it would be idle to palaver long with them. I sent them away,
after arresting a rascal amongst them, whom I hope to transport - a
fellow who preaches at the chapel yonder sometimes."

"Not Moses Barraclough?"

"Yes."

"Ah! you've  arrested him? Good! Then out of a scoundrel you're going to
make a martyr. You've  done a wise thing."

"I've  done a right thing. Well, the short and the long of it is, I'm
determined to get Farren a place, and I reckon on you to give him one."

"This is cool, however!" exclaimed Mr. Yorke. "What right have you to
reckon on me to provide for your dismissed workmen? What do I know about
your Farrens and your Williams? I've  heard he's an honest man, but am I
to support all the honest men in Yorkshire? You may say that would be no
great charge to undertake; but great or little, I'll none of it."

"Come, Mr. Yorke, what can you find for him to do?"

" I find! You'll make me use language I'm not accustomed to use. I wish
you would go home. Here is the door; set off."

Moore sat down on one of the hall chairs.

"You can't  give him work in your mill - good; but you have land. Find him
some occupation on your land, Mr. Yorke."

"Bob, I thought you cared nothing about our lourdauds de paysans . I
don't  understand this change."

"I do. The fellow spoke to me nothing but truth and sense. I answered
him just as roughly as I did the rest, who jabbered mere gibberish. I
couldn't  make distinctions there and then. His appearance told what he
had gone through lately clearer than his words; but where is the use of
explaining? Let him have work."

"Let him have it yourself. If you are so very much in earnest, strain a
point."

"If there was a point left in my affairs to strain, I would strain it
till it cracked again; but I received letters this morning which showed
me pretty clearly where I stand, and it is not far off the end of the
plank. My foreign market, at any rate, is gorged. If there is no
change - if there dawns no prospect of peace - if the Orders in Council
are not, at least, suspended, so as to open our way in the West - I do
not know where I am to turn. I see no more light than if I were sealed
in a rock, so that for me to pretend to offer a man a livelihood would
be to do a dishonest thing."

"Come, let us take a turn on the front. It is a starlight night," said
Mr. Yorke.

They passed out, closing the front door after them, and side by side
paced the frost-white pavement to and fro.

"Settle about Farren at once," urged Mr. Moore. "You have large
fruit-gardens at Yorke Mills. He is a good gardener. Give him work
there."

"Well, so be it. I'll send for him to-morrow, and we'll see. And now, my
lad, you're concerned about the condition of your affairs?"

"Yes, a second failure - which I may delay, but which, at this moment, I
see no way finally to avert - would blight the name of Moore completely;
and you are aware I had fine intentions of paying off every debt and
re-establishing the old firm on its former basis."

"You want capital - that's all you want."

"Yes; but you might as well say that breath is all a dead man wants to
live."

"I know - I know capital is not to be had for the asking; and if you were
a married man, and had a family, like me, I should think your case
pretty nigh desperate; but the young and unencumbered have chances
peculiar to themselves. I hear gossip now and then about your being on
the eve of marriage with this miss and that; but I suppose it is none of
it true?"

"You may well suppose that. I think I am not in a position to be
dreaming of marriage. Marriage! I cannot bear the word; it sounds so
silly and utopian. I have settled it decidedly that marriage and love
are superfluities, intended only for the rich, who live at ease, and
have no need to take thought for the morrow; or desperations - the last
and reckless joy of the deeply wretched, who never hope to rise out of
the slough of their utter poverty."

"I should not think so if I were circumstanced as you are. I should
think I could very likely get a wife with a few thousands, who would
suit both me and my affairs."

"I wonder where?"

"Would you try if you had a chance?"

"I don't  know. It depends on - in short, it depends on many things."

"Would you take an old woman?"

"I'd rather break stones on the road."

"So would I. Would you take an ugly one?"

"Bah! I hate ugliness and delight in beauty. My eyes and heart, Yorke,
take pleasure in a sweet, young, fair face, as they are repelled by a
grim, rugged, meagre one. Soft delicate lines and hues please, harsh
ones prejudice me. I won't  have an ugly wife."

"Not if she were rich?"

"Not if she were dressed in gems. I could not love - I could not fancy - I
could not endure her. My taste must have satisfaction, or disgust would
break out in despotism, or worse - freeze to utter iciness."

"What! Bob, if you married an honest, good-natured, and wealthy lass,
though a little hard-favoured, couldn't  you put up with the high
cheek-bones, the rather wide mouth, and reddish hair?"

"I'll never try, I tell you. Grace at least I will have, and youth and
symmetry - yes, and what I call beauty."

"And poverty, and a nursery full of bairns you can neither clothe nor
feed, and very soon an anxious, faded mother; and then bankruptcy,
discredit - a life-long struggle."

"Let me alone, Yorke."

"If you are romantic, Robert, and especially if you are already in love,
it is of no use talking."

"I am not romantic. I am stripped of romance as bare as the white
tenters in that field are of cloth."

"Always use such figures of speech, lad; I can understand them. And
there is no love affair to disturb your judgment?"

"I thought I had said enough on that subject before. Love for me?
Stuff!"

"Well, then, if you are sound both in heart and head, there is no
reason why you should not profit by a good chance if it offers;
therefore, wait and see."

"You are quite oracular, Yorke."

"I think I am a bit i' that line. I promise ye naught and I advise ye
naught; but I bid ye keep your heart up, and be guided by
circumstances."

"My namesake the physician's almanac could not speak more guardedly."

"In the meantime, I care naught about ye, Robert Moore: ye are nothing
akin to me or mine, and whether ye lose or find a fortune it maks no
difference to me. Go home, now. It has stricken ten. Miss Hortense will
be wondering where ye are."




CHAPTER X.

OLD MAIDS.


Time wore on, and spring matured. The surface of England began to look
pleasant: her fields grew green, her hills fresh, her gardens blooming;
but at heart she was no better. Still her poor were wretched, still
their employers were harassed. Commerce, in some of its branches, seemed
threatened with paralysis, for the war continued; England's blood was
shed and her wealth lavished - all, it seemed, to attain most inadequate
ends. Some tidings there were indeed occasionally of successes in the
Peninsula, but these came in slowly; long intervals occurred between, in
which no note was heard but the insolent self-felicitations of Bonaparte
on his continued triumphs. Those who suffered from the results of the
war felt this tedious, and, as they thought, hopeless struggle against
what their fears or their interests taught them to regard as an
invincible power, most insufferable. They demanded peace on any terms.
Men like Yorke and Moore - and there were thousands whom the war placed
where it placed them, shuddering on the verge of bankruptcy - insisted on
peace with the energy of desperation.

They held meetings, they made speeches, they got up petitions to extort
this boon; on what terms it was made they cared not.

All men, taken singly, are more or less selfish; and taken in bodies,
they are intensely so. The British merchant is no exception to this
rule: the mercantile classes illustrate it strikingly. These classes
certainly think too exclusively of making money; they are too oblivious
of every national consideration but that of extending England's - that
is, their own - commerce. Chivalrous feeling, disinterestedness, pride in
honour, is too dead in their hearts. A land ruled by them alone would
too often make ignominious submission - not at all from the motives
Christ teaches, but rather from those Mammon instils. During the late
war, the tradesmen of England would have endured buffets from the
French on the right cheek and on the left; their cloak they would have
given to Napoleon, and then have politely offered him their coat also,
nor would they have withheld their waistcoat if urged; they would have
prayed permission only to retain their one other garment, for the sake
of the purse in its pocket. Not one spark of spirit, not one symptom of
resistance, would they have shown till the hand of the Corsican bandit
had grasped that beloved purse; then , perhaps, transfigured at once
into British bulldogs, they would have sprung at the robber's throat,
and there they would have fastened, and there hung, inveterate,
insatiable, till the treasure had been restored. Tradesmen, when they
speak against war, always profess to hate it because it is a bloody and
barbarous proceeding. You would think, to hear them talk, that they are
peculiarly civilized - especially gentle and kindly of disposition to
their fellow-men. This is not the case. Many of them are extremely
narrow and cold-hearted; have no good feeling for any class but their
own; are distant, even hostile, to all others; call them useless; seem
to question their right to exist; seem to grudge them the very air they
breathe, and to think the circumstance of their eating, drinking, and
living in decent houses quite unjustifiable. They do not know what
others do in the way of helping, pleasing, or teaching their race; they
will not trouble themselves to inquire. Whoever is not in trade is
accused of eating the bread of idleness, of passing a useless existence.
Long may it be ere England really becomes a nation of shop-keepers!

We have already said that Moore was no self-sacrificing patriot, and we
have also explained what circumstances rendered him specially prone to
confine his attention and efforts to the furtherance of his individual
interest; accordingly, when he felt himself urged a second time to the
brink of ruin, none struggled harder than he against the influences
which would have thrust him over. What he could do towards stirring
agitation in the north against the war he did, and he instigated others
whose money and connections gave them more power than he possessed.
Sometimes, by flashes, he felt there was little reason in the demands
his party made on Government. When he heard of all Europe threatened by
Bonaparte, and of all Europe arming to resist him; when he saw Russia
menaced, and beheld Russia rising, incensed and stern, to defend her
frozen soil, her wild provinces of serfs, her dark native despotism,
from the tread, the yoke, the tyranny of a foreign victor - he knew that
England, a free realm, could not then depute her sons to make
concessions and propose terms to the unjust, grasping French leader.
When news came from time to time of the movements of that MAN then
representing England in the Peninsula, of his advance from success to
success - that advance so deliberate but so unswerving, so circumspect
but so certain, so "unhasting" but so "unresting;" when he read Lord
Wellington's own dispatches in the columns of the newspapers, documents
written by modesty to the dictation of truth - Moore confessed at heart
that a power was with the troops of Britain, of that vigilant, enduring,
genuine, unostentatious sort, which must win victory to the side it led,
in the end. In the end! But that end, he thought, was yet far off; and
meantime he, Moore, as an individual, would be crushed, his hopes ground
to dust. It was himself he had to care for, his hopes he had to pursue;
and he would fulfil his destiny.

He fulfilled it so vigorously that ere long he came to a decisive
rupture with his old Tory friend the rector. They quarrelled at a public
meeting, and afterwards exchanged some pungent letters in the
newspapers. Mr. Helstone denounced Moore as a Jacobin, ceased to see
him, would not even speak to him when they met. He intimated also to his
niece, very distinctly, that her communications with Hollow's Cottage
must for the present cease; she must give up taking French lessons. The
language, he observed, was a bad and frivolous one at the best, and most
of the works it boasted were bad and frivolous, highly injurious in
their tendency to weak female minds. He wondered  he remarked
parenthetically  what noodle first made it the fashion to teach women
French. Nothing was more improper for them. It was like feeding a
rickety child on chalk and water gruel. Caroline must give it up, and
give up her cousins too. They were dangerous people.

Mr. Helstone quite expected opposition to this order; he expected tears.
Seldom did he trouble himself about Caroline's movements, but a vague
idea possessed him that she was fond of going to Hollow's Cottage; also
he suspected that she liked Robert Moore's occasional presence at the
rectory. The Cossack had perceived that whereas if Malone stepped in of
an evening to make himself sociable and charming, by pinching the ears
of an aged black cat, which usually shared with Miss Helstone's feet the
accommodation of her footstool, or by borrowing a fowling-piece, and
banging away at a tool shed door in the garden while enough of daylight
remained to show that conspicuous mark, keeping the passage and
sitting-room doors meantime uncomfortably open for the convenience of
running in and out to announce his failures and successes with noisy
 brusquerie - he had observed that under such entertaining circumstances
Caroline had a trick of disappearing, tripping noiselessly upstairs, and
remaining invisible till called down to supper. On the other hand, when
Robert Moore was the guest, though he elicited no vivacities from the
cat, did nothing to it, indeed, beyond occasionally coaxing it from the
stool to his knee, and there letting it purr, climb to his shoulder, and
rub its head against his cheek; though there was no ear-splitting
cracking off of firearms, no diffusion of sulphurous gunpowder perfume,
no noise, no boasting during his stay - that still Caroline sat in the
room, and seemed to find wondrous content in the stitching of Jew-basket
pin-cushions and the knitting of missionary-basket socks.

She was very quiet, and Robert paid her little attention, scarcely ever
addressing his discourse to her; but Mr. Helstone, not being one of
those elderly gentlemen who are easily blinded - on the contrary, finding
himself on all occasions extremely wide-awake - had watched them when
they bade each other good-night. He had just seen their eyes meet
once - only once. Some natures would have taken pleasure in the glance
then surprised, because there was no harm and some delight in it. It was
by no means a glance of mutual intelligence, for mutual love secrets
existed not between them. There was nothing then of craft and
concealment to offend: only Mr. Moore's eyes, looking into Caroline's,
felt they were clear and gentle; and Caroline's eyes, encountering Mr.
Moore's, confessed they were manly and searching. Each acknowledged the
charm in his or her own way. Moore smiled slightly, and Caroline
coloured as slightly. Mr. Helstone could, on the spot, have rated them
both. They annoyed him. Why? Impossible to say. If you had asked him
what Moore merited at that moment, he would have said a "horsewhip;" if
you had inquired into Caroline's deserts, he would have adjudged her a
box on the ear; if you had further demanded the reason of such
chastisements, he would have stormed against flirtation and
love-making, and vowed he would have no such folly going on under his
roof.

These private considerations, combined with political reasons, fixed his
resolution of separating the cousins. He announced his will to Caroline
one evening as she was sitting at work near the drawing-room window. Her
face was turned towards him, and the light fell full upon it. It had
struck him a few minutes before that she was looking paler and quieter
than she used to look. It had not escaped him either that Robert Moore's
name had never, for some three weeks past, dropped from her lips; nor
during the same space of time had that personage made his appearance at
the rectory. Some suspicion of clandestine meetings haunted his mind.
Having but an indifferent opinion of women, he always suspected them. He
thought they needed constant watching. It was in a tone dryly
significant he desired her to cease her daily visits to the Hollow. He
expected a start, a look of depreciation. The start he saw, but it was a
very slight one; no look whatever was directed to him.

"Do you hear me?" he asked.

"Yes, uncle."

"Of course you mean to attend to what I say?"

"Yes, certainly."

"And there must be no letter-scribbling to your cousin Hortense - no
intercourse whatever. I do not approve of the principles of the family.
They are Jacobinical."

"Very well," said Caroline quietly. She acquiesced then. There was no
vexed flushing of the face, no gathering tears; the shadowy
thoughtfulness which had covered her features ere Mr. Helstone spoke
remained undisturbed; she was obedient.

Yes, perfectly; because the mandate coincided with her own previous
judgment; because it was now become pain to her to go to Hollow's
Cottage; nothing met her there but disappointment. Hope and love had
quitted that little tenement, for Robert seemed to have deserted its
precincts. Whenever she asked after him - which she very seldom did,
since the mere utterance of his name made her face grow hot - the answer
was, he was from home, or he was quite taken up with business. Hortense
feared he was killing himself by application. He scarcely ever took a
meal in the house; he lived in the counting-house.

At church only Caroline had the chance of seeing him, and there she
rarely looked at him. It was both too much pain and too much pleasure
to look - it excited too much emotion; and that it was all wasted emotion
she had learned well to comprehend.

Once, on a dark, wet Sunday, when there were few people at church, and
when especially certain ladies were absent, of whose observant faculties
and tomahawk tongues Caroline stood in awe, she had allowed her eye to
seek Robert's pew, and to rest awhile on its occupant. He was there
alone. Hortense had been kept at home by prudent considerations relative
to the rain and a new spring chapeau . During the sermon he sat with
folded arms and eyes cast down, looking very sad and abstracted. When
depressed, the very hue of his face seemed more dusk than when he
smiled, and to-day cheek and forehead wore their most tintless and sober
olive. By instinct Caroline knew, as she examined that clouded
countenance, that his thoughts were running in no familiar or kindly
channel; that they were far away, not merely from her, but from all
which she could comprehend, or in which she could sympathize. Nothing
that they had ever talked of together was now in his mind: he was wrapt
from her by interests and responsibilities in which it was deemed such
as she could have no part.

Caroline meditated in her own way on the subject; speculated on his
feelings, on his life, on his fears, on his fate; mused over the mystery
of "business," tried to comprehend more about it than had ever been told
her - to understand its perplexities, liabilities, duties, exactions;
endeavoured to realize the state of mind of a "man of business," to
enter into it, feel what he would feel, aspire to what he would aspire.
Her earnest wish was to see things as they were, and not to be romantic.
By dint of effort she contrived to get a glimpse of the light of truth
here and there, and hoped that scant ray might suffice to guide her.

"Different, indeed," she concluded, "is Robert's mental condition to
mine. I think only of him; he has no room, no leisure, to think of me.
The feeling called love is and has been for two years the predominant
emotion of my heart - always there, always awake, always astir. Quite
other feelings absorb his reflections and govern his faculties. He is
rising now, going to leave the church, for service is over. Will he turn
his head towards this pew? No, not once. He has not one look for me.
That is hard. A kind glance would have made me happy till to-morrow. I
have not got it; he would not give it; he is gone. Strange that grief
should now almost choke me, because another human being's eye has failed
to greet mine."

That Sunday evening, Mr. Malone coming, as usual, to pass it with his
rector, Caroline withdrew after tea to her chamber. Fanny, knowing her
habits, had lit her a cheerful little fire, as the weather was so gusty
and chill. Closeted there, silent and solitary, what could she do but
think? She noiselessly paced to and fro the carpeted floor, her head
drooped, her hands folded. It was irksome to sit; the current of
reflection ran rapidly through her mind; to-night she was mutely
excited.

Mute was the room, mute the house. The double door of the study muffled
the voices of the gentlemen. The servants were quiet in the kitchen,
engaged with books their young mistress had lent them - books which she
had told them were "fit for Sunday reading." And she herself had another
of the same sort open on the table, but she could not read it. Its
theology was incomprehensible to her, and her own mind was too busy,
teeming, wandering, to listen to the language of another mind.

Then, too, her imagination was full of pictures - images of Moore, scenes
where he and she had been together; winter fireside sketches; a glowing
landscape of a hot summer afternoon passed with him in the bosom of
Nunnely Wood; divine vignettes of mild spring or mellow autumn moments,
when she had sat at his side in Hollow's Copse, listening to the call of
the May cuckoo, or sharing the September treasure of nuts and ripe
blackberries - a wild dessert which it was her morning's pleasure to
collect in a little basket, and cover with green leaves and fresh
blossoms, and her afternoon's delight to administer to Moore, berry by
berry, and nut by nut, like a bird feeding its fledgling.

Robert's features and form were with her; the sound of his voice was
quite distinct in her ear; his few caresses seemed renewed. But these
joys, being hollow, were, ere long, crushed in. The pictures faded, the
voice failed, the visionary clasp melted chill from her hand, and where
the warm seal of lips had made impress on her forehead, it felt now as
if a sleety rain-drop had fallen. She returned from an enchanted region
to the real world: for Nunnely Wood in June she saw her narrow chamber;
for the songs of birds in alleys she heard the rain on her casement; for
the sigh of the south wind came the sob of the mournful east; and for
Moore's manly companionship she had the thin illusion of her own dim
shadow on the wall. Turning from the pale phantom which reflected
herself in its outline, and her reverie in the drooped attitude of its
dim head and colourless tresses, she sat down - inaction would suit the
frame of mind into which she was now declining - she said to herself, "I
have to live, perhaps, till seventy years. As far as I know, I have good
health; half a century of existence may lie before me. How am I to
occupy it? What am I to do to fill the interval of time which spreads
between me and the grave?"

She reflected.

"I shall not be married, it appears," she continued. "I suppose, as
Robert does not care for me, I shall never have a husband to love, nor
little children to take care of. Till lately I had reckoned securely on
the duties and affections of wife and mother to occupy my existence. I
considered, somehow, as a matter of course, that I was growing up to the
ordinary destiny, and never troubled myself to seek any other; but now I
perceive plainly I may have been mistaken. Probably I shall be an old
maid. I shall live to see Robert married to some one else, some rich
lady. I shall never marry. What was I created for, I wonder? Where is my
place in the world?"

She mused again.

"Ah! I see," she pursued presently; "that is the question which most old
maids are puzzled to solve. Other people solve it for them by saying,
'Your place is to do good to others, to be helpful whenever help is
wanted.' That is right in some measure, and a very convenient doctrine
for the people who hold it; but I perceive that certain sets of human
beings are very apt to maintain that other sets should give up their
lives to them and their service, and then they requite them by praise;
they call them devoted and virtuous. Is this enough? Is it to live? Is
there not a terrible hollowness, mockery, want, craving, in that
existence which is given away to others, for want of something of your
own to bestow it on? I suspect there is. Does virtue lie in abnegation
of self? I do not believe it. Undue humility makes tyranny; weak
concession creates selfishness. The Romish religion especially teaches
renunciation of self, submission to others, and nowhere are found so
many grasping tyrants as in the ranks of the Romish priesthood. Each
human being has his share of rights. I suspect it would conduce to the
happiness and welfare of all if each knew his allotment, and held to it
as tenaciously as the martyr to his creed. Queer thoughts these that
surge in my mind. Are they right thoughts? I am not certain.

"Well, life is short at the best. Seventy years, they say, pass like a
vapour, like a dream when one awaketh; and every path trod by human feet
terminates in one bourne - the grave, the little chink in the surface of
this great globe, the furrow where the mighty husbandman with the scythe
deposits the seed he has shaken from the ripe stem; and there it falls,
decays, and thence it springs again, when the world has rolled round a
few times more. So much for the body. The soul meantime wings its long
flight upward, folds its wings on the brink of the sea of fire and
glass, and gazing down through the burning clearness, finds there
mirrored the vision of the Christian's triple Godhead - the sovereign
Father, the mediating Son, the Creator Spirit. Such words, at least,
have been chosen to express what is inexpressible, to describe what
baffles description. The soul's real hereafter who shall guess?"

Her fire was decayed to its last cinder; Malone had departed; and now
the study bell rang for prayers.

The next day Caroline had to spend altogether alone, her uncle being
gone to dine with his friend Dr. Boultby, vicar of Whinbury. The whole
time she was talking inwardly in the same strain - looking forwards,
asking what she was to do with life. Fanny, as she passed in and out of
the room occasionally, intent on housemaid errands, perceived that her
young mistress sat very still. She was always in the same place, always
bent industriously over a piece of work. She did not lift her head to
speak to Fanny, as her custom was; and when the latter remarked that the
day was fine, and she ought to take a walk, she only said, "It is cold."

"You are very diligent at that sewing, Miss Caroline," continued the
girl, approaching her little table.

"I am tired of it, Fanny."

"Then why do you go on with it? Put it down. Read, or do something to
amuse you."

"It is solitary in this house, Fanny. Don't  you think so?"

"I don't  find it so, miss. Me and Eliza are company for one another; but
you are quite too still. You should visit more. Now, be persuaded: go
upstairs and dress yourself smart, and go and take tea, in a friendly
way, with Miss Mann or Miss Ainley. I am certain either of those ladies
would be delighted to see you."

"But their houses are dismal: they are both old maids. I am certain old
maids are a very unhappy race."

"Not they, miss. They can't  be unhappy; they take such care of
themselves. They are all selfish."

"Miss Ainley is not selfish, Fanny. She is always doing good. How
devotedly kind she was to her step-mother as long as the old lady lived;
and now when she is quite alone in the world, without brother or sister,
or any one to care for her, how charitable she is to the poor, as far as
her means permit! Still nobody thinks much of her, or has pleasure in
going to see her; and how gentlemen always sneer at her!"

"They shouldn't , miss. I believe she is a good woman. But gentlemen
think only of ladies' looks."

"I'll go and see her," exclaimed Caroline, starting up; "and if she asks
me to stay to tea, I'll stay. How wrong it is to neglect people because
they are not pretty, and young, and merry! And I will certainly call to
see Miss Mann too. She may not be amiable, but what has made her
unamiable? What has life been to her?"

Fanny helped Miss Helstone to put away her work, and afterwards assisted
her to dress.

" You 'll not be an old maid, Miss Caroline," she said, as she tied the
sash of her brown silk frock, having previously smoothed her soft, full,
and shining curls; "there are no signs of an old maid about you."

Caroline looked at the little mirror before her, and she thought there
were some signs. She could see that she was altered within the last
month; that the hues of her complexion were paler, her eyes changed - a
wan shade seemed to circle them; her countenance was dejected - she was
not, in short, so pretty or so fresh as she used to be. She distantly
hinted this to Fanny, from whom she got no direct answer, only a remark
that people did vary in their looks, but that at her age a little
falling away signified nothing; she would soon come round again, and be
plumper and rosier than ever. Having given this assurance, Fanny showed
singular zeal in wrapping her up in warm shawls and handkerchiefs, till
Caroline, nearly smothered with the weight, was fain to resist further
additions.

She paid her visits - first to Miss Mann, for this was the most difficult
point. Miss Mann was certainly not quite a lovable person. Till now,
Caroline had always unhesitatingly declared she disliked her, and more
than once she had joined her cousin Robert in laughing at some of her
peculiarities. Moore was not habitually given to sarcasm, especially on
anything humbler or weaker than himself; but he had once or twice
happened to be in the room when Miss Mann had made a call on his sister,
and after listening to her conversation and viewing her features for a
time, he had gone out into the garden where his little cousin was
tending some of his favourite flowers, and while standing near and
watching her he had amused himself with comparing fair youth, delicate
and attractive, with shrivelled eld, livid and loveless, and in
jestingly repeating to a smiling girl the vinegar discourse of a
cankered old maid. Once on such an occasion Caroline had said to him,
looking up from the luxuriant creeper she was binding to its frame, "Ah!
Robert, you do not like old maids. I, too, should come under the lash of
your sarcasm if I were an old maid."

"You an old maid!" he had replied. "A piquant notion suggested by lips
of that tint and form. I can fancy you, though, at forty, quietly
dressed, pale and sunk, but still with that straight nose, white
forehead, and those soft eyes. I suppose, too, you will keep your voice,
which has another 'timbre' than that hard, deep organ of Miss Mann's.
Courage, Cary! Even at fifty you will not be repulsive."

"Miss Mann did not make herself, or tune her voice, Robert."

"Nature made her in the mood in which she makes her briars and thorns;
whereas for the creation of some women she reserves the May morning
hours, when with light and dew she wooes the primrose from the turf and
the lily from the wood-moss."

          

Ushered into Miss Mann's little parlour, Caroline found her, as she
always found her, surrounded by perfect neatness, cleanliness, and
comfort  after all, is it not a virtue in old maids that solitude rarely
makes them negligent or disorderly?  - no dust on her polished furniture,
none on her carpet, fresh flowers in the vase on her table, a bright
fire in the grate. She herself sat primly and somewhat grimly-tidy in a
cushioned rocking-chair, her hands busied with some knitting. This was
her favourite work, as it required the least exertion. She scarcely rose
as Caroline entered. To avoid excitement was one of Miss Mann's aims in
life. She had been composing herself ever since she came down in the
morning, and had just attained a certain lethargic state of tranquillity
when the visitor's knock at the door startled her, and undid her day's
work. She was scarcely pleased, therefore, to see Miss Helstone. She
received her with reserve, bade her be seated with austerity, and when
she got her placed opposite, she fixed her with her eye.

This was no ordinary doom - to be fixed with Miss Mann's eye. Robert
Moore had undergone it once, and had never forgotten the circumstance.

He considered it quite equal to anything Medusa could do. He professed
to doubt whether, since that infliction, his flesh had been quite what
it was before - whether there was not something stony in its texture. The
gaze had had such an effect on him as to drive him promptly from the
apartment and house; it had even sent him straightway up to the rectory,
where he had appeared in Caroline's presence with a very queer face, and
amazed her by demanding a cousinly salute on the spot, to rectify a
damage that had been done him.

Certainly Miss Mann had a formidable eye for one of the softer sex. It
was prominent, and showed a great deal of the white, and looked as
steadily, as unwinkingly, at you as if it were a steel ball soldered in
her head; and when, while looking, she began to talk in an indescribably
dry, monotonous tone - a tone without vibration or inflection - you felt
as if a graven image of some bad spirit were addressing you. But it was
all a figment of fancy, a matter of surface. Miss Mann's goblin grimness
scarcely went deeper than the angel sweetness of hundreds of beauties.
She was a perfectly honest, conscientious woman, who had performed
duties in her day from whose severe anguish many a human Peri,
gazelle-eyed, silken-tressed, and silver-tongued, would have shrunk
appalled. She had passed alone through protracted scenes of suffering,
exercised rigid self-denial, made large sacrifices of time, money,
health for those who had repaid her only by ingratitude, and now her
main - almost her sole - fault was that she was censorious.

Censorious she certainly was. Caroline had not sat five minutes ere her
hostess, still keeping her under the spell of that dread and Gorgon
gaze, began flaying alive certain of the families in the neighbourhood.
She went to work at this business in a singularly cool, deliberate
manner, like some surgeon practising with his scalpel on a lifeless
subject. She made few distinctions; she allowed scarcely any one to be
good; she dissected impartially almost all her acquaintance. If her
auditress ventured now and then to put in a palliative word she set it
aside with a certain disdain. Still, though thus pitiless in moral
anatomy, she was no scandal-monger. She never disseminated really
malignant or dangerous reports. It was not her heart so much as her
temper that was wrong.

Caroline made this discovery for the first time to-day, and moved
thereby to regret divers unjust judgments she had more than once passed
on the crabbed old maid, she began to talk to her softly, not in
sympathizing words, but with a sympathizing voice. The loneliness of her
condition struck her visitor in a new light, as did also the character
of her ugliness - a bloodless pallor of complexion, and deeply worn lines
of feature. The girl pitied the solitary and afflicted woman; her looks
told what she felt. A sweet countenance is never so sweet as when the
moved heart animates it with compassionate tenderness. Miss Mann, seeing
such a countenance raised to her, was touched in her turn. She
acknowledged her sense of the interest thus unexpectedly shown in her,
who usually met with only coldness and ridicule, by replying to her
candidly. Communicative on her own affairs she usually was not, because
no one cared to listen to her; but to-day she became so, and her
confidante shed tears as she heard her speak, for she told of cruel,
slow-wasting, obstinate sufferings. Well might she be corpse-like; well
might she look grim, and never smile; well might she wish to avoid
excitement, to gain and retain composure! Caroline, when she knew all,
acknowledged that Miss Mann was rather to be admired for fortitude than
blamed for moroseness. Reader! when you behold an aspect for whose
constant gloom and frown you cannot account, whose unvarying cloud
exasperates you by its apparent causelessness, be sure that there is a
canker somewhere, and a canker not the less deeply corroding because
concealed.

Miss Mann felt that she was understood partly, and wished to be
understood further; for, however old, plain, humble, desolate, afflicted
we may be, so long as our hearts preserve the feeblest spark of life,
they preserve also, shivering near that pale ember, a starved, ghostly
longing for appreciation and affection. To this extenuated spectre,
perhaps, a crumb is not thrown once a year, but when ahungered and
athirst to famine - when all humanity has forgotten the dying tenant of a
decaying house - Divine mercy remembers the mourner, and a shower of
manna falls for lips that earthly nutriment is to pass no more. Biblical
promises, heard first in health, but then unheeded, come whispering to
the couch of sickness; it is felt that a pitying God watches what all
mankind have forsaken. The tender compassion of Jesus is recalled and
relied on; the faded eye, gazing beyond time, sees a home, a friend, a
refuge in eternity.

Miss Mann, drawn on by the still attention of her listener, proceeded to
allude to circumstances in her past life. She spoke like one who tells
the truth - simply, and with a certain reserve; she did not boast, nor
did she exaggerate. Caroline found that the old maid had been a most
devoted daughter and sister, an unwearied watcher by lingering
deathbeds; that to prolonged and unrelaxing attendance on the sick the
malady that now poisoned her own life owed its origin; that to one
wretched relative she had been a support and succour in the depths of
self-earned degradation, and that it was still her hand which kept him
from utter destitution. Miss Helstone stayed the whole evening, omitting
to pay her other intended visit; and when she left Miss Mann it was with
the determination to try in future to excuse her faults; never again to
make light of her peculiarities or to laugh at her plainness; and, above
all things, not to neglect her, but to come once a week, and to offer
her, from one human heart at least, the homage of affection and respect.
She felt she could now sincerely give her a small tribute of each
feeling.

Caroline, on her return, told Fanny she was very glad she had gone out,
as she felt much better for the visit. The next day she failed not to
seek Miss Ainley. This lady was in narrower circumstances than Miss
Mann, and her dwelling was more humble. It was, however, if possible,
yet more exquisitely clean, though the decayed gentlewoman could not
afford to keep a servant, but waited on herself, and had only the
occasional assistance of a little girl who lived in a cottage near.

Not only was Miss Ainley poorer, but she was even plainer than the other
old maid. In her first youth she must have been ugly; now, at the age of
fifty, she was very ugly. At first sight, all but peculiarly
well-disciplined minds were apt to turn from her with annoyance, to
conceive against her a prejudice, simply on the ground of her
unattractive look. Then she was prim in dress and manner; she looked,
spoke, and moved the complete old maid.

Her welcome to Caroline was formal, even in its kindness - for it was
kind; but Miss Helstone excused this. She knew something of the
benevolence of the heart which beat under that starched kerchief; all
the neighbourhood - at least all the female neighbourhood - knew something
of it. No one spoke against Miss Ainley except lively young gentlemen
and inconsiderate old ones, who declared her hideous.

Caroline was soon at home in that tiny parlour. A kind hand took from
her her shawl and bonnet, and installed her in the most comfortable seat
near the fire. The young and the antiquated woman were presently deep in
kindly conversation, and soon Caroline became aware of the power a most
serene, unselfish, and benignant mind could exercise over those to whom
it was developed. She talked never of herself, always of others. Their
faults she passed over. Her theme was their wants, which she sought to
supply; their sufferings, which she longed to alleviate. She was
religious, a professor of religion - what some would call "a saint;" and
she referred to religion often in sanctioned phrase - in phrase which
those who possess a perception of the ridiculous, without owning the
power of exactly testing and truly judging character, would certainly
have esteemed a proper subject for satire, a matter for mimicry and
laughter. They would have been hugely mistaken for their pains.
Sincerity is never ludicrous; it is always respectable. Whether
truth - be it religious or moral truth - speak eloquently and in
well-chosen language or not, its voice should be heard with reverence.
Let those who cannot nicely, and with certainty, discern the difference
between the tones of hypocrisy and those of sincerity, never presume to
laugh at all, lest they should have the miserable misfortune to laugh in
the wrong place, and commit impiety when they think they are achieving
wit.

Not from Miss Ainley's own lips did Caroline hear of her good works, but
she knew much of them nevertheless. Her beneficence was the familiar
topic of the poor in Briarfield. They were not works of almsgiving. The
old maid was too poor to give much, though she straitened herself to
privation that she might contribute her mite when needful. They were the
works of a Sister of Charity - far more difficult to perform than those
of a Lady Bountiful. She would watch by any sick-bed; she seemed to fear
no disease. She would nurse the poorest whom none else would nurse. She
was serene, humble, kind, and equable through everything.

For this goodness she got but little reward in this life. Many of the
poor became so accustomed to her services that they hardly thanked her
for them. The rich heard them mentioned with wonder, but were silent,
from a sense of shame at the difference between her sacrifices and their
own. Many ladies, however, respected her deeply. They could not help it.
One gentleman - one only - gave her his friendship and perfect confidence.
This was Mr. Hall, the vicar of Nunnely. He said, and said truly, that
her life came nearer the life of Christ than that of any other human
being he had ever met with. You must not think, reader, that ill
sketching Miss Ainley's character I depict a figment of imagination. No.
We seek the originals of such portraits in real life only.

Miss Helstone studied well the mind and heart now revealed to her. She
found no high intellect to admire - the old maid was merely sensible - but
she discovered so much goodness, so much usefulness, so much mildness,
patience, truth, that she bent her own mind before Miss Ainley's in
reverence. What was her love of nature, what was her sense of beauty,
what were her more varied and fervent emotions, what was her deeper
power of thought, what her wider capacity to comprehend, compared to the
practical excellence of this good woman? Momently, they seemed only
beautiful forms of selfish delight; mentally, she trod them under foot.

It is true she still felt with pain that the life which made Miss Ainley
happy could not make her happy. Pure and active as it was, in her heart
she deemed it deeply dreary, because it was so loveless - to her ideas,
so forlorn. Yet, doubtless, she reflected, it needed only habit to make
it practicable and agreeable to any one. It was despicable, she felt, to
pine sentimentally, to cherish secret griefs, vain memories, to be
inert, to waste youth in aching languor, to grow old doing nothing.

"I will bestir myself," was her resolution, "and try to be wise if I
cannot be good."

She proceeded to make inquiry of Miss Ainley if she could help her in
anything. Miss Ainley, glad of an assistant, told her that she could,
and indicated some poor families in Briarfield that it was desirable she
should visit, giving her likewise, at her further request, some work to
do for certain poor women who had many children, and who were unskilled
in using the needle for themselves.

Caroline went home, laid her plans, and took a resolve not to swerve
from them. She allotted a certain portion of her time for her various
studies, and a certain portion for doing anything Miss Ainley might
direct her to do. The remainder was to be spent in exercise; not a
moment was to be left for the indulgence of such fevered thoughts as had
poisoned last Sunday evening.

To do her justice, she executed her plans conscientiously,
perseveringly. It was very hard work at first - it was even hard work to
the end - but it helped her to stem and keep down anguish; it forced her
to be employed; it forbade her to brood; and gleams of satisfaction
chequered her gray life here and there when she found she had done good,
imparted pleasure, or allayed suffering.

Yet I must speak truth. These efforts brought her neither health of body
nor continued peace of mind. With them all she wasted, grew more joyless
and more wan; with them all her memory kept harping on the name of
Robert Moore; an elegy over the past still rung constantly in her ear; a
funereal inward cry haunted and harassed her; the heaviness of a broken
spirit, and of pining and palsying faculties, settled slow on her
buoyant youth. Winter seemed conquering her spring; the mind's soil and
its treasures were freezing gradually to barren stagnation.




CHAPTER XI.

FIELDHEAD.


Yet Caroline refused tamely to succumb. She had native strength in her
girl's heart, and she used it. Men and women never struggle so hard as
when they struggle alone, without witness, counsellor, or confidant,
unencouraged, unadvised, and unpitied.

Miss Helstone was in this position. Her sufferings were her only spur,
and being very real and sharp, they roused her spirit keenly. Bent on
victory over a mortal pain, she did her best to quell it. Never had she
been seen so busy, so studious, and, above all, so active. She took
walks in all weathers, long walks in solitary directions. Day by day she
came back in the evening, pale and wearied-looking, yet seemingly not
fatigued; for still, as soon as she had thrown off her bonnet and shawl,
she would, instead of resting, begin to pace her apartment. Sometimes
she would not sit down till she was literally faint. She said she did
this to tire herself well, that she might sleep soundly at night. But if
that was her aim it was unattained; for at night, when others slumbered,
she was tossing on her pillow, or sitting at the foot of her couch in
the darkness, forgetful, apparently, of the necessity of seeking repose.
Often, unhappy girl! she was crying - crying in a sort of intolerable
despair, which, when it rushed over her, smote down her strength, and
reduced her to childlike helplessness.

When thus prostrate, temptations besieged her. Weak suggestions
whispered in her weary heart to write to Robert, and say that she was
unhappy because she was forbidden to see him and Hortense, and that she
feared he would withdraw his friendship  not love  from her, and forget
her entirely, and begging him to remember her, and sometimes to write to
her. One or two such letters she actually indited, but she never sent
them: shame and good sense forbade.

At last the life she led reached the point when it seemed she could bear
it no longer, that she must seek and find a change somehow, or her heart
and head would fail under the pressure which strained them. She longed
to leave Briarfield, to go to some very distant place. She longed for
something else - the deep, secret, anxious yearning to discover and know
her mother strengthened daily; but with the desire was coupled a doubt,
a dread - if she knew her, could she love her? There was cause for
hesitation, for apprehension on this point. Never in her life had she
heard that mother praised; whoever mentioned her mentioned her coolly.
Her uncle seemed to regard his sister-in-law with a sort of tacit
antipathy; an old servant, who had lived with Mrs. James Helstone for a
short time after her marriage, whenever she referred to her former
mistress, spoke with chilling reserve - sometimes she called her "queer,"
sometimes she said she did not understand her. These expressions were
ice to the daughter's heart; they suggested the conclusion that it was
perhaps better never to know her parent than to know her and not like
her.

But one project could she frame whose execution seemed likely to bring
her a hope of relief: it was to take a situation, to be a governess; she
could do nothing else. A little incident brought her to the point, when
she found courage to break her design to her uncle.

Her long and late walks lay always, as has been said, on lonely roads;
but in whatever direction she had rambled - whether along the drear
skirts of Stilbro' Moor or over the sunny stretch of Nunnely Common - her
homeward path was still so contrived as to lead her near the Hollow. She
rarely descended the den, but she visited its brink at twilight almost
as regularly as the stars rose over the hillcrests. Her resting-place
was at a certain stile under a certain old thorn. Thence she could look
down on the cottage, the mill, the dewy garden-ground, the still, deep
dam; thence was visible the well-known counting-house window, from whose
panes at a fixed hour shot, suddenly bright, the ray of the well-known
lamp. Her errand was to watch for this ray, her reward to catch it,
sometimes sparkling bright in clear air, sometimes shimmering dim
through mist, and anon flashing broken between slant lines of rain - for
she came in all weathers.

There were nights when it failed to appear. She knew then that Robert
was from home, and went away doubly sad; whereas its kindling rendered
her elate, as though she saw in it the promise of some indefinite hope.
If, while she gazed, a shadow bent between the light and lattice, her
heart leaped. That eclipse was Robert; she had seen him. She would
return home comforted, carrying in her mind a clearer vision of his
aspect, a distincter recollection of his voice, his smile, his bearing;
and blent with these impressions was often a sweet persuasion that, if
she could get near him, his heart might welcome her presence yet, that
at this moment he might be willing to extend his hand and draw her to
him, and shelter her at his side as he used to do. That night, though
she might weep as usual, she would fancy her tears less scalding; the
pillow they watered seemed a little softer; the temples pressed to that
pillow ached less.

The shortest path from the Hollow to the rectory wound near a certain
mansion, the same under whose lone walls Malone passed on that
night-journey mentioned in an early chapter of this work - the old and
tenantless dwelling yclept Fieldhead. Tenantless by the proprietor it
had been for ten years, but it was no ruin. Mr. Yorke had seen it kept
in good repair, and an old gardener and his wife had lived in it,
cultivated the grounds, and maintained the house in habitable condition.

If Fieldhead had few other merits as a building, it might at least be
termed picturesque. Its regular architecture, and the gray and mossy
colouring communicated by time, gave it a just claim to this epithet.
The old latticed windows, the stone porch, the walls, the roof, the
chimney-stacks, were rich in crayon touches and sepia lights and shades.
The trees behind were fine, bold, and spreading; the cedar on the lawn
in front was grand; and the granite urns on the garden wall, the fretted
arch of the gateway, were, for an artist, as the very desire of the eye.

One mild May evening Caroline, passing near about moonrise, and feeling,
though weary, unwilling yet to go home, where there was only the bed of
thorns and the night of grief to anticipate, sat down on the mossy
ground near the gate, and gazed through towards cedar and mansion. It
was a still night - calm, dewy, cloudless; the gables, turned to the
west, reflected the clear amber of the horizon they faced; the oaks
behind were black; the cedar was blacker. Under its dense, raven boughs
a glimpse of sky opened gravely blue. It was full of the moon, which
looked solemnly and mildly down on Caroline from beneath that sombre
canopy.

She felt this night and prospect mournfully lovely. She wished she could
be happy; she wished she could know inward peace; she wondered
Providence had no pity on her, and would not help or console her.
Recollections of happy trysts of lovers, commemorated in old ballads,
returned on her mind; she thought such tryst in such scene would be
blissful. Where now was Robert? she asked. Not at the Hollow; she had
watched for his lamp long, and had not seen it. She questioned within
herself whether she and Moore were ever destined to meet and speak
again. Suddenly the door within the stone porch of the hall opened, and
two men came out - one elderly and white-headed, the other young,
dark-haired, and tall. They passed across the lawn, out through a portal
in the garden wall. Caroline saw them cross the road, pass the stile,
descend the fields; she saw them disappear. Robert Moore had passed
before her with his friend Mr. Yorke. Neither had seen her.

The apparition had been transient - scarce seen ere gone; but its
electric passage left her veins kindled, her soul insurgent. It found
her despairing, it left her desperate - two different states.

"Oh, had he but been alone! had he but seen me!" was her cry. "He would
have said something. He would have given me his hand. He does , he
 must , love me a little. He would have shown some token of affection.
In his eye, on his lips, I should have read comfort; but the chance is
lost. The wind, the cloud's shadow, does not pass more silently, more
emptily than he. I have been mocked, and Heaven is cruel!"

Thus, in the utter sickness of longing and disappointment, she went
home.

The next morning at breakfast, where she appeared white-cheeked and
miserable-looking as one who had seen a ghost, she inquired of Mr.
Helstone, "Have you any objection, uncle, to my inquiring for a
situation in a family?"

Her uncle, ignorant as the table supporting his coffee-cup of all his
niece had undergone and was undergoing, scarcely believed his ears.

"What whim now?" he asked. "Are you bewitched? What can you mean?"

"I am not well, and need a change," she said.

He examined her. He discovered she had experienced a change, at any
rate. Without his being aware of it, the rose had dwindled and faded to
a mere snowdrop; bloom had vanished, flesh wasted; she sat before him
drooping, colourless, and thin. But for the soft expression of her brown
eyes, the delicate lines of her features, and the flowing abundance of
her hair, she would no longer have possessed a claim to the epithet
pretty.

"What on earth is the matter with you?" he asked. "What is wrong? How
are you ailing?"

No answer; only the brown eyes filled, the faintly-tinted lips trembled.

"Look out for a situation, indeed! For what situation are you fit? What
have you been doing with yourself? You are not well."

"I should be well if I went from home."

"These women are incomprehensible. They have the strangest knack of
startling you with unpleasant surprises. To-day you see them bouncing,
buxom, red as cherries, and round as apples; to-morrow they exhibit
themselves effete as dead weeds, blanched and broken down. And the
reason of it all? That's the puzzle. She has her meals, her liberty, a
good house to live in, and good clothes to wear, as usual. A while since
that sufficed to keep her handsome and cheery, and there she sits now a
poor, little, pale, puling chit enough. Provoking! Then comes the
question, What is to be done? I suppose I must send for advice. Will you
have a doctor, child?"

"No, uncle, I don't  want one. A doctor could do me no good. I merely
want change of air and scene."

"Well, if that be the caprice, it shall be gratified. You shall go to a
watering-place. I don't  mind the expense. Fanny shall accompany you."

"But, uncle, some day I must do something for myself; I have no fortune.
I had better begin now."

"While I live, you shall not turn out as a governess, Caroline. I will
not have it said that my niece is a governess."

"But the later in life one makes a change of that sort, uncle, the more
difficult and painful it is. I should wish to get accustomed to the yoke
before any habits of ease and independence are formed."

"I beg you will not harass me, Caroline. I mean to provide for you. I
have always meant to provide for you. I will purchase an annuity. Bless
me! I am but fifty-five; my health and constitution are excellent.
There is plenty of time to save and take measures. Don't  make yourself
anxious respecting the future. Is that what frets you?"

"No, uncle; but I long for a change."

He laughed. "There speaks the woman!" cried he, "the very woman! A
change! a change! Always fantastical and whimsical! Well, it's in her
sex."

"But it is not fantasy and whim, uncle."

"What is it then?"

"Necessity, I think. I feel weaker than formerly. I believe I should
have more to do."

"Admirable! She feels weak, and therefore she should be set to hard
labour - 'clair comme le jour,' as Moore - confound Moore! You shall go to
Cliff Bridge; and there are two guineas to buy a new frock. Come, Cary,
never fear. We'll find balm in Gilead."

"Uncle, I wish you were less generous and more - - "

"More what?"

Sympathizing was the word on Caroline's lips, but it was not uttered.
She checked herself in time. Her uncle would indeed have laughed if that
namby-pamby word had escaped her. Finding her silent, he said, "The fact
is, you don't  know precisely what you want."

"Only to be a governess."

"Pooh! mere nonsense! I'll not hear of governessing. Don't  mention it
again. It is rather too feminine a fancy. I have finished breakfast.
Ring the bell. Put all crotchets out of your head, and run away and
amuse yourself."

"What with? My doll?" asked Caroline to herself as she quitted the room.

A week or two passed; her bodily and mental health neither grew worse
nor better. She was now precisely in that state when, if her
constitution had contained the seeds of consumption, decline, or slow
fever, those diseases would have been rapidly developed, and would soon
have carried her quietly from the world. People never die of love or
grief alone, though some die of inherent maladies which the tortures of
those passions prematurely force into destructive action. The sound by
nature undergo these tortures, and are racked, shaken, shattered; their
beauty and bloom perish, but life remains untouched. They are brought to
a certain point of dilapidation; they are reduced to pallor, debility,
and emaciation. People think, as they see them gliding languidly about,
that they will soon withdraw to sick-beds, perish there, and cease from
among the healthy and happy. This does not happen. They live on; and
though they cannot regain youth and gaiety, they may regain strength and
serenity. The blossom which the March wind nips, but fails to sweep
away, may survive to hang a withered apple on the tree late into autumn:
having braved the last frosts of spring, it may also brave the first of
winter.

Every one noticed the change in Miss Helstone's appearance, and most
people said she was going to die. She never thought so herself. She felt
in no dying case; she had neither pain nor sickness. Her appetite was
diminished; she knew the reason. It was because she wept so much at
night. Her strength was lessened; she could account for it. Sleep was
coy and hard to be won; dreams were distressing and baleful. In the far
future she still seemed to anticipate a time when this passage of misery
should be got over, and when she should once more be calm, though
perhaps never again happy.

Meanwhile her uncle urged her to visit, to comply with the frequent
invitations of their acquaintance. This she evaded doing. She could not
be cheerful in company; she felt she was observed there with more
curiosity than sympathy. Old ladies were always offering her their
advice, recommending this or that nostrum; young ladies looked at her in
a way she understood, and from which she shrank. Their eyes said they
knew she had been "disappointed," as custom phrases it; by whom, they
were not certain.

Commonplace young ladies can be quite as hard as commonplace young
gentlemen - quite as worldly and selfish. Those who suffer should always
avoid them. Grief and calamity they despise; they seem to regard them as
the judgments of God on the lowly. With them, to "love" is merely to
contrive a scheme for achieving a good match; to be "disappointed" is to
have their scheme seen through and frustrated. They think the feelings
and projects of others on the subject of love similar to their own, and
judge them accordingly.

All this Caroline knew, partly by instinct, partly by observation. She
regulated her conduct by her knowledge, keeping her pale face and wasted
figure as much out of sight as she could. Living thus in complete
seclusion, she ceased to receive intelligence of the little transactions
of the neighbourhood.

One morning her uncle came into the parlour, where she sat endeavouring
to find some pleasure in painting a little group of wild flowers,
gathered under a hedge at the top of the Hollow fields, and said to her
in his abrupt manner, "Come, child, you are always stooping over
palette, or book, or sampler; leave that tinting work. By-the-bye, do
you put your pencil to your lips when you paint?"

"Sometimes, uncle, when I forget."

"Then it is that which is poisoning you. The paints are deleterious,
child. There is white lead and red lead, and verdigris, and gamboge, and
twenty other poisons in those colour cakes. Lock them up! lock them up!
Get your bonnet on. I want you to make a call with me."

"With you , uncle?"

This question was asked in a tone of surprise. She was not accustomed to
make calls with her uncle. She never rode or walked out with him on any
occasion.

"Quick! quick! I am always busy, you know. I have no time to lose."

She hurriedly gathered up her materials, asking, meantime, where they
were going.

"To Fieldhead."

"Fieldhead! What! to see old James Booth, the gardener? Is he ill?"

"We are going to see Miss Shirley Keeldar."

"Miss Keeldar! Is she coming to Yorkshire? Is she at Fieldhead?"

"She is. She has been there a week. I met her at a party last
night - that party to which you would not go. I was pleased with her. I
choose that you shall make her acquaintance. It will do you good."

"She is now come of age, I suppose?"

"She is come of age, and will reside for a time on her property. I
lectured her on the subject; I showed her her duty. She is not
intractable. She is rather a fine girl; she will teach you what it is to
have a sprightly spirit. Nothing lackadaisical about her ."

"I don't  think she will want to see me, or to have me introduced to her.
What good can I do her? How can I amuse her?"

"Pshaw! Put your bonnet on."

"Is she proud, uncle?"

"Don't  know. You hardly imagine she would show her pride to me, I
suppose? A chit like that would scarcely presume to give herself airs
with the rector of her parish, however rich she might be."

"No. But how did she behave to other people?"

"Didn't  observe. She holds her head high, and probably can be saucy
enough where she dare. She wouldn't  be a woman otherwise. There! Away
now for your bonnet at once!"

Not naturally very confident, a failure of physical strength and a
depression of spirits had not tended to increase Caroline's presence of
mind and ease of manner, or to give her additional courage to face
strangers, and she quailed, in spite of self-remonstrance, as she and
her uncle walked up the broad, paved approach leading from the gateway
of Fieldhead to its porch. She followed Mr. Helstone reluctantly through
that porch into the sombre old vestibule beyond.

Very sombre it was - long, vast, and dark; one latticed window lit it but
dimly. The wide old chimney contained now no fire, for the present warm
weather needed it not; it was filled instead with willow-boughs. The
gallery on high, opposite the entrance, was seen but in outline, so
shadowy became this hall towards its ceiling. Carved stags' heads, with
real antlers, looked down grotesquely from the walls. This was neither a
grand nor a comfortable house; within as without it was antique,
rambling, and incommodious. A property of a thousand a year belonged to
it, which property had descended, for lack of male heirs, on a female.
There were mercantile families in the district boasting twice the
income, but the Keeldars, by virtue of their antiquity, and their
distinction of lords of the manor, took the precedence of all.

Mr. and Miss Helstone were ushered into a parlour. Of course, as was to
be expected in such a Gothic old barrack, this parlour was lined with
oak: fine, dark, glossy panels compassed the walls gloomily and grandly.
Very handsome, reader, these shining brown panels are, very mellow in
colouring and tasteful in effect, but - if you know what a 'spring clean"
is - very execrable and inhuman. Whoever, having the bowels of humanity,
has seen servants scrubbing at these polished wooden walls with
beeswaxed cloths on a warm May day must allow that they are "intolerable
and not to be endured;" and I cannot but secretly applaud the benevolent
barbarian who had painted another and larger apartment of Fieldhead - the
drawing-room, to wit, formerly also an oak-room - of a delicate pinky
white, thereby earning for himself the character of a Hun, but mightily
enhancing the cheerfulness of that portion of his abode, and saving
future housemaids a world of toil.

The brown-panelled parlour was furnished all in old style, and with real
old furniture. On each side of the high mantelpiece stood two antique
chairs of oak, solid as silvan thrones, and in one of these sat a lady.
But if this were Miss Keeldar, she must have come of age at least some
twenty years ago. She was of matronly form, and though she wore no cap,
and possessed hair of quite an undimmed auburn, shading small and
naturally young-looking features, she had no youthful aspect, nor
apparently the wish to assume it. You could have wished her attire of a
newer fashion. In a well-cut, well-made gown hers would have been no
uncomely presence. It puzzled you to guess why a garment of handsome
materials should be arranged in such scanty folds, and devised after
such an obsolete mode. You felt disposed to set down the wearer as
somewhat eccentric at once.

This lady received the visitors with a mixture of ceremony and
diffidence quite English. No middle-aged matron who was not an
Englishwoman could evince precisely the same manner - a manner so
uncertain of herself, of her own merits, of her power to please, and yet
so anxious to be proper, and, if possible, rather agreeable than
otherwise. In the present instance, however, more embarrassment was
shown than is usual even with diffident Englishwomen. Miss Helstone felt
this, sympathized with the stranger, and knowing by experience what was
good for the timid, took a seat quietly near her, and began to talk to
her with a gentle ease, communicated for the moment by the presence of
one less self-possessed than herself.

She and this lady would, if alone, have at once got on extremely well
together. The lady had the clearest voice imaginable - infinitely softer
and more tuneful than could have been reasonably expected from forty
years - and a form decidedly inclined to embonpoint . This voice
Caroline liked; it atoned for the formal, if correct, accent and
language. The lady would soon have discovered she liked it and her, and
in ten minutes they would have been friends. But Mr. Helstone stood on
the rug looking at them both, looking especially at the strange lady
with his sarcastic, keen eye, that clearly expressed impatience of her
chilly ceremony, and annoyance at her want of aplomb . His hard gaze
and rasping voice discomfited the lady more and more. She tried,
however, to get up little speeches about the weather, the aspect of the
country, etc.; but the impracticable Mr. Helstone presently found
himself somewhat deaf. Whatever she said he affected not to hear
distinctly, and she was obliged to go over each elaborately-constructed
nothing twice. The effort soon became too much for her. She was just
rising in a perplexed flutter, nervously murmuring that she knew not
what detained Miss Keeldar, that she would go and look for her, when
Miss Keeldar saved her the trouble by appearing. It was to be presumed
at least that she who now came in through a glass door from the garden
owned that name.

There is real grace in ease of manner, and so old Helstone felt when an
erect, slight girl walked up to him, retaining with her left hand her
little silk apron full of flowers, and, giving him her right hand, said
pleasantly, "I knew you would come to see me, though you do think Mr.
Yorke has made me a Jacobin. Good-morning."

"But we'll not have you a Jacobin," returned he. "No, Miss Shirley; they
shall not steal the flower of my parish from me. Now that you are
amongst us, you shall be my pupil in politics and religion; I'll teach
you sound doctrine on both points."

"Mrs. Pryor has anticipated you," she replied, turning to the elder
lady. "Mrs. Pryor, you know, was my governess, and is still my friend;
and of all the high and rigid Tories she is queen; of all the stanch
churchwomen she is chief. I have been well drilled both in theology and
history, I assure you, Mr. Helstone."

The rector immediately bowed very low to Mrs. Pryor, and expressed
himself obliged to her.

The ex-governess disclaimed skill either in political or religious
controversy, explained that she thought such matters little adapted for
female minds, but avowed herself in general terms the advocate of order
and loyalty, and, of course, truly attached to the Establishment. She
added she was ever averse to change under any circumstances, and
something scarcely audible about the extreme danger of being too ready
to take up new ideas closed her sentence.

"Miss Keeldar thinks as you think, I hope, madam."

"Difference of age and difference of temperament occasion difference of
sentiment," was the reply. "It can scarcely be expected that the eager
and young should hold the opinions of the cool and middle-aged."

"Oh! oh! we are independent; we think for ourselves!" cried Mr.
Helstone. "We are a little Jacobin, for anything I know - a little
freethinker, in good earnest. Let us have a confession of faith on the
spot."

And he took the heiress's two hands - causing her to let fall her whole
cargo of flowers - and seated her by him on the sofa.

"Say your creed," he ordered.

"The Apostles' Creed?"

"Yes."

She said it like a child.

"Now for St. Athanasius's. That's the test!"

"Let me gather up my flowers. Here is Tartar coming; he will tread upon
them."

Tartar was a rather large, strong, and fierce-looking dog, very ugly,
being of a breed between mastiff and bulldog, who at this moment entered
through the glass door, and posting directly to the rug, snuffed the
fresh flowers scattered there. He seemed to scorn them as food; but
probably thinking their velvety petals might be convenient as litter, he
was turning round preparatory to depositing his tawny bulk upon them,
when Miss Helstone and Miss Keeldar simultaneously stooped to the
rescue.

"Thank you," said the heiress, as she again held out her little apron
for Caroline to heap the blossoms into it. "Is this your daughter, Mr.
Helstone?" she asked.

"My niece Caroline."

Miss Keeldar shook hands with her, and then looked at her. Caroline also
looked at her hostess.

Shirley Keeldar  she had no Christian name but Shirley: her parents, who
had wished to have a son, finding that, after eight years of marriage,
Providence had granted them only a daughter, bestowed on her the same
masculine family cognomen they would have bestowed on a boy, if with a
boy they had been blessed  - Shirley Keeldar was no ugly heiress. She was
agreeable to the eye. Her height and shape were not unlike Miss
Helstone's; perhaps in stature she might have the advantage by an inch
or two. She was gracefully made, and her face, too, possessed a charm as
well described by the word grace as any other. It was pale naturally,
but intelligent, and of varied expression. She was not a blonde, like
Caroline. Clear and dark were the characteristics of her aspect as to
colour. Her face and brow were clear, her eyes of the darkest gray  no
green lights in them - transparent, pure, neutral gray , and her hair of
the darkest brown. Her features were distinguished - by which I do not
mean that they were high, bony, and Roman, being indeed rather small and
slightly marked than otherwise, but only that they were, to use a few
French words, "fins, gracieux, spirituels" - mobile they were and
speaking; but their changes were not to be understood nor their language
interpreted all at once. She examined Caroline seriously, inclining her
head a little to one side, with a thoughtful air.

"You see she is only a feeble chick," observed Mr. Helstone.

"She looks young - younger than I. - How old are you?" she inquired in a
manner that would have been patronizing if it had not been extremely
solemn and simple.

"Eighteen years and six months."

"And I am twenty-one."

She said no more. She had now placed her flowers on the table, and was
busied in arranging them.

"And St. Athanasius's Creed?" urged the rector. "You believe it all,
don't  you?"

"I can't  remember it quite all. I will give you a nosegay, Mr. Helstone,
when I have given your niece one."

She had selected a little bouquet of one brilliant and two or three
delicate flowers, relieved by a spray of dark verdure. She tied it with
silk from her work-box, and placed it on Caroline's lap; and then she
put her hands behind her, and stood bending slightly towards her guest,
still regarding her, in the attitude and with something of the aspect of
a grave but gallant little cavalier. This temporary expression of face
was aided by the style in which she wore her hair, parted on one temple,
and brushed in a glossy sweep above the forehead, whence it fell in
curls that looked natural, so free were their wavy undulations.

"Are you tired with your walk?" she inquired.

"No - not in the least. It is but a short distance - but a mile."

"You look pale. - Is she always so pale?" she asked, turning to the
rector.

"She used to be as rosy as the reddest of your flowers."

"Why is she altered? What has made her pale? Has she been ill?"

"She tells me she wants a change."

"She ought to have one. You ought to give her one. You should send her
to the sea-coast."

"I will, ere summer is over. Meantime, I intend her to make acquaintance
with you, if you have no objection."

"I am sure Miss Keeldar will have no objection," here observed Mrs.
Pryor. "I think I may take it upon me to say that Miss Helstone's
frequent presence at Fieldhead will be esteemed a favour."

"You speak my sentiments precisely, ma'am," said Shirley, "and I thank
you for anticipating me. - Let me tell you," she continued, turning again
to Caroline, "that you also ought to thank my governess. It is not every
one she would welcome as she has welcomed you. You are distinguished
more than you think. This morning, as soon as you are gone, I shall ask
Mrs. Pryor's opinion of you. I am apt to rely on her judgment of
character, for hitherto I have found it wondrous accurate. Already I
foresee a favourable answer to my inquiries. - Do I not guess rightly,
Mrs. Pryor?"

"My dear, you said but now you would ask my opinion when Miss Helstone
was gone. I am scarcely likely to give it in her presence."

"No; and perhaps it will be long enough before I obtain it. - I am
sometimes sadly tantalized, Mr. Helstone, by Mrs. Pryor's extreme
caution. Her judgments ought to be correct when they come, for they are
often as tardy of delivery as a Lord Chancellor's. On some people's
characters I cannot get her to pronounce a sentence, entreat as I may."

Mrs. Pryor here smiled.

"Yes," said her pupil, "I know what that smile means. You are thinking
of my gentleman-tenant. - Do you know Mr. Moore of the Hollow?" she asked
Mr. Helstone.

"Ay! ay! Your tenant - so he is. You have seen a good deal of him, no
doubt, since you came?"

"I have been obliged to see him. There was business to transact.
Business! Really the word makes me conscious I am indeed no longer a
girl, but quite a woman and something more. I am an esquire! Shirley
Keeldar, Esquire, ought to be my style and title. They gave me a man's
name; I hold a man's position. It is enough to inspire me with a touch
of manhood; and when I see such people as that stately
Anglo-Belgian - that Gérard Moore - before me, gravely talking to me of
business, really I feel quite gentlemanlike. You must choose me for your
churchwarden, Mr. Helstone, the next time you elect new ones. They ought
to make me a magistrate and a captain of yeomanry. Tony Lumpkin's mother
was a colonel, and his aunt a justice of the peace. Why shouldn't  I be?"

"With all my heart. If you choose to get up a requisition on the
subject, I promise to head the list of signatures with my name. But you
were speaking of Moore?"

"Ah! yes. I find it a little difficult to understand Mr. Moore, to know
what to think of him, whether to like him or not. He seems a tenant of
whom any proprietor might be proud - and proud of him I am, in that
sense; but as a neighbour, what is he? Again and again I have entreated
Mrs. Pryor to say what she thinks of him, but she still evades returning
a direct answer. I hope you will be less oracular, Mr. Helstone, and
pronounce at once. Do you like him?"

"Not at all, just now. His name is entirely blotted from my good books."

"What is the matter? What has he done?"

"My uncle and he disagree on politics," interposed the low voice of
Caroline. She had better not have spoken just then. Having scarcely
joined in the conversation before, it was not apropos to do it now. She
felt this with nervous acuteness as soon as she had spoken, and coloured
to the eyes.

"What are Moore's politics?" inquired Shirley.

"Those of a tradesman," returned the rector - "narrow, selfish, and
unpatriotic. The man is eternally writing and speaking against the
continuance of the war. I have no patience with him."

"The war hurts his trade. I remember he remarked that only yesterday.
But what other objection have you to him?"

"That is enough."

"He looks the gentleman, in my sense of the term," pursued Shirley, "and
it pleases me to think he is such."

Caroline rent the Tyrian petals of the one brilliant flower in her
bouquet, and answered in distinct tones, "Decidedly he is." Shirley,
hearing this courageous affirmation, flashed an arch, searching glance
at the speaker from her deep, expressive eyes.

" You are his friend, at any rate," she said. "You defend him in his
absence."

"I am both his friend and his relative," was the prompt reply. "Robert
Moore is my cousin."

"Oh, then, you can tell me all about him. Just give me a sketch of his
character."

Insuperable embarrassment seized Caroline when this demand was made. She
could not, and did not, attempt to comply with it. Her silence was
immediately covered by Mrs. Pryor, who proceeded to address sundry
questions to Mr. Helstone regarding a family or two in the
neighbourhood, with whose connections in the south she said she was
acquainted. Shirley soon withdrew her gaze from Miss Helstone's face.
She did not renew her interrogations, but returning to her flowers,
proceeded to choose a nosegay for the rector. She presented it to him as
he took leave, and received the homage of a salute on the hand in
return.

"Be sure you wear it for my sake," said she.

"Next my heart, of course," responded Helstone. - "Mrs. Pryor, take care
of this future magistrate, this churchwarden in perspective, this
captain of yeomanry, this young squire of Briarfield, in a word. Don't 
let him exert himself too much; don't  let him break his neck in hunting;
especially, let him mind how he rides down that dangerous hill near the
Hollow."

"I like a descent," said Shirley; "I like to clear it rapidly; and
especially I like that romantic Hollow with all my heart."

"Romantic, with a mill in it?"

"Romantic with a mill in it. The old mill and the white cottage are each
admirable in its way."

"And the counting-house, Mr. Keeldar?"

"The counting-house is better than my bloom-coloured drawing-room. I
adore the counting-house."

"And the trade? The cloth, the greasy wool, the polluting dyeing-vats?"

"The trade is to be thoroughly respected."

"And the tradesman is a hero? Good!"

"I am glad to hear you say so. I thought the tradesman looked heroic."

Mischief, spirit, and glee sparkled all over her face as she thus
bandied words with the old Cossack, who almost equally enjoyed the tilt.

"Captain Keeldar, you have no mercantile blood in your veins. Why are
you so fond of trade?"

"Because I am a mill-owner, of course. Half my income comes from the
works in that Hollow."

"Don't  enter into partnership - that's all."

"You've  put it into my head! you've  put it into my head!" she exclaimed,
with a joyous laugh. "It will never get out. Thank you." And waving her
hand, white as a lily and fine as a fairy's, she vanished within the
porch, while the rector and his niece passed out through the arched
gateway.




CHAPTER XII.

SHIRLEY AND CAROLINE.


Shirley showed she had been sincere in saying she should be glad of
Caroline's society, by frequently seeking it; and, indeed, if she had
not sought it, she would not have had it, for Miss Helstone was slow to
make fresh acquaintance. She was always held back by the idea that
people could not want her, that she could not amuse them; and a
brilliant, happy, youthful creature like the heiress of Fieldhead seemed
to her too completely independent of society so uninteresting as hers
ever to find it really welcome.

Shirley might be brilliant, and probably happy likewise, but no one is
independent of genial society; and though in about a month she had made
the acquaintance of most of the families round, and was on quite free
and easy terms with all the Misses Sykes, and all the Misses Pearson,
and the two superlative Misses Wynne of Walden Hall, yet, it appeared,
she found none amongst them very genial: she fraternized with none of
them, to use her own words. If she had had the bliss to be really
Shirley Keeldar, Esq., lord of the manor of Briarfield, there was not a
single fair one in this and the two neighbouring parishes whom she
should have felt disposed to request to become Mrs. Keeldar, lady of the
manor. This declaration she made to Mrs. Pryor, who received it very
quietly, as she did most of her pupil's off-hand speeches, responding,
"My dear, do not allow that habit of alluding to yourself as a gentleman
to be confirmed. It is a strange one. Those who do not know you, hearing
you speak thus, would think you affected masculine manners."

Shirley never laughed at her former governess; even the little
formalities and harmless peculiarities of that lady were respectable in
her eyes. Had it been otherwise, she would have proved herself a weak
character at once; for it is only the weak who make a butt of quiet
worth. Therefore she took her remonstrance in silence. She stood
quietly near the window, looking at the grand cedar on her lawn
watching a bird on one of its lower boughs. Presently she began to
chirrup to the bird; soon her chirrup grew clearer; ere long she was
whistling; the whistle struck into a tune, and very sweetly and deftly
it was executed.

"My dear!" expostulated Mrs. Pryor.

"Was I whistling?" said Shirley. "I forgot. I beg your pardon, ma'am. I
had resolved to take care not to whistle before you."

"But, Miss Keeldar, where did you learn to whistle? You must have got
the habit since you came down into Yorkshire. I never knew you guilty of
it before."

"Oh! I learned to whistle a long while ago."

"Who taught you?"

"No one. I took it up by listening, and I had laid it down again. But
lately, yesterday evening, as I was coming up our lane, I heard a
gentleman whistling that very tune in the field on the other side of the
hedge, and that reminded me."

"What gentleman was it?"

"We have only one gentleman in this region, ma'am, and that is Mr.
Moore - at least he is the only gentleman who is not gray-haired. My two
venerable favourites, Mr. Helstone and Mr. Yorke, it is true, are fine
old beaus, infinitely better than any of the stupid young ones."

Mrs. Pryor was silent.

"You do not like Mr. Helstone, ma'am?"

"My dear, Mr. Helstone's office secures him from criticism."

"You generally contrive to leave the room when he is announced."

"Do you walk out this morning, my dear?"

"Yes, I shall go to the rectory, and seek and find Caroline Helstone,
and make her take some exercise. She shall have a breezy walk over
Nunnely Common."

"If you go in that direction, my dear, have the goodness to remind Miss
Helstone to wrap up well, as there is a fresh wind, and she appears to
me to require care."

"You shall be minutely obeyed, Mrs. Pryor. Meantime, will you not
accompany us yourself?"

"No, my love; I should be a restraint upon you. I am stout, and cannot
walk so quickly as you would wish to do."

Shirley easily persuaded Caroline to go with her, and when they were
fairly out on the quiet road, traversing the extensive and solitary
sweep of Nunnely Common, she as easily drew her into conversation. The
first feelings of diffidence overcome, Caroline soon felt glad to talk
with Miss Keeldar. The very first interchange of slight observations
sufficed to give each an idea of what the other was. Shirley said she
liked the green sweep of the common turf, and, better still, the heath
on its ridges, for the heath reminded her of moors. She had seen moors
when she was travelling on the borders near Scotland. She remembered
particularly a district traversed one long afternoon, on a sultry but
sunless day in summer. They journeyed from noon till sunset, over what
seemed a boundless waste of deep heath, and nothing had they seen but
wild sheep, nothing heard but the cries of wild birds.

"I know how the heath would look on such a day," said Caroline;
"purple-black - a deeper shade of the sky-tint, and that would be livid."

"Yes, quite livid, with brassy edges to the clouds, and here and there a
white gleam, more ghastly than the lurid tinge, which, as you looked at
it, you momentarily expected would kindle into blinding lightning."

"Did it thunder?"

"It muttered distant peals, but the storm did not break till evening,
after we had reached our inn - that inn being an isolated house at the
foot of a range of mountains."

"Did you watch the clouds come down over the mountains?"

"I did. I stood at the window an hour watching them. The hills seemed
rolled in a sullen mist, and when the rain fell in whitening sheets,
suddenly they were blotted from the prospect; they were washed from the
world."

"I have seen such storms in hilly districts in Yorkshire; and at their
riotous climax, while the sky was all cataract, the earth all flood, I
have remembered the Deluge."

"It is singularly reviving after such hurricanes to feel calm return,
and from the opening clouds to receive a consolatory gleam, softly
testifying that the sun is not quenched."

"Miss Keeldar, just stand still now, and look down at Nunnely dale and
wood."

They both halted on the green brow of the common. They looked down on
the deep valley robed in May raiment; on varied meads, some pearled with
daisies, and some golden with king-cups. To-day all this young verdure
smiled clear in sunlight; transparent emerald and amber gleams played
over it. On Nunnwood - the sole remnant of antique British forest in a
region whose lowlands were once all silvan chase, as its highlands were
breast-deep heather - slept the shadow of a cloud; the distant hills were
dappled, the horizon was shaded and tinted like mother-of-pearl; silvery
blues, soft purples, evanescent greens and rose-shades, all melting into
fleeces of white cloud, pure as azury snow, allured the eye as with a
remote glimpse of heaven's foundations. The air blowing on the brow was
fresh, and sweet, and bracing.

"Our England is a bonny island," said Shirley, "and Yorkshire is one of
her bonniest nooks."

"You are a Yorkshire girl too?"

"I am - Yorkshire in blood and birth. Five generations of my race sleep
under the aisles of Briarfield Church. I drew my first breath in the old
black hall behind us."

Hereupon Caroline presented her hand, which was accordingly taken and
shaken. "We are compatriots," said she.

"Yes," agreed Shirley, with a grave nod.

"And that," asked Miss Keeldar, pointing to the forest - "that is
Nunnwood?"

"It is."

"Were you ever there?"

"Many a time."

"In the heart of it?"

"Yes."

"What is it like?"

"It is like an encampment of forest sons of Anak. The trees are huge and
old. When you stand at their roots, the summits seem in another region.
The trunks remain still and firm as pillars, while the boughs sway to
every breeze. In the deepest calm their leaves are never quite hushed,
and in high wind a flood rushes, a sea thunders above you."

"Was it not one of Robin Hood's haunts?"

"Yes, and there are mementos of him still existing. To penetrate into
Nunnwood, Miss Keeldar, is to go far back into the dim days of old. Can
you see a break in the forest, about the centre?"

"Yes, distinctly."

"That break is a dell - a deep, hollow cup, lined with turf as green and
short as the sod of this common. The very oldest of the trees, gnarled
mighty oaks, crowd about the brink of this dell. In the bottom lie the
ruins of a nunnery."

"We will go - you and I alone, Caroline - to that wood, early some fine
summer morning, and spend a long day there. We can take pencils and
sketch-books, and any interesting reading book we like; and of course we
shall take something to eat. I have two little baskets, in which Mrs.
Gill, my housekeeper, might pack our provisions, and we could each carry
our own. It would not tire you too much to walk so far?"

"Oh no; especially if we rested the whole day in the wood. And I know
all the pleasantest spots. I know where we could get nuts in nutting
time; I know where wild strawberries abound; I know certain lonely,
quite untrodden glades, carpeted with strange mosses, some yellow as if
gilded, some a sober gray, some gem-green. I know groups of trees that
ravish the eye with their perfect, picture-like effects - rude oak,
delicate birch, glossy beech, clustered in contrast; and ash trees
stately as Saul, standing isolated; and superannuated wood-giants clad
in bright shrouds of ivy. Miss Keeldar, I could guide you."

"You would be dull with me alone?"

"I should not. I think we should suit; and what third person is there
whose presence would not spoil our pleasure?"

"Indeed, I know of none about our own ages - no lady at least; and as to
gentlemen - - "

"An excursion becomes quite a different thing when there are gentlemen
of the party," interrupted Caroline.

"I agree with you - quite a different thing to what we were proposing."

"We were going simply to see the old trees, the old ruins; to pass a day
in old times, surrounded by olden silence, and above all by quietude."

"You are right; and the presence of gentlemen dispels the last charm, I
think. If they are of the wrong sort, like your Malones, and your young
Sykes, and Wynnes, irritation takes the place of serenity. If they are
of the right sort, there is still a change; I can hardly tell what
change - one easy to feel, difficult to describe."

"We forget Nature, imprimis ."

"And then Nature forgets us, covers her vast calm brow with a dim veil,
conceals her face, and withdraws the peaceful joy with which, if we had
been content to worship her only, she would have filled our hearts."

"What does she give us instead?"

"More elation and more anxiety; an excitement that steals the hours away
fast, and a trouble that ruffles their course."

"Our power of being happy lies a good deal in ourselves, I believe,"
remarked Caroline sagely. "I have gone to Nunnwood with a large
party - all the curates and some other gentry of these parts, together
with sundry ladies - and I found the affair insufferably tedious and
absurd; and I have gone quite alone, or accompanied but by Fanny, who
sat in the woodman's hut and sewed, or talked to the goodwife, while I
roamed about and made sketches, or read; and I have enjoyed much
happiness of a quiet kind all day long. But that was when I was
young - two years ago."

"Did you ever go with your cousin, Robert Moore?"

"Yes; once."

"What sort of a companion is he on these occasions?"

"A cousin, you know, is different to a stranger."

"I am aware of that; but cousins, if they are stupid, are still more
insupportable than strangers, because you cannot so easily keep them at
a distance. But your cousin is not stupid?"

"No; but - - "

"Well?"

"If the company of fools irritates, as you say, the society of clever
men leaves its own peculiar pain also. Where the goodness or talent of
your friend is beyond and above all doubt, your own worthiness to be his
associate often becomes a matter of question."

"Oh! there I cannot follow you. That crotchet is not one I should choose
to entertain for an instant. I consider myself not unworthy to be the
associate of the best of them - of gentlemen, I mean - though that is
saying a great deal. Where they are good, they are very good, I believe.
Your uncle, by-the-bye, is not a bad specimen of the elderly gentleman.
I am always glad to see his brown, keen, sensible old face, either in my
own house or any other. Are you fond of him? Is he kind to you? Now,
speak the truth."

"He has brought me up from childhood, I doubt not, precisely as he would
have brought up his own daughter, if he had had one; and that is
kindness. But I am not fond of him. I would rather be out of his
presence than in it."

"Strange, when he has the art of making himself so agreeable."

"Yes, in company; but he is stern and silent at home. As he puts away
his cane and shovel-hat in the rectory hall, so he locks his liveliness
in his book-case and study-desk: the knitted brow and brief word for the
fireside; the smile, the jest, the witty sally for society."

"Is he tyrannical?"

"Not in the least. He is neither tyrannical nor hypocritical. He is
simply a man who is rather liberal than good-natured, rather brilliant
than genial, rather scrupulously equitable than truly just - if you can
understand such superfine distinctions."

"Oh yes! Good-nature implies indulgence, which he has not; geniality,
warmth of heart, which he does not own; and genuine justice is the
offspring of sympathy and considerateness, of which, I can well
conceive, my bronzed old friend is quite innocent."

"I often wonder, Shirley, whether most men resemble my uncle in their
domestic relations; whether it is necessary to be new and unfamiliar to
them in order to seem agreeable or estimable in their eyes; and whether
it is impossible to their natures to retain a constant interest and
affection for those they see every day."

"I don't  know. I can't  clear up your doubts. I ponder over similar ones
myself sometimes. But, to tell you a secret, if I were convinced that
they are necessarily and universally different from us - fickle, soon
petrifying, unsympathizing - I would never marry. I should not like to
find out that what I loved did not love me, that it was weary of me, and
that whatever effort I might make to please would hereafter be worse
than useless, since it was inevitably in its nature to change and become
indifferent. That discovery once made, what should I long for? To go
away, to remove from a presence where my society gave no pleasure."

"But you could not if you were married."

"No, I could not. There it is. I could never be my own mistress more. A
terrible thought! It suffocates me! Nothing irks me like the idea of
being a burden and a bore - an inevitable burden, a ceaseless bore! Now,
when I feel my company superfluous, I can comfortably fold my
independence round me like a mantle, and drop my pride like a veil, and
withdraw to solitude. If married, that could not be."

"I wonder we don't  all make up our minds to remain single," said
Caroline. "We should if we listened to the wisdom of experience. My
uncle always speaks of marriage as a burden; and I believe whenever he
hears of a man being married he invariably regards him as a fool, or, at
any rate, as doing a foolish thing."

"But, Caroline, men are not all like your uncle. Surely not. I hope
not."

She paused and mused.

"I suppose we each find an exception in the one we love, till we are 
married," suggested Caroline.

"I suppose so. And this exception we believe to be of sterling
materials. We fancy it like ourselves; we imagine a sense of harmony. We
think his voice gives the softest, truest promise of a heart that will
never harden against us; we read in his eyes that faithful
feeling - affection. I don't  think we should trust to what they call
passion at all, Caroline. I believe it is a mere fire of dry sticks,
blazing up and vanishing. But we watch him, and see him kind to animals,
to little children, to poor people. He is kind to us likewise, good,
considerate. He does not flatter women, but he is patient with them, and
he seems to be easy in their presence, and to find their company genial.
He likes them not only for vain and selfish reasons, but as we like
him - because we like him. Then we observe that he is just, that he
always speaks the truth, that he is conscientious. We feel joy and peace
when he comes into a room; we feel sadness and trouble when he leaves
it. We know that this man has been a kind son, that he is a kind
brother. Will any one dare to tell me that he will not be a kind
husband?"

"My uncle would affirm it unhesitatingly. 'He will be sick of you in a
month,' he would say."

"Mrs. Pryor would seriously intimate the same."

"Mrs. Yorke and Miss Mann would darkly suggest ditto."

"If they are true oracles, it is good never to fall in love."

"Very good, if you can avoid it."

"I choose to doubt their truth."

"I am afraid that proves you are already caught."

"Not I. But if I were, do you know what soothsayers I would consult?"

"Let me hear."

"Neither man nor woman, elderly nor young: the little Irish beggar that
comes barefoot to my door; the mouse that steals out of the cranny in
the wainscot; the bird that in frost and snow pecks at my window for a
crumb; the dog that licks my hand and sits beside my knee."

"Did you ever see any one who was kind to such things?"

"Did you ever see any one whom such things seemed instinctively to
follow, like, rely on?"

"We have a black cat and an old dog at the rectory. I know somebody to
whose knee that black cat loves to climb, against whose shoulder and
cheek it likes to purr. The old dog always comes out of his kennel and
wags his tail, and whines affectionately when somebody passes."

"And what does that somebody do?"

"He quietly strokes the cat, and lets her sit while he conveniently can;
and when he must disturb her by rising, he puts her softly down, and
never flings her from him roughly. He always whistles to the dog and
gives him a caress."

"Does he? It is not Robert?"

"But it is Robert."

"Handsome fellow!" said Shirley, with enthusiasm. Her eyes sparkled.

"Is he not handsome? Has he not fine eyes and well-cut features, and a
clear, princely forehead?"

"He has all that, Caroline. Bless him! he is both graceful and good."

"I was sure you would see that he was. When I first looked at your face
I knew you would."

"I was well inclined to him before I saw him. I liked him when I did see
him. I admire him now. There is charm in beauty for itself, Caroline;
when it is blent with goodness, there is a powerful charm."

"When mind is added, Shirley?"

"Who can resist it?"

"Remember my uncle, Mesdames Pryor, Yorke, and Mann."

"Remember the croaking of the frogs of Egypt. He is a noble being. I
tell you when they are good they are the lords of the creation - they
are the sons of God. Moulded in their Maker's image, the minutest spark
of His spirit lifts them almost above mortality. Indisputably, a great,
good, handsome man is the first of created things."

"Above us?"

"I would scorn to contend for empire with him - I would scorn it. Shall
my left hand dispute for precedence with my right? Shall my heart
quarrel with my pulse? Shall my veins be jealous of the blood which
fills them?"

"Men and women, husbands and wives, quarrel horribly, Shirley."

"Poor things! Poor, fallen, degenerate things! God made them for another
lot, for other feelings."

"But are we men's equals, or are we not?"

"Nothing ever charms me more than when I meet my superior - one who makes
me sincerely feel that he is my superior."

"Did you ever meet him?"

"I should be glad to see him any day. The higher above me, so much the
better. It degrades to stoop; it is glorious to look up. What frets me
is, that when I try to esteem, I am baffled; when religiously inclined,
there are but false gods to adore. I disdain to be a pagan."

"Miss Keeldar, will you come in? We are here at the rectory gates."

"Not to-day, but to-morrow I shall fetch you to spend the evening with
me. Caroline Helstone, if you really are what at present to me you seem,
you and I will suit. I have never in my whole life been able to talk to
a young lady as I have talked to you this morning. Kiss me - and
good-bye."

          

Mrs. Pryor seemed as well disposed to cultivate Caroline's acquaintance
as Shirley. She, who went nowhere else, called on an early day at the
rectory. She came in the afternoon, when the rector happened to be out.
It was rather a close day; the heat of the weather had flushed her, and
she seemed fluttered too by the circumstance of entering a strange
house, for it appeared her habits were most retiring and secluded. When
Miss Helstone went to her in the dining-room she found her seated on the
sofa, trembling, fanning herself with her handkerchief, and seeming to
contend with a nervous discomposure that threatened to become
hysterical.

Caroline marvelled somewhat at this unusual want of self-command in a
lady of her years, and also at the lack of real strength in one who
appeared almost robust - for Mrs. Pryor hastened to allege the fatigue of
her walk, the heat of the sun, etc., as reasons for her temporary
indisposition; and still as, with more hurry than coherence, she again
and again enumerated these causes of exhaustion, Caroline gently sought
to relieve her by opening her shawl and removing her bonnet. Attentions
of this sort Mrs. Pryor would not have accepted from every one. In
general she recoiled from touch or close approach with a mixture of
embarrassment and coldness far from flattering to those who offered her
aid. To Miss Helstone's little light hand, however, she yielded
tractably, and seemed soothed by its contact. In a few minutes she
ceased to tremble, and grew quiet and tranquil.

Her usual manner being resumed, she proceeded to talk of ordinary
topics. In a miscellaneous company Mrs. Pryor rarely opened her lips,
or, if obliged to speak, she spoke under restraint, and consequently not
well; in dialogue she was a good converser. Her language, always a
little formal, was well chosen; her sentiments were just; her
information was varied and correct. Caroline felt it pleasant to listen
to her, more pleasant than she could have anticipated.

On the wall opposite the sofa where they sat hung three pictures - the
centre one, above the mantelpiece, that of a lady; the two others, male
portraits.

"That is a beautiful face," said Mrs. Pryor, interrupting a brief pause
which had followed half an hour's animated conversation. "The features
may be termed perfect; no statuary's chisel could improve them. It is a
portrait from the life, I presume?"

"It is a portrait of Mrs. Helstone."

"Of Mrs. Matthewson Helstone? Of your uncle's wife?"

"It is, and is said to be a good likeness. Before her marriage she was
accounted the beauty of the district."

"I should say she merited the distinction. What accuracy in all the
lineaments! It is, however, a passive face. The original could not have
been what is generally termed 'a woman of spirit.'"

"I believe she was a remarkably still, silent person."

"One would scarcely have expected, my dear, that your uncle's choice
should have fallen on a partner of that description. Is he not fond of
being amused by lively chat?"

"In company he is. But he always says he could never do with a talking
wife. He must have quiet at home. You go out to gossip, he affirms; you
come home to read and reflect."

"Mrs. Matthewson lived but a few years after her marriage, I think I
have heard?"

"About five years."

"Well, my dear," pursued Mrs. Pryor, rising to go, "I trust it is
understood that you will frequently come to Fieldhead. I hope you will.
You must feel lonely here, having no female relative in the house; you
must necessarily pass much of your time in solitude."

"I am inured to it. I have grown up by myself. May I arrange your shawl
for you?"

Mrs. Pryor submitted to be assisted.

"Should you chance to require help in your studies," she said, "you may
command me."

Caroline expressed her sense of such kindness.

"I hope to have frequent conversations with you. I should wish to be of
use to you."

Again Miss Helstone returned thanks. She thought what a kind heart was
hidden under her visitor's seeming chilliness. Observing that Mrs. Pryor
again glanced with an air of interest towards the portraits, as she
walked down the room, Caroline casually explained: "The likeness that
hangs near the window, you will see, is my uncle, taken twenty years
ago; the other, to the left of the mantelpiece, is his brother James, my
father."

"They resemble each other in some measure," said Mrs. Pryor; "yet a
difference of character may be traced in the different mould of the brow
and mouth."

"What difference?" inquired Caroline, accompanying her to the door.
"James Helstone - that is, my father - is generally considered the
best-looking of the two. Strangers, I remark, always exclaim, 'What a
handsome man!' Do you think his picture handsome, Mrs. Pryor?"

"It is much softer or finer featured than that of your uncle."

"But where or what is the difference of character to which you alluded?
Tell me. I wish to see if you guess right."

"My dear, your uncle is a man of principle. His forehead and his lips
are firm, and his eye is steady."

"Well, and the other? Do not be afraid of offending me. I always like
the truth."

"Do you like the truth? It is well for you. Adhere to that
preference - never swerve thence. The other, my dear, if he had been
living now, would probably have furnished little support to his
daughter. It is, however, a graceful head - taken in youth, I should
think. My dear"  turning abruptly , "you acknowledge an inestimable
value in principle?"

"I am sure no character can have true worth without it."

"You feel what you say? You have considered the subject?"

"Often. Circumstances early forced it upon my attention."

"The lesson was not lost, then, though it came so prematurely. I suppose
the soil is not light nor stony, otherwise seed falling in that season
never would have borne fruit. My dear, do not stand in the air of the
door; you will take cold. Good-afternoon."

Miss Helstone's new acquaintance soon became of value to her: their
society was acknowledged a privilege. She found she would have been in
error indeed to have let slip this chance of relief, to have neglected
to avail herself of this happy change. A turn was thereby given to her
thoughts; a new channel was opened for them, which, diverting a few of
them at least from the one direction in which all had hitherto tended,
abated the impetuosity of their rush, and lessened the force of their
pressure on one worn-down point.

Soon she was content to spend whole days at Fieldhead, doing by turns
whatever Shirley or Mrs. Pryor wished her to do; and now one would claim
her, now the other. Nothing could be less demonstrative than the
friendship of the elder lady, but also nothing could be more vigilant,
assiduous, untiring. I have intimated that she was a peculiar personage,
and in nothing was her peculiarity more shown than in the nature of the
interest she evinced for Caroline. She watched all her movements; she
seemed as if she would have guarded all her steps. It gave her pleasure
to be applied to by Miss Helstone for advice and assistance. She yielded
her aid, when asked, with such quiet yet obvious enjoyment that Caroline
ere long took delight in depending on her.

Shirley Keeldar's complete docility with Mrs. Pryor had at first
surprised Miss Helstone, and not less the fact of the reserved
ex-governess being so much at home and at ease in the residence of her
young pupil, where she filled with such quiet independency a very
dependent post; but she soon found that it needed but to know both
ladies to comprehend fully the enigma. Every one, it seemed to her, must
like, must love, must prize Mrs. Pryor when they knew her. No matter
that she perseveringly wore old-fashioned gowns; that her speech was
formal and her manner cool; that she had twenty little ways such as
nobody else had: she was still such a stay, such a counsellor, so
truthful, so kind in her way, that, in Caroline's idea, none once
accustomed to her presence could easily afford to dispense with it.

As to dependency or humiliation, Caroline did not feel it in her
intercourse with Shirley, and why should Mrs. Pryor? The heiress was
rich - very rich - compared with her new friend: one possessed a clear
thousand a year, the other not a penny; and yet there was a safe sense
of equality experienced in her society, never known in that of the
ordinary Briarfield and Whinbury gentry.

The reason was, Shirley's head ran on other things than money and
position. She was glad to be independent as to property; by fits she was
even elated at the notion of being lady of the manor, and having tenants
and an estate. She was especially tickled with an agreeable complacency
when reminded of "all that property" down in the Hollow, "comprising an
excellent cloth-mill, dyehouse, warehouse, together with the messuage,
gardens, and outbuildings, termed Hollow's Cottage;" but her exultation
being quite undisguised was singularly inoffensive; and, for her serious
thoughts, they tended elsewhere. To admire the great, reverence the
good, and be joyous with the genial, was very much the bent of Shirley's
soul: she mused, therefore, on the means of following this bent far
oftener than she pondered on her social superiority.

In Caroline Miss Keeldar had first taken an interest because she was
quiet, retiring, looked delicate, and seemed as if she needed some one
to take care of her. Her predilection increased greatly when she
discovered that her own way of thinking and talking was understood and
responded to by this new acquaintance. She had hardly expected it. Miss
Helstone, she fancied, had too pretty a face, manners and voice too
soft, to be anything out of the common way in mind and attainments; and
she very much wondered to see the gentle features light up archly to the
reveille of a dry sally or two risked by herself; and more did she
wonder to discover the self-won knowledge treasured, and the untaught
speculations working in that girlish, curl-veiled head. Caroline's
instinct of taste, too, was like her own. Such books as Miss Keeldar had
read with the most pleasure were Miss Helstone's delight also. They held
many aversions too in common, and could have the comfort of laughing
together over works of false sentimentality and pompous pretension.

Few, Shirley conceived, men or women have the right taste in poetry, the
right sense for discriminating between what is real and what is false.
She had again and again heard very clever people pronounce this or that
passage, in this or that versifier, altogether admirable, which, when
she read, her soul refused to acknowledge as anything but cant,
flourish, and tinsel, or at the best elaborate wordiness, curious,
clever, learned, perhaps, haply even tinged with the fascinating hues of
fancy, but, God knows, as different from real poetry as the gorgeous and
massy vase of mosaic is from the little cup of pure metal; or, to give
the reader a choice of similes, as the milliner's artificial wreath is
from the fresh-gathered lily of the field.

Caroline, she found, felt the value of the true ore, and knew the
deception of the flashy dross. The minds of the two girls being toned in
harmony often chimed very sweetly together.

One evening they chanced to be alone in the oak-parlour. They had passed
a long wet day together without ennui . It was now on the edge of dark;
candles were not yet brought in; both, as twilight deepened, grew
meditative and silent. A western wind roared high round the hall,
driving wild clouds and stormy rain up from the far-remote ocean; all
was tempest outside the antique lattices, all deep peace within. Shirley
sat at the window, watching the rack in heaven, the mist on earth,
listening to certain notes of the gale that plained like restless
spirits - notes which, had she not been so young, gay, and healthy, would
have swept her trembling nerves like some omen, some anticipatory dirge.
In this her prime of existence and bloom of beauty they but subdued
vivacity to pensiveness. Snatches of sweet ballads haunted her ear; now
and then she sang a stanza. Her accents obeyed the fitful impulse of the
wind; they swelled as its gusts rushed on, and died as they wandered
away. Caroline, withdrawn to the farthest and darkest end of the room,
her figure just discernible by the ruby shine of the flameless fire,
was pacing to and fro, muttering to herself fragments of well-remembered
poetry. She spoke very low, but Shirley heard her; and while singing
softly, she listened. This was the strain: - 

 "Obscurest night involved the sky,
 The Atlantic billows roared,
 When such a destined wretch as I,
 Washed headlong from on board,
 Of friends, of hope, of all bereft,
 His floating home for ever left."

Here the fragment stopped, because Shirley's song, erewhile somewhat
full and thrilling, had become delicately faint.

"Go on," said she.

"Then you go on too. I was only repeating 'The Castaway.'"

"I know. If you can remember it all, say it all."

And as it was nearly dark, and, after all, Miss Keeldar was no
formidable auditor, Caroline went through it. She went through it as she
should have gone through it. The wild sea, the drowning mariner, the
reluctant ship swept on in the storm, you heard were realized by her;
and more vividly was realized the heart of the poet, who did not weep
for "The Castaway," but who, in an hour of tearless anguish, traced a
semblance to his own God-abandoned misery in the fate of that
man-forsaken sailor, and cried from the depths where he struggled, - 

 "No voice divine the storm allayed,
 No light propitious shone,
 When, snatched from all effectual aid,
 We perished - each alone!
 But I beneath a rougher sea,
 And whelmed in deeper gulfs than he."

"I hope William Cowper is safe and calm in heaven now," said Caroline.

"Do you pity what he suffered on earth?" asked Miss Keeldar.

"Pity him, Shirley? What can I do else? He was nearly broken-hearted
when he wrote that poem, and it almost breaks one's heart to read it.
But he found relief in writing it - I know he did; and that gift of
poetry - the most divine bestowed on man - was, I believe, granted to
allay emotions when their strength threatens harm. It seems to me,
Shirley, that nobody should write poetry to exhibit intellect or
attainment. Who cares for that sort of poetry? Who cares for
learning - who cares for fine words in poetry? And who does not care for
feeling - real feeling - however simply, even rudely expressed?"

"It seems you care for it, at all events; and certainly, in hearing that
poem, one discovers that Cowper was under an impulse strong as that of
the wind which drove the ship - an impulse which, while it would not
suffer him to stop to add ornament to a single stanza, filled him with
force to achieve the whole with consummate perfection. You managed to
recite it with a steady voice, Caroline. I wonder thereat."

"Cowper's hand did not tremble in writing the lines. Why should my voice
falter in repeating them? Depend on it, Shirley, no tear blistered the
manuscript of 'The Castaway.' I hear in it no sob of sorrow, only the
cry of despair; but, that cry uttered, I believe the deadly spasm passed
from his heart, that he wept abundantly, and was comforted."

Shirley resumed her ballad minstrelsy. Stopping short, she remarked ere
long, "One could have loved Cowper, if it were only for the sake of
having the privilege of comforting him."

"You never would have loved Cowper," rejoined Caroline promptly. "He was
not made to be loved by woman."

"What do you mean?"

"What I say. I know there is a kind of natures in the world - and very
noble, elevated natures too - whom love never comes near. You might have
sought Cowper with the intention of loving him, and you would have
looked at him, pitied him, and left him, forced away by a sense of the
impossible, the incongruous, as the crew were borne from their drowning
comrade by 'the furious blast.'"

"You may be right. Who told you this?"

"And what I say of Cowper, I should say of Rousseau. Was Rousseau ever
loved? He loved passionately; but was his passion ever returned? I am
certain, never. And if there were any female Cowpers and Rousseaus, I
should assert the same of them."

"Who told you this, I ask? Did Moore?"

"Why should anybody have told me? Have I not an instinct? Can I not
divine by analogy? Moore never talked to me either about Cowper, or
Rousseau, or love. The voice we hear in solitude told me all I know on
these subjects."

"Do you like characters of the Rousseau order, Caroline?"

"Not at all, as a whole. I sympathize intensely with certain qualities
they possess. Certain divine sparks in their nature dazzle my eyes, and
make my soul glow. Then, again, I scorn them. They are made of clay and
gold. The refuse and the ore make a mass of weakness: taken altogether,
I feel them unnatural, unhealthy, repulsive."

"I dare say I should be more tolerant of a Rousseau than you would,
Cary. Submissive and contemplative yourself, you like the stern and the
practical. By the way, you must miss that Cousin Robert of yours very
much, now that you and he never meet."

"I do."

"And he must miss you?"

"That he does not."

"I cannot imagine," pursued Shirley, who had lately got a habit of
introducing Moore's name into the conversation, even when it seemed to
have no business there - "I cannot imagine but that he was fond of you,
since he took so much notice of you, talked to you, and taught you so
much."

"He never was fond of me; he never professed to be fond of me. He took
pains to prove that he only just tolerated me."

Caroline, determined not to err on the flattering side in estimating her
cousin's regard for her, always now habitually thought of it and
mentioned it in the most scanty measure. She had her own reasons for
being less sanguine than ever in hopeful views of the future, less
indulgent to pleasurable retrospections of the past.

"Of course, then," observed Miss Keeldar, "you only just tolerated him
in return?"

"Shirley, men and women are so different; they are in such a different
position. Women have so few things to think about, men so many. You may
have a friendship for a man, while he is almost indifferent to you. Much
of what cheers your life may be dependent on him, while not a feeling or
interest of moment in his eyes may have reference to you. Robert used to
be in the habit of going to London, sometimes for a week or a fortnight
together. Well, while he was away, I found his absence a void. There
was something wanting; Briarfield was duller. Of course, I had my usual
occupations; still I missed him. As I sat by myself in the evenings, I
used to feel a strange certainty of conviction I cannot describe, that
if a magician or a genius had, at that moment, offered me Prince Ali's
tube  you remember it in the 'Arabian Nights'? , and if, with its aid, I
had been enabled to take a view of Robert - to see where he was, how
occupied - I should have learned, in a startling manner, the width of the
chasm which gaped between such as he and such as I. I knew that, however
my thoughts might adhere to him, his were effectually sundered from me."

"Caroline," demanded Miss Keeldar abruptly, "don't  you wish you had a
profession - a trade?"

"I wish it fifty times a day. As it is, I often wonder what I came into
the world for. I long to have something absorbing and compulsory to fill
my head and hands and to occupy my thoughts."

"Can labour alone make a human being happy?"

"No; but it can give varieties of pain, and prevent us from breaking our
hearts with a single tyrant master-torture. Besides, successful labour
has its recompense; a vacant, weary, lonely, hopeless life has none."

"But hard labour and learned professions, they say, make women
masculine, coarse, unwomanly."

"And what does it signify whether unmarried and never-to-be-married
women are unattractive and inelegant or not? Provided only they are
decent, decorous, and neat, it is enough. The utmost which ought to be
required of old maids, in the way of appearance, is that they should not
absolutely offend men's eyes as they pass them in the street; for the
rest, they should be allowed, without too much scorn, to be as absorbed,
grave, plain-looking, and plain-dressed as they please."

"You might be an old maid yourself, Caroline, you speak so earnestly."

"I shall be one. It is my destiny. I will never marry a Malone or a
Sykes; and no one else will ever marry me."

Here fell a long pause. Shirley broke it. Again the name by which she
seemed bewitched was almost the first on her lips.

"Lina - did not Moore call you Lina sometimes?"

"Yes. It is sometimes used as the abbreviation of Caroline in his native
country."

"Well, Lina, do you remember my one day noticing an inequality in your
hair - a curl wanting on that right side - and your telling me that it was
Robert's fault, as he had once cut therefrom a long lock?"

"Yes."

"If he is, and always was, as indifferent to you as you say, why did he
steal your hair?"

"I don't  know - yes, I do. It was my doing, not his. Everything of that
sort always was my doing. He was going from home - to London, as usual;
and the night before he went, I had found in his sister's workbox a lock
of black hair - a short, round curl. Hortense told me it was her
brother's, and a keepsake. He was sitting near the table. I looked at
his head. He has plenty of hair; on the temples were many such round
curls. I thought he could spare me one. I knew I should like to have it,
and I asked for it. He said, on condition that he might have his choice
of a tress from my head. So he got one of my long locks of hair, and I
got one of his short ones. I keep his, but I dare say he has lost mine.
It was my doing, and one of those silly deeds it distresses the heart
and sets the face on fire to think of; one of those small but sharp
recollections that return, lacerating your self-respect like tiny
penknives, and forcing from your lips, as you sit alone, sudden,
insane-sounding interjections."

"Caroline!"

"I do think myself a fool, Shirley, in some respects; I do despise
myself. But I said I would not make you my confessor, for you cannot
reciprocate foible for foible; you are not weak. How steadily you watch
me now! Turn aside your clear, strong, she-eagle eye; it is an insult to
fix it on me thus."

"What a study of character you are - weak, certainly, but not in the
sense you think! - Come in!"

This was said in answer to a tap at the door. Miss Keeldar happened to
be near it at the moment, Caroline at the other end of the room. She saw
a note put into Shirley's hands, and heard the words, "From Mr. Moore,
ma'am."

"Bring candles," said Miss Keeldar.

Caroline sat expectant.

"A communication on business," said the heiress; but when candles were
brought, she neither opened nor read it. The rector's Fanny was
presently announced, and the rector's niece went home.




CHAPTER XIII.

FURTHER COMMUNICATIONS ON BUSINESS.


In Shirley's nature prevailed at times an easy indolence. There were
periods when she took delight in perfect vacancy of hand and
eye - moments when her thoughts, her simple existence, the fact of the
world being around and heaven above her, seemed to yield her such
fullness of happiness that she did not need to lift a finger to increase
the joy. Often, after an active morning, she would spend a sunny
afternoon in lying stirless on the turf, at the foot of some tree of
friendly umbrage. No society did she need but that of Caroline, and it
sufficed if she were within call; no spectacle did she ask but that of
the deep blue sky, and such cloudlets as sailed afar and aloft across
its span; no sound but that of the bee's hum, the leaf's whisper. Her
sole book in such hours was the dim chronicle of memory or the sibyl
page of anticipation. From her young eyes fell on each volume a glorious
light to read by; round her lips at moments played a smile which
revealed glimpses of the tale or prophecy. It was not sad, not dark.
Fate had been benign to the blissful dreamer, and promised to favour her
yet again. In her past were sweet passages, in her future rosy hopes.

Yet one day when Caroline drew near to rouse her, thinking she had lain
long enough, behold, as she looked down, Shirley's cheek was wet as if
with dew; those fine eyes of hers shone humid and brimming.

"Shirley, why do you cry?" asked Caroline, involuntarily laying stress
on you .

Miss Keeldar smiled, and turned her picturesque head towards the
questioner. "Because it pleases me mightily to cry," she said. "My heart
is both sad and glad. But why, you good, patient child - why do you not
bear me company? I only weep tears, delightful and soon wiped away; you
might weep gall, if you choose."

"Why should I weep gall?"

"Mateless, solitary bird!" was the only answer.

"And are not you too mateless, Shirley?"

"At heart - no."

"Oh! who nestles there, Shirley?"

But Shirley only laughed gaily at this question, and alertly started up.

"I have dreamed," she said, "a mere day-dream - certainly bright,
probably baseless!"

          

Miss Helstone was by this time free enough from illusions: she took a
sufficiently grave view of the future, and fancied she knew pretty well
how her own destiny and that of some others were tending. Yet old
associations retained their influence over her, and it was these and the
power of habit which still frequently drew her of an evening to the
field-style and the old thorn overlooking the Hollow.

One night, the night after the incident of the note, she had been at her
usual post, watching for her beacon - watching vainly: that evening no
lamp was lit. She waited till the rising of certain constellations
warned her of lateness and signed her away. In passing Fieldhead, on her
return, its moonlight beauty attracted her glance, and stayed her step
an instant. Tree and hall rose peaceful under the night sky and clear
full orb; pearly paleness gilded the building; mellow brown gloom
bosomed it round; shadows of deep green brooded above its oak-wreathed
roof. The broad pavement in front shone pale also; it gleamed as if some
spell had transformed the dark granite to glistering Parian. On the
silvery space slept two sable shadows, thrown sharply defined from two
human figures. These figures when first seen were motionless and mute;
presently they moved in harmonious step, and spoke low in harmonious
key. Earnest was the gaze that scrutinized them as they emerged from
behind the trunk of the cedar. "Is it Mrs. Pryor and Shirley?"

Certainly it is Shirley. Who else has a shape so lithe, and proud, and
graceful? And her face, too, is visible - her countenance careless and
pensive, and musing and mirthful, and mocking and tender. Not fearing
the dew, she has not covered her head; her curls are free - they veil her
neck and caress her shoulder with their tendril rings. An ornament of
gold gleams through the half-closed folds of the scarf she has wrapped
across her bust, and a large bright gem glitters on the white hand
which confines it. Yes, that is Shirley.

Her companion then is, of course, Mrs. Pryor?

Yes, if Mrs. Pryor owns six feet of stature, and if she has changed her
decent widow's weeds for masculine disguise. The figure walking at Miss
Keeldar's side is a man - a tall, young, stately man; it is her tenant,
Robert Moore.

The pair speak softly; their words are not distinguishable. To remain a
moment to gaze is not to be an eavesdropper; and as the moon shines so
clearly and their countenances are so distinctly apparent, who can
resist the attraction of such interest? Caroline, it seems, cannot, for
she lingers.

There was a time when, on summer nights, Moore had been wont to walk
with his cousin, as he was now walking with the heiress. Often had she
gone up the Hollow with him after sunset, to scent the freshness of the
earth, where a growth of fragrant herbage carpeted a certain narrow
terrace, edging a deep ravine, from whose rifted gloom was heard a sound
like the spirit of the lonely watercourse, moaning amongst its wet
stones, and between its weedy banks, and under its dark bower of alders.

"But I used to be closer to him," thought Caroline. "He felt no
obligation to treat me with homage; I needed only kindness. He used to
hold my hand; he does not touch hers. And yet Shirley is not proud where
she loves. There is no haughtiness in her aspect now, only a little in
her port - what is natural to and inseparable from her, what she retains
in her most careless as in her most guarded moments. Robert must think,
as I think, that he is at this instant looking down on a fine face; and
he must think it with a man's brain, not with mine. She has such
generous yet soft fire in her eyes. She smiles - what makes her smile so
sweet? I saw that Robert felt its beauty, and he must have felt it with
his man's heart, not with my dim woman's perceptions. They look to me
like two great happy spirits. Yonder silvered pavement reminds me of
that white shore we believe to be beyond the death-flood. They have
reached it; they walk there united. And what am I, standing here in
shadow, shrinking into concealment, my mind darker than my hiding-place?
I am one of this world, no spirit - a poor doomed mortal, who asks, in
ignorance and hopelessness, wherefore she was born, to what end she
lives; whose mind for ever runs on the question, how she shall at last
encounter, and by whom be sustained through death.

"This is the worst passage I have come to yet; still I was quite
prepared for it. I gave Robert up, and gave him up to Shirley, the first
day I heard she was come, the first moment I saw her - rich, youthful,
and lovely. She has him now. He is her lover. She is his darling. She
will be far more his darling yet when they are married. The more Robert
knows of Shirley the more his soul will cleave to her. They will both be
happy, and I do not grudge them their bliss; but I groan under my own
misery. Some of my suffering is very acute. Truly I ought not to have
been born; they should have smothered me at the first cry."

Here, Shirley stepping aside to gather a dewy flower, she and her
companion turned into a path that lay nearer the gate. Some of their
conversation became audible. Caroline would not stay to listen. She
passed away noiselessly, and the moonlight kissed the wall which her
shadow had dimmed. The reader is privileged to remain, and try what he
can make of the discourse.

"I cannot conceive why nature did not give you a bulldog's head, for you
have all a bulldog's tenacity," said Shirley.

"Not a flattering idea. Am I so ignoble?"

"And something also you have of the same animal's silent ways of going
about its work. You give no warning; you come noiselessly behind, seize
fast, and hold on."

"This is guess-work. You have witnessed no such feat on my part. In your
presence I have been no bulldog."

"Your very silence indicates your race. How little you talk in general,
yet how deeply you scheme! You are far-seeing; you are calculating."

"I know the ways of these people. I have gathered information of their
intentions. My note last night informed you that Barraclough's trial had
ended in his conviction and sentence to transportation. His associates
will plot vengeance. I shall lay my plans so as to counteract or at
least be prepared for theirs - that is all. Having now given you as clear
an explanation as I can, am I to understand that for what I propose
doing I have your approbation?"

"I shall stand by you so long as you remain on the defensive. Yes."

"Good! Without any aid - even opposed or disapproved by you - I believe I
should have acted precisely as I now intend to act, but in another
spirit. I now feel satisfied. On the whole, I relish the position."

"I dare say you do. That is evident. You relish the work which lies
before you still better than you would relish the execution of a
government order for army-cloth."

"I certainly feel it congenial."

"So would old Helstone. It is true there is a shade of difference in
your motives - many shades, perhaps. Shall I speak to Mr. Helstone? I
will, if you like."

"Act as you please. Your judgment, Miss Keeldar, will guide you
accurately. I could rely on it myself in a more difficult crisis. But I
should inform you Mr. Helstone is somewhat prejudiced against me at
present."

"I am aware - I have heard all about your differences. Depend upon it,
they will melt away. He cannot resist the temptation of an alliance
under present circumstances."

"I should be glad to have him; he is of true metal."

"I think so also."

"An old blade, and rusty somewhat, but the edge and temper still
excellent."

"Well, you shall have him, Mr. Moore - that is, if I can win him."

"Whom can you not win?"

"Perhaps not the rector; but I will make the effort."

"Effort! He will yield for a word - a smile."

"By no means. It will cost me several cups of tea, some toast and cake,
and an ample measure of remonstrances, expostulations, and persuasions.
It grows rather chill."

"I perceive you shiver. Am I acting wrongly to detain you here? Yet it
is so calm - I even feel it warm - and society such as yours is a pleasure
to me so rare. If you were wrapped in a thicker shawl - - "

"I might stay longer, and forget how late it is, which would chagrin
Mrs. Pryor. We keep early and regular hours at Fieldhead, Mr. Moore; and
so, I am sure, does your sister at the cottage."

"Yes; but Hortense and I have an understanding the most convenient in
the world, that we shall each do as we please."

"How do you please to do?"

"Three nights in the week I sleep in the mill - but I require little
rest - and when it is moonlight and mild I often haunt the Hollow till
daybreak."

"When I was a very little girl, Mr. Moore, my nurse used to tell me
tales of fairies being seen in that Hollow. That was before my father
built the mill, when it was a perfectly solitary ravine. You will be
falling under enchantment."

"I fear it is done," said Moore, in a low voice.

"But there are worse things than fairies to be guarded against," pursued
Miss Keeldar.

"Things more perilous," he subjoined.

"Far more so. For instance, how would you like to meet Michael Hartley,
that mad Calvinist and Jacobin weaver? They say he is addicted to
poaching, and often goes abroad at night with his gun."

"I have already had the luck to meet him. We held a long argument
together one night. A strange little incident it was; I liked it."

"Liked it? I admire your taste! Michael is not sane. Where did you meet
him?"

"In the deepest, shadiest spot in the glen, where the water runs low,
under brushwood. We sat down near that plank bridge. It was moonlight,
but clouded, and very windy. We had a talk."

"On politics?"

"And religion. I think the moon was at the full, and Michael was as near
crazed as possible. He uttered strange blasphemy in his Antinomian
fashion."

"Excuse me, but I think you must have been nearly as mad as he, to sit
listening to him."

"There is a wild interest in his ravings. The man would be half a poet,
if he were not wholly a maniac; and perhaps a prophet, if he were not a
profligate. He solemnly informed me that hell was foreordained my
inevitable portion; that he read the mark of the beast on my brow; that
I had been an outcast from the beginning. God's vengeance, he said, was
preparing for me, and affirmed that in a vision of the night he had
beheld the manner and the instrument of my doom. I wanted to know
further, but he left me with these words, 'The end is not yet.'"

"Have you ever seen him since?"

"About a month afterwards, in returning from market, I encountered him
and Moses Barraclough, both in an advanced stage of inebriation. They
were praying in frantic sort at the roadside. They accosted me as Satan,
bid me avaunt, and clamoured to be delivered from temptation. Again, but
a few days ago, Michael took the trouble of appearing at the
counting-house door, hatless, in his shirt-sleeves - his coat and castor
having been detained at the public-house in pledge. He delivered himself
of the comfortable message that he could wish Mr. Moore to set his house
in order, as his soul was likely shortly to be required of him."

"Do you make light of these things?"

"The poor man had been drinking for weeks, and was in a state bordering
on delirium tremens."

"What then? He is the more likely to attempt the fulfilment of his own
prophecies."

"It would not do to permit incidents of this sort to affect one's
nerves."

"Mr. Moore, go home!"

"So soon?"

"Pass straight down the fields, not round by the lade and plantations."

"It is early yet."

"It is late. For my part, I am going in. Will you promise me not to
wander in the Hollow to-night?"

"If you wish it."

"I do wish it. May I ask whether you consider life valueless?"

"By no means. On the contrary, of late I regard my life as invaluable."

"Of late?"

"Existence is neither aimless nor hopeless to me now, and it was both
three months ago. I was then drowning, and rather wished the operation
over. All at once a hand was stretched to me - such a delicate hand I
scarcely dared trust it; its strength, however, has rescued me from
ruin."

"Are you really rescued?"

"For the time. Your assistance has given me another chance."

"Live to make the best of it. Don't  offer yourself as a target to
Michael Hartley; and good-night!"

          

Miss Helstone was under a promise to spend the evening of the next day
at Fieldhead. She kept her promise. Some gloomy hours had she spent in
the interval. Most of the time had been passed shut up in her own
apartment, only issuing from it, indeed, to join her uncle at meals, and
anticipating inquiries from Fanny by telling her that she was busy
altering a dress, and preferred sewing upstairs, to avoid interruption.

She did sew. She plied her needle continuously, ceaselessly, but her
brain worked faster than her fingers. Again, and more intensely than
ever, she desired a fixed occupation, no matter how onerous, how
irksome. Her uncle must be once more entreated, but first she would
consult Mrs. Pryor. Her head laboured to frame projects as diligently as
her hands to plait and stitch the thin texture of the muslin summer
dress spread on the little white couch at the foot of which she sat. Now
and then, while thus doubly occupied, a tear would fill her eyes and
fall on her busy hands; but this sign of emotion was rare and quickly
effaced. The sharp pang passed; the dimness cleared from her vision. She
would re-thread her needle, rearrange tuck and trimming, and work on.

Late in the afternoon she dressed herself. She reached Fieldhead, and
appeared in the oak parlour just as tea was brought in. Shirley asked
her why she came so late.

"Because I have been making my dress," said she. "These fine sunny days
began to make me ashamed of my winter merino, so I have furbished up a
lighter garment."

"In which you look as I like to see you," said Shirley. "You are a
lady-like little person, Caroline. - Is she not, Mrs. Pryor?"

Mrs. Pryor never paid compliments, and seldom indulged in remarks,
favourable or otherwise, on personal appearance. On the present occasion
she only swept Caroline's curls from her cheek as she took a seat near
her, caressed the oval outline, and observed, "You get somewhat thin, my
love, and somewhat pale. Do you sleep well? your eyes have a languid
look." And she gazed at her anxiously.

"I sometimes dream melancholy dreams," answered Caroline; "and if I lie
awake for an hour or two in the night, I am continually thinking of the
rectory as a dreary old place. You know it is very near the churchyard.
The back part of the house is extremely ancient, and it is said that the
out-kitchens there were once enclosed in the churchyard, and that there
are graves under them. I rather long to leave the rectory."

"My dear, you are surely not superstitious?"

"No, Mrs. Pryor; but I think I grow what is called nervous. I see things
under a darker aspect than I used to do. I have fears I never used to
have - not of ghosts, but of omens and disastrous events; and I have an
inexpressible weight on my mind which I would give the world to shake
off, and I cannot do it."

"Strange!" cried Shirley. "I never feel so." Mrs. Pryor said nothing.

"Fine weather, pleasant days, pleasant scenes, are powerless to give me
pleasure," continued Caroline. "Calm evenings are not calm to me.
Moonlight, which I used to think mild, now only looks mournful. Is this
weakness of mind, Mrs. Pryor, or what is it? I cannot help it. I often
struggle against it. I reason; but reason and effort make no
difference."

"You should take more exercise," said Mrs. Pryor.

"Exercise! I exercise sufficiently. I exercise till I am ready to drop."

"My dear, you should go from home."

"Mrs. Pryor, I should like to go from home, but not on any purposeless
excursion or visit. I wish to be a governess, as you have been. It would
oblige me greatly if you would speak to my uncle on the subject."

"Nonsense!" broke in Shirley. "What an idea! Be a governess! Better be a
slave at once. Where is the necessity of it? Why should you dream of
such a painful step?"

"My dear," said Mrs. Pryor, "you are very young to be a governess, and
not sufficiently robust. The duties a governess undertakes are often
severe."

"And I believe I want severe duties to occupy me."

"Occupy you!" cried Shirley. "When are you idle? I never saw a more
industrious girl than you. You are always at work. Come," she
continued - "come and sit by my side, and take some tea to refresh you.
You don't  care much for my friendship, then, that you wish to leave me?"

"Indeed I do, Shirley; and I don't  wish to leave you. I shall never find
another friend so dear."

At which words Miss Keeldar put her hand into Caroline's with an
impulsively affectionate movement, which was well seconded by the
expression of her face.

"If you think so, you had better make much of me," she said, "and not
run away from me. I hate to part with those to whom I am become
attached. Mrs. Pryor there sometimes talks of leaving me, and says I
might make a more advantageous connection than herself. I should as soon
think of exchanging an old-fashioned mother for something modish and
stylish. As for you - why, I began to flatter myself we were thoroughly
friends; that you liked Shirley almost as well as Shirley likes you, and
she does not stint her regard."

"I do like Shirley. I like her more and more every day. But that does
not make me strong or happy."

"And would it make you strong or happy to go and live as a dependent
amongst utter strangers? It would not. And the experiment must not be
tried; I tell you it would fail. It is not in your nature to bear the
desolate life governesses generally lead; you would fall ill. I won't 
hear of it."

And Miss Keeldar paused, having uttered this prohibition very decidedly.
Soon she recommenced, still looking somewhat courroucée , "Why, it is
my daily pleasure now to look out for the little cottage bonnet and the
silk scarf glancing through the trees in the lane, and to know that my
quiet, shrewd, thoughtful companion and monitress is coming back to me;
that I shall have her sitting in the room to look at, to talk to or to
let alone, as she and I please. This may be a selfish sort of
language - I know it is - but it is the language which naturally rises to
my lips, therefore I utter it."

"I would write to you, Shirley."

"And what are letters? Only a sort of pis aller . Drink some tea,
Caroline. Eat something - you eat nothing. Laugh and be cheerful, and
stay at home."

Miss Helstone shook her head and sighed. She felt what difficulty she
would have to persuade any one to assist or sanction her in making that
change in her life which she believed desirable. Might she only follow
her own judgment, she thought she should be able to find perhaps a harsh
but an effectual cure for her sufferings. But this judgment, founded on
circumstances she could fully explain to none, least of all to Shirley,
seemed, in all eyes but her own, incomprehensible and fantastic, and
was opposed accordingly.

There really was no present pecuniary need for her to leave a
comfortable home and "take a situation;" and there was every probability
that her uncle might, in some way, permanently provide for her. So her
friends thought, and, as far as their lights enabled them to see, they
reasoned correctly; but of Caroline's strange sufferings, which she
desired so eagerly to overcome or escape, they had no idea, of her
racked nights and dismal days no suspicion. It was at once impossible
and hopeless to explain; to wait and endure was her only plan. Many that
want food and clothing have cheerier lives and brighter prospects than
she had; many, harassed by poverty, are in a strait less afflictive.

"Now, is your mind quieted?" inquired Shirley. "Will you consent to stay
at home?"

"I shall not leave it against the approbation of my friends," was the
reply; "but I think in time they will be obliged to think as I do."

During this conversation Mrs. Pryor looked far from easy. Her extreme
habitual reserve would rarely permit her to talk freely or to
interrogate others closely. She could think a multitude of questions she
never ventured to put, give advice in her mind which her tongue never
delivered. Had she been alone with Caroline, she might possibly have
said something to the point: Miss Keeldar's presence, accustomed as she
was to it, sealed her lips. Now, as on a thousand other occasions,
inexplicable nervous scruples kept her back from interfering. She merely
showed her concern for Miss Helstone in an indirect way, by asking her
if the fire made her too warm, placing a screen between her chair and
the hearth, closing a window whence she imagined a draught proceeded,
and often and restlessly glancing at her. Shirley resumed: "Having
destroyed your plan," she said, "which I hope I have done, I shall
construct a new one of my own. Every summer I make an excursion. This
season I propose spending two months either at the Scotch lochs or the
English lakes - that is, I shall go there provided you consent to
accompany me. If you refuse, I shall not stir a foot."

"You are very good, Shirley."

"I would be very good if you would let me. I have every disposition to
be good. It is my misfortune and habit, I know, to think of myself
paramount to anybody else; but who is not like me in that respect?
However, when Captain Keeldar is made comfortable, accommodated with all
he wants, including a sensible, genial comrade, it gives him a thorough
pleasure to devote his spare efforts to making that comrade happy. And
should we not be happy, Caroline, in the Highlands? We will go to the
Highlands. We will, if you can bear a sea-voyage, go to the Isles - the
Hebrides, the Shetland, the Orkney Islands. Would you not like that? I
see you would. - Mrs. Pryor, I call you to witness. Her face is all
sunshine at the bare mention of it."

"I should like it much," returned Caroline, to whom, indeed, the notion
of such a tour was not only pleasant, but gloriously reviving. Shirley
rubbed her hands.

"Come; I can bestow a benefit," she exclaimed. "I can do a good deed
with my cash. My thousand a year is not merely a matter of dirty
bank-notes and jaundiced guineas  let me speak respectfully of both,
though, for I adore them , but, it may be, health to the drooping,
strength to the weak, consolation to the sad. I was determined to make
something of it better than a fine old house to live in, than satin
gowns to wear, better than deference from acquaintance and homage from
the poor. Here is to begin. This summer, Caroline, Mrs. Pryor and I go
out into the North Atlantic, beyond the Shetland, perhaps to the Faroe
Isles. We will see seals in Suderoe, and, doubtless, mermaids in
Stromoe. - Caroline is laughing, Mrs. Pryor. I made her laugh; I have
done her good."

"I shall like to go, Shirley," again said Miss Helstone. "I long to hear
the sound of waves - ocean-waves - and to see them as I have imagined them
in dreams, like tossing banks of green light, strewed with vanishing and
reappearing wreaths of foam, whiter than lilies. I shall delight to pass
the shores of those lone rock-islets where the sea-birds live and breed
unmolested. We shall be on the track of the old Scandinavians - of the
Norsemen. We shall almost see the shores of Norway. This is a very vague
delight that I feel, communicated by your proposal, but it is a
delight."

"Will you think of Fitful Head now when you lie awake at night, of gulls
shrieking round it, and waves tumbling in upon it, rather than of the
graves under the rectory back-kitchen?"

"I will try; and instead of musing about remnants of shrouds, and
fragments of coffins, and human bones and mould, I will fancy seals
lying in the sunshine on solitary shores, where neither fisherman nor
hunter ever come; of rock crevices full of pearly eggs bedded in
seaweed; of unscared birds covering white sands in happy flocks."

"And what will become of that inexpressible weight you said you had on
your mind?"

"I will try to forget it in speculation on the sway of the whole great
deep above a herd of whales rushing through the livid and liquid thunder
down from the frozen zone - a hundred of them, perhaps, wallowing,
flashing, rolling in the wake of a patriarch bull, huge enough to have
been spawned before the Flood, such a creature as poor Smart had in his
mind when he said, - 

 'Strong against tides, the enormous whale
 Emerges as he goes.'"

"I hope our bark will meet with no such shoal, or herd as you term it,
Caroline.  I suppose you fancy the sea-mammoths pasturing about the
bases of the 'everlasting hills,' devouring strange provender in the
vast valleys through and above which sea-billows roll.  I should not
like to be capsized by the patriarch bull."

"I suppose you expect to see mermaids, Shirley?"

"One of them, at any rate - I do not bargain for less - and she is to
appear in some such fashion as this. I am to be walking by myself on
deck, rather late of an August evening, watching and being watched by a
full harvest moon. Something is to rise white on the surface of the sea,
over which that moon mounts silent and hangs glorious. The object
glitters and sinks. It rises again. I think I hear it cry with an
articulate voice; I call you up from the cabin; I show you an image,
fair as alabaster, emerging from the dim wave. We both see the long
hair, the lifted and foam-white arm, the oval mirror brilliant as a
star. It glides nearer; a human face is plainly visible - a face in the
style of yours - whose straight, pure  excuse the word, it is
appropriate  - whose straight, pure lineaments paleness does not
disfigure. It looks at us, but not with your eyes. I see a preternatural
lure in its wily glance. It beckons. Were we men, we should spring at
the sign - the cold billow would be dared for the sake of the colder
enchantress; being women, we stand safe, though not dreadless. She
comprehends our unmoved gaze; she feels herself powerless; anger crosses
her front; she cannot charm, but she will appal us; she rises high, and
glides all revealed on the dark wave-ridge. Temptress-terror! monstrous
likeness of ourselves! Are you not glad, Caroline, when at last, and
with a wild shriek, she dives?"

"But, Shirley, she is not like us. We are neither temptresses, nor
terrors, nor monsters."

"Some of our kind, it is said, are all three. There are men who ascribe
to 'woman,' in general, such attributes."

"My dears," here interrupted Mrs. Pryor, "does it not strike you that
your conversation for the last ten minutes has been rather fanciful?"

"But there is no harm in our fancies; is there, ma'am?"

"We are aware that mermaids do not exist; why speak of them as if they
did? How can you find interest in speaking of a nonentity?"

"I don't  know," said Shirley.

"My dear, I think there is an arrival. I heard a step in the lane while
you were talking; and is not that the garden-gate which creaks?"

Shirley stepped to the window.

"Yes, there is some one," said she, turning quietly away; and as she
resumed her seat a sensitive flush animated her face, while a trembling
ray at once kindled and softened her eye. She raised her hand to her
chin, cast her gaze down, and seemed to think as she waited.

The servant announced Mr. Moore, and Shirley turned round when Mr. Moore
appeared at the door. His figure seemed very tall as he entered, and
stood in contrast with the three ladies, none of whom could boast a
stature much beyond the average. He was looking well, better than he had
been known to look for the past twelve months. A sort of renewed youth
glowed in his eye and colour, and an invigorated hope and settled
purpose sustained his bearing. Firmness his countenance still indicated,
but not austerity. It looked as cheerful as it was earnest.

"I am just returned from Stilbro'," he said to Miss Keeldar, as he
greeted her; "and I thought I would call to impart to you the result of
my mission."

"You did right not to keep me in suspense," she said, "and your visit is
well timed. Sit down. We have not finished tea. Are you English enough
to relish tea, or do you faithfully adhere to coffee?"

Moore accepted tea.

"I am learning to be a naturalized Englishman," said he; "my foreign
habits are leaving me one by one."

And now he paid his respects to Mrs. Pryor, and paid them well, with a
grave modesty that became his age compared with hers. Then he looked at
Caroline - not, however, for the first time: his glance had fallen upon
her before. He bent towards her as she sat, gave her his hand, and asked
her how she was. The light from the window did not fall upon Miss
Helstone; her back was turned towards it. A quiet though rather low
reply, a still demeanour, and the friendly protection of early twilight
kept out of view each traitorous symptom. None could affirm that she had
trembled or blushed, that her heart had quaked or her nerves thrilled;
none could prove emotion; a greeting showing less effusion was never
interchanged. Moore took the empty chair near her, opposite Miss
Keeldar. He had placed himself well. His neighbour, screened by the very
closeness of his vicinage from his scrutiny, and sheltered further by
the dusk which deepened each moment, soon regained not merely seeming 
but real mastery of the feelings which had started into insurrection
at the first announcement of his name.

He addressed his conversation to Miss Keeldar.

"I went to the barracks," he said, "and had an interview with Colonel
Ryde. He approved my plans, and promised the aid I wanted. Indeed, he
offered a more numerous force than I require - half a dozen will suffice.
I don't  intend to be swamped by redcoats. They are needed for appearance
rather than anything else. My main reliance is on my own civilians."

"And on their captain," interposed Shirley.

"What, Captain Keeldar?" inquired Moore, slightly smiling, and not
lifting his eyes. The tone of raillery in which he said this was very
respectful and suppressed.

"No," returned Shirley, answering the smile; "Captain Gérard Moore, who
trusts much to the prowess of his own right arm, I believe."

"Furnished with his counting-house ruler," added Moore. Resuming his
usual gravity, he went on: "I received by this evening's post a note
from the Home Secretary in answer to mine. It appears they are uneasy at
the state of matters here in the north; they especially condemn the
supineness and pusillanimity of the mill-owners. They say, as I have
always said, that inaction, under present circumstances, is criminal,
and that cowardice is cruelty, since both can only encourage disorder,
and lead finally to sanguinary outbreaks. There is the note - I brought
it for your perusal; and there is a batch of newspapers, containing
further accounts of proceedings in Nottingham, Manchester, and
elsewhere."

He produced letters and journals, and laid them before Miss Keeldar.
While she perused them he took his tea quietly; but though his tongue
was still, his observant faculties seemed by no means off duty. Mrs.
Pryor, sitting in the background, did not come within the range of his
glance, but the two younger ladies had the full benefit thereof.

Miss Keeldar, placed directly opposite, was seen without effort. She was
the object his eyes, when lifted, naturally met first; and as what
remained of daylight - the gilding of the west - was upon her, her shape
rose in relief from the dark panelling behind. Shirley's clear cheek was
tinted yet with the colour which had risen into it a few minutes since.
The dark lashes of her eyes looking down as she read, the dusk yet
delicate line of her eyebrows, the almost sable gloss of her curls, made
her heightened complexion look fine as the bloom of a red wild flower by
contrast. There was natural grace in her attitude, and there was
artistic effect in the ample and shining folds of her silk dress - an
attire simply fashioned, but almost splendid from the shifting
brightness of its dye, warp and woof being of tints deep and changing as
the hue on a pheasant's neck. A glancing bracelet on her arm produced
the contrast of gold and ivory. There was something brilliant in the
whole picture. It is to be supposed that Moore thought so, as his eye
dwelt long on it, but he seldom permitted his feelings or his opinions
to exhibit themselves in his face. His temperament boasted a certain
amount of phlegm, and he preferred an undemonstrative, not ungentle, but
serious aspect to any other.

He could not, by looking straight before him, see Caroline, as she was
close at his side. It was necessary, therefore, to manouvre a little to
get her well within the range of his observation. He leaned back in his
chair, and looked down on her. In Miss Helstone neither he nor any one
else could discover brilliancy. Sitting in the shade, without flowers
or ornaments, her attire the modest muslin dress, colourless but for its
narrow stripe of pale azure, her complexion unflushed, unexcited, the
very brownness of her hair and eyes invisible by this faint light, she
was, compared with the heiress, as a graceful pencil sketch compared
with a vivid painting. Since Robert had seen her last a great change had
been wrought in her. Whether he perceived it might not be ascertained.
He said nothing to that effect.

"How is Hortense?" asked Caroline softly.

"Very well; but she complains of being unemployed. She misses you."

"Tell her that I miss her, and that I write and read a portion of French
every day."

"She will ask if you sent your love; she is always particular on that
point. You know she likes attention."

"My best love - my very best. And say to her that whenever she has time
to write me a little note I shall be glad to hear from her."

"What if I forget? I am not the surest messenger of compliments."

"No, don't  forget, Robert. It is no compliment; it is in good earnest."

"And must, therefore, be delivered punctually."

"If you please."

"Hortense will be ready to shed tears. She is tenderhearted on the
subject of her pupil; yet she reproaches you sometimes for obeying your
uncle's injunctions too literally. Affection, like love, will be unjust
now and then."

And Caroline made no answer to this observation; for indeed her heart
was troubled, and to her eyes she would have raised her handkerchief if
she had dared. If she had dared, too, she would have declared how the
very flowers in the garden of Hollow's Cottage were dear to her; how the
little parlour of that house was her earthly paradise; how she longed to
return to it, as much almost as the first woman, in her exile, must have
longed to revisit Eden. Not daring, however, to say these things, she
held her peace; she sat quiet at Robert's side, waiting for him to say
something more. It was long since this proximity had been hers - long
since his voice had addressed her; could she, with any show of
probability, even of possibility, have imagined that the meeting gave
him pleasure, to her it would have given deep bliss. Yet, even in doubt
that it pleased, in dread that it might annoy him, she received the
boon of the meeting as an imprisoned bird would the admission of
sunshine to its cage. It was of no use arguing, contending against the
sense of present happiness; to be near Robert was to be revived.

Miss Keeldar laid down the papers.

"And are you glad or sad for all these menacing tidings?" she inquired
of her tenant.

"Not precisely either; but I certainly am instructed. I see that our
only plan is to be firm. I see that efficient preparation and a resolute
attitude are the best means of averting bloodshed."

He then inquired if she had observed some particular paragraph, to which
she replied in the negative, and he rose to show it to her. He continued
the conversation standing before her. From the tenor of what he said, it
appeared evident that they both apprehended disturbances in the
neighbourhood of Briarfield, though in what form they expected them to
break out was not specified. Neither Caroline nor Mrs. Pryor asked
questions. The subject did not appear to be regarded as one ripe for
free discussion; therefore the lady and her tenant were suffered to keep
details to themselves, unimportuned by the curiosity of their listeners.

Miss Keeldar, in speaking to Mr. Moore, took a tone at once animated and
dignified, confidential and self-respecting. When, however, the candles
were brought in, and the fire was stirred up, and the fullness of light
thus produced rendered the expression of her countenance legible, you
could see that she was all interest, life, and earnestness. There was
nothing coquettish in her demeanour; whatever she felt for Moore she
felt it seriously. And serious, too, were his feelings, and settled were
his views, apparently, for he made no petty effort to attract, dazzle,
or impress. He contrived, notwithstanding, to command a little; because
the deeper voice, however mildly modulated, the somewhat harder mind,
now and then, though involuntarily and unintentionally, bore down by
some peremptory phrase or tone the mellow accents and susceptible, if
high, nature of Shirley. Miss Keeldar looked happy in conversing with
him, and her joy seemed twofold - a joy of the past and present, of
memory and of hope.

What I have just said are Caroline's ideas of the pair. She felt what
has just been described. In thus feeling she tried not to suffer, but
suffered sharply nevertheless. She suffered, indeed, miserably. A few
minutes before her famished heart had tasted a drop and crumb of
nourishment, that, if freely given, would have brought back abundance of
life where life was failing; but the generous feast was snatched from
her, spread before another, and she remained but a bystander at the
banquet.

The clock struck nine; it was Caroline's time for going home. She
gathered up her work, put the embroidery, the scissors, the thimble into
her bag. She bade Mrs. Pryor a quiet good-night, receiving from that
lady a warmer pressure of the hand than usual. She stepped up to Miss
Keeldar.

"Good-night, Shirley!"

Shirley started up. "What! so soon? Are you going already?"

"It is past nine."

"I never heard the clock. You will come again to-morrow, and you will be
happy to-night, will you not? Remember our plans."

"Yes," said Caroline; "I have not forgotten."

Her mind misgave her that neither those plans nor any other could
permanently restore her mental tranquillity. She turned to Robert, who
stood close behind her. As he looked up, the light of the candles on the
mantelpiece fell full on her face. All its paleness, all its change, all
its forlorn meaning were clearly revealed. Robert had good eyes, and
might have seen it if he would; whether he did see it, nothing
indicated.

"Good-night!" she said, shaking like a leaf, offering her thin hand
hastily, anxious to part from him quickly.

"You are going home?" he asked, not touching her hand.

"Yes."

"Is Fanny come for you?"

"Yes."

"I may as well accompany you a step of the way; not up to the rectory,
though, lest my old friend Helstone should shoot me from the window."

He laughed, and took his hat. Caroline spoke of unnecessary trouble; he
told her to put on her bonnet and shawl. She was quickly ready, and they
were soon both in the open air. Moore drew her hand under his arm, just
in his old manner - that manner which she ever felt to be so kind.

"You may run on, Fanny," he said to the housemaid; "we shall overtake
you." And when the girl had got a little in advance, he enclosed
Caroline's hand in his, and said he was glad to find she was a familiar
guest at Fieldhead. He hoped her intimacy with Miss Keeldar would
continue; such society would be both pleasant and improving.

Caroline replied that she liked Shirley.

"And there is no doubt the liking is mutual," said Moore. "If she
professes friendship, be certain she is sincere. She cannot feign; she
scorns hypocrisy. And, Caroline, are we never to see you at Hollow's
Cottage again?"

"I suppose not, unless my uncle should change his mind."

"Are you much alone now?"

"Yes, a good deal. I have little pleasure in any society but Miss
Keeldar's."

"Have you been quite well lately?"

"Quite."

"You must take care of yourself. Be sure not to neglect exercise. Do you
know I fancied you somewhat altered - a little fallen away, and pale. Is
your uncle kind to you?"

"Yes; he is just as he always is."

"Not too tender, that is to say - not too protective and attentive. And
what ails you, then? Tell me, Lina."

"Nothing, Robert." But her voice faltered.

"That is to say, nothing that you will tell me. I am not to be taken
into confidence. Separation is then quite to estrange us, is it?"

"I do not know. Sometimes I almost fear it is."

"But it ought not to have that effect. 'Should auld acquaintance be
forgot, and days o' lang syne?'"

"Robert, I don't  forget."

"It is two months, I should think, Caroline, since you were at the
cottage."

"Since I was within it - yes."

"Have you ever passed that way in your walk?"

"I have come to the top of the fields sometimes of an evening and looked
down. Once I saw Hortense in the garden watering her flowers, and I know
at what time you light your lamp in the counting-house. I have waited
for it to shine out now and then, and I have seen you bend between it
and the window. I knew it was you; I could almost trace the outline of
your form."

"I wonder I never encountered you. I occasionally walk to the top of the
Hollow's fields after sunset."

"I know you do. I had almost spoken to you one night, you passed so near
me."

"Did I? I passed near you, and did not see you! Was I alone?"

"I saw you twice, and neither time were you alone."

"Who was my companion? Probably nothing but Joe Scott, or my own shadow
by moonlight."

"No; neither Joe Scott nor your shadow, Robert. The first time you were
with Mr. Yorke; and the second time what you call your shadow was a
shape with a white forehead and dark curls, and a sparkling necklace
round its neck. But I only just got a glimpse of you and that fairy
shadow; I did not wait to hear you converse."

"It appears you walk invisible. I noticed a ring on your hand this
evening; can it be the ring of Gyges? Henceforth, when sitting in the
counting-house by myself, perhaps at dead of night, I shall permit
myself to imagine that Caroline may be leaning over my shoulder reading
with me from the same book, or sitting at my side engaged in her own
particular task, and now and then raising her unseen eyes to my face to
read there my thoughts."

"You need fear no such infliction. I do not come near you; I only stand
afar off, watching what may become of you."

"When I walk out along the hedgerows in the evening after the mill is
shut, or at night when I take the watchman's place, I shall fancy the
flutter of every little bird over its nest, the rustle of every leaf, a
movement made by you; tree-shadows will take your shape; in the white
sprays of hawthorn I shall imagine glimpses of you. Lina, you will haunt
me."

"I will never be where you would not wish me to be, nor see nor hear
what you would wish unseen and unheard."

"I shall see you in my very mill in broad daylight. Indeed, I have seen
you there once. But a week ago I was standing at the top of one of my
long rooms; girls were working at the other end, and amongst half a
dozen of them, moving to and fro, I seemed to see a figure resembling
yours. It was some effect of doubtful light or shade, or of dazzling
sunbeam. I walked up to this group. What I sought had glided away; I
found myself between two buxom lasses in pinafores."

"I shall not follow you into your mill, Robert, unless you call me
there."

"Nor is that the only occasion on which imagination has played me a
trick. One night, when I came home late from market, I walked into the
cottage parlour thinking to find Hortense; but instead of her I thought
I found you. There was no candle in the room; my sister had taken the
light upstairs with her. The window-blind was not drawn, and broad
moonbeams poured through the panes. There you were, Lina, at the
casement, shrinking a little to one side in an attitude not unusual with
you. You were dressed in white, as I have seen you dressed at an evening
party. For half a second your fresh, living face seemed turned towards
me, looking at me; for half a second my idea was to go and take your
hand, to chide you for your long absence, and welcome your present
visit. Two steps forward broke the spell. The drapery of the dress
changed outline; the tints of the complexion dissolved, and were
formless. Positively, as I reached the spot, there was nothing left but
the sweep of a white muslin curtain, and a balsam plant in a flower-pot,
covered with a flush of bloom. 'Sic transit,' et cetera."

"It was not my wraith, then? I almost thought it was."

"No; only gauze, crockery, and pink blossom - a sample of earthly
illusions."

"I wonder you have time for such illusions, occupied as your mind must
be."

"So do I. But I find in myself, Lina, two natures - one for the world and
business, and one for home and leisure. Gérard Moore is a hard dog,
brought up to mill and market; the person you call your cousin Robert is
sometimes a dreamer, who lives elsewhere than in Cloth-hall and
counting-house."

"Your two natures agree with you. I think you are looking in good
spirits and health. You have quite lost that harassed air which it often
pained one to see in your face a few months ago."

"Do you observe that? Certainly I am disentangled of some difficulties.
I have got clear of some shoals, and have more sea-room."

"And, with a fair wind, you may now hope to make a prosperous voyage?"

"I may hope it - yes - but hope is deceptive. There is no controlling
wind or wave. Gusts and swells perpetually trouble the mariner's
course; he dare not dismiss from his mind the expectation of tempest."

"But you are ready for a breeze; you are a good seaman, an able
commander. You are a skilful pilot, Robert; you will weather the storm."

"My kinswoman always thinks the best of me, but I will take her words
for a propitious omen. I will consider that in meeting her to-night I
have met with one of those birds whose appearance is to the sailor the
harbinger of good luck."

"A poor harbinger of good luck is she who can do nothing, who has no
power. I feel my incapacity. It is of no use saying I have the will to
serve you when I cannot prove it. Yet I have that will. I wish you
success. I wish you high fortune and true happiness."

"When did you ever wish me anything else? What is Fanny waiting for? I
told her to walk on. Oh! we have reached the churchyard. Then we are to
part here, I suppose. We might have sat a few minutes in the church
porch, if the girl had not been with us. It is so fine a night, so
summer-mild and still, I have no particular wish to return yet to the
Hollow."

"But we cannot sit in the porch now, Robert."

Caroline said this because Moore was turning her round towards it.

"Perhaps not. But tell Fanny to go in. Say we are coming. A few minutes
will make no difference."

The church clock struck ten.

"My uncle will be coming out to take his usual sentinel round, and he
always surveys the church and churchyard."

"And if he does? If it were not for Fanny, who knows we are here, I
should find pleasure in dodging and eluding him. We could be under the
east window when he is at the porch; as he came round to the north side
we could wheel off to the south; we might at a pinch hide behind some of
the monuments. That tall erection of the Wynnes would screen us
completely."

"Robert, what good spirits you have! Go! go!" added Caroline hastily. "I
hear the front door - - "

"I don't  want to go; on the contrary, I want to stay."

"You know my uncle will be terribly angry. He forbade me to see you
because you are a Jacobin."

"A queer Jacobin!"

"Go, Robert, he is coming; I hear him cough."

"Diable! It is strange - what a pertinacious wish I feel to stay!"

"You remember what he did to Fanny's - " began Caroline, and stopped
abruptly short. "Sweetheart" was the word that ought to have followed,
but she could not utter it. It seemed calculated to suggest ideas she
had no intention to suggest - ideas delusive and disturbing. Moore was
less scrupulous. "Fanny's sweetheart?" he said at once. "He gave him a
shower-bath under the pump, did he not? He'd do as much for me, I dare
say, with pleasure. I should like to provoke the old Turk - not, however,
against you. But he would make a distinction between a cousin and a
lover, would he not?"

"Oh, he would not think of you in that way, of course not; his quarrel
with you is entirely political. Yet I should not like the breach to be
widened, and he is so testy. Here he is at the garden gate. For your own
sake and mine, Robert, go!"

The beseeching words were aided by a beseeching gesture and a more
beseeching look. Moore covered her clasped hands an instant with his,
answered her upward by a downward gaze, said "Good-night!" and went.

Caroline was in a moment at the kitchen door behind Fanny. The shadow of
the shovel-hat at that very instant fell on a moonlit tomb. The rector
emerged, erect as a cane, from his garden, and proceeded in slow march,
his hands behind him, down the cemetery. Moore was almost caught. He had
to "dodge" after all, to coast round the church, and finally to bend his
tall form behind the Wynnes' ambitious monument. There he was forced to
hide full ten minutes, kneeling with one knee on the turf, his hat off,
his curls bare to the dew, his dark eye shining, and his lips parted
with inward laughter at his position; for the rector meantime stood
coolly star-gazing, and taking snuff within three feet of him.

It happened, however, that Mr. Helstone had no suspicion whatever on his
mind; for being usually but vaguely informed of his niece's movements,
not thinking it worth while to follow them closely, he was not aware
that she had been out at all that day, and imagined her then occupied
with book or work in her chamber - where, indeed, she was by this time,
though not absorbed in the tranquil employment he ascribed to her, but
standing at her window with fast-throbbing heart, peeping anxiously from
behind the blind, watching for her uncle to re-enter and her cousin to
escape. And at last she was gratified. She heard Mr. Helstone come in;
she saw Robert stride the tombs and vault the wall; she then went down
to prayers. When she returned to her chamber, it was to meet the memory
of Robert. Slumber's visitation was long averted. Long she sat at her
lattice, long gazed down on the old garden and older church, on the
tombs laid out all gray and calm, and clear in moonlight. She followed
the steps of the night, on its pathway of stars, far into the "wee sma'
hours ayont the twal'." She was with Moore, in spirit, the whole time;
she was at his side; she heard his voice; she gave her hand into his
hand; it rested warm in his fingers. When the church clock struck, when
any other sound stirred, when a little mouse familiar to her chamber - an
intruder for which she would never permit Fanny to lay a trap - came
rattling amongst the links of her locket-chain, her one ring, and
another trinket or two on the toilet-table, to nibble a bit of biscuit
laid ready for it, she looked up, recalled momentarily to the real. Then
she said half aloud, as if deprecating the accusation of some unseen and
unheard monitor, "I am not cherishing love dreams; I am only thinking
because I cannot sleep. Of course, I know he will marry Shirley."

With returning silence, with the lull of the chime, and the retreat of
her small untamed and unknown protégé , she still resumed the dream,
nestling to the vision's side - listening to, conversing with it. It
paled at last. As dawn approached, the setting stars and breaking day
dimmed the creation of fancy; the wakened song of birds hushed her
whispers. The tale full of fire, quick with interest, borne away by the
morning wind, became a vague murmur. The shape that, seen in a moonbeam,
lived, had a pulse, had movement, wore health's glow and youth's
freshness, turned cold and ghostly gray, confronted with the red of
sunrise. It wasted. She was left solitary at last. She crept to her
couch, chill and dejected.




CHAPTER XIV.

SHIRLEY SEEKS TO BE SAVED BY WORKS.


"Of course, I know he will marry Shirley," were her first words when she
rose in the morning. "And he ought to marry her. She can help him," she
added firmly. "But I shall be forgotten when they are married," was
the cruel succeeding thought. "Oh! I shall be wholly forgotten! And
what - what shall I do when Robert is taken quite from me? Where shall
I turn? My Robert! I wish I could justly call him mine. But I am
poverty and incapacity; Shirley is wealth and power. And she is beauty
too, and love. I cannot deny it. This is no sordid suit. She loves
him - not with inferior feelings. She loves, or will love, as he must
feel proud to be loved. Not a valid objection can be made. Let them be
married, then. But afterwards I shall be nothing to him. As for being
his sister, and all that stuff, I despise it. I will either be all or
nothing to a man like Robert; no feeble shuffling or false cant is
endurable. Once let that pair be united, and I will certainly leave
them. As for lingering about, playing the hypocrite, and pretending to
calm sentiments of friendship, when my soul will be wrung with other
feelings, I shall not descend to such degradation. As little could I
fill the place of their mutual friend as that of their deadly foe; as
little could I stand between them as trample over them. Robert is a
first-rate man - in my eyes. I have loved, do love, and must love
him. I would be his wife if I could; as I cannot, I must go where I
shall never see him. There is but one alternative - to cleave to him as
if I were a part of him, or to be sundered from him wide as the two
poles of a sphere. - Sunder me then, Providence. Part us speedily."

Some such aspirations as these were again working in her mind late in
the afternoon, when the apparition of one of the personages haunting her
thoughts passed the parlour window. Miss Keeldar sauntered slowly by,
her gait, her countenance, wearing that mixture of wistfulness and
carelessness which, when quiescent, was the wonted cast of her look and
character of her bearing. When animated, the carelessness quite
vanished, the wistfulness became blent with a genial gaiety, seasoning
the laugh, the smile, the glance, with a unique flavour of sentiment, so
that mirth from her never resembled "the crackling of thorns under a
pot."

"What do you mean by not coming to see me this afternoon, as you
promised?" was her address to Caroline as she entered the room.

"I was not in the humour," replied Miss Helstone, very truly.

Shirley had already fixed on her a penetrating eye.

"No," she said; "I see you are not in the humour for loving me. You are
in one of your sunless, inclement moods, when one feels a
fellow-creature's presence is not welcome to you. You have such moods.
Are you aware of it?"

"Do you mean to stay long, Shirley?"

"Yes. I am come to have my tea, and must have it before I go. I shall
take the liberty, then, of removing my bonnet, without being asked."

And this she did, and then stood on the rug with her hands behind her.

"A pretty expression you have in your countenance," she went on, still
gazing keenly, though not inimically - rather indeed pityingly - at
Caroline. "Wonderfully self-supported you look, you solitude-seeking,
wounded deer. Are you afraid Shirley will worry you if she discovers
that you are hurt, and that you bleed?"

"I never do fear Shirley."

"But sometimes you dislike her; often you avoid her. Shirley can feel
when she is slighted and shunned. If you had not walked home in the
company you did last night, you would have been a different girl to-day.
What time did you reach the rectory?"

"By ten."

"Humph! You took three-quarters of an hour to walk a mile. Was it you,
or Moore, who lingered so?"

"Shirley, you talk nonsense."

" He talked nonsense - that I doubt not; or he looked it, which is a
thousand times worse. I see the reflection of his eyes on your forehead
at this moment. I feel disposed to call him out, if I could only get a
trustworthy second. I feel desperately irritated. I felt so last night,
and have felt it all day."

"You don't  ask me why," she proceeded, after a pause, "you little
silent, over-modest thing; and you don't  deserve that I should pour out
my secrets into your lap without an invitation. Upon my word, I could
have found it in my heart to have dogged Moore yesterday evening with
dire intent. I have pistols, and can use them."

"Stuff, Shirley! Which would you have shot - me or Robert?"

"Neither, perhaps. Perhaps myself - more likely a bat or a tree-bough. He
is a puppy, your cousin - a quiet, serious, sensible, judicious,
ambitious puppy. I see him standing before me, talking his half-stern,
half-gentle talk, bearing me down  as I am very conscious he does  with
his fixity of purpose, etc.; and then - I have no patience with him!"

Miss Keeldar started off on a rapid walk through the room, repeating
energetically that she had no patience with men in general, and with her
tenant in particular.

"You are mistaken," urged Caroline, in some anxiety. "Robert is no puppy
or male flirt; I can vouch for that."

" You vouch for it! Do you think I'll take your word on the subject?
There is no one's testimony I would not credit sooner than yours. To
advance Moore's fortune you would cut off your right hand."

"But not tell lies. And if I speak the truth, I must assure you that he
was just civil to me last night - that was all."

"I never asked what he was. I can guess. I saw him from the window take
your hand in his long fingers, just as he went out at my gate."

"That is nothing. I am not a stranger, you know. I am an old
acquaintance, and his cousin."

"I feel indignant, and that is the long and short of the matter,"
responded Miss Keeldar. "All my comfort," she added presently, "is
broken up by his manouvres. He keeps intruding between you and me.
Without him we should be good friends; but that six feet of puppyhood
makes a perpetually-recurring eclipse of our friendship. Again and again
he crosses and obscures the disc I want always to see clear; ever and
anon he renders me to you a mere bore and nuisance."

"No, Shirley, no."

"He does. You did not want my society this afternoon, and I feel it
hard. You are naturally somewhat reserved, but I am a social personage,
who cannot live alone. If we were but left unmolested, I have that
regard for you that I could bear you in my presence for ever, and not
for the fraction of a second do I ever wish to be rid of you. You cannot
say as much respecting me."

"Shirley, I can say anything you wish. Shirley, I like you."

"You will wish me at Jericho to-morrow, Lina."

"I shall not. I am every day growing more accustomed to - fonder of you.
You know I am too English to get up a vehement friendship all at once;
but you are so much better than common - you are so different to
every-day young ladies - I esteem you, I value you; you are never a
burden to me - never. Do you believe what I say?"

"Partly," replied Miss Keeldar, smiling rather incredulously; "but you
are a peculiar personage. Quiet as you look, there is both a force and a
depth somewhere within not easily reached or appreciated. Then you
certainly are not happy."

"And unhappy people are rarely good. Is that what you mean?"

"Not at all. I mean rather that unhappy people are often preoccupied,
and not in the mood for discoursing with companions of my nature.
Moreover, there is a sort of unhappiness which not only depresses, but
corrodes; and that, I fear, is your portion. Will pity do you any good,
Lina? If it will, take some from Shirley; she offers largely, and
warrants the article genuine."

"Shirley, I never had a sister - you never had a sister; but it flashes
on me at this moment how sisters feel towards each other - affection
twined with their life, which no shocks of feeling can uproot, which
little quarrels only trample an instant, that it may spring more freshly
when the pressure is removed; affection that no passion can ultimately
outrival, with which even love itself cannot do more than compete in
force and truth. Love hurts us so, Shirley. It is so tormenting, so
racking, and it burns away our strength with its flame. In affection is
no pain and no fire, only sustenance and balm. I am supported and
soothed when you - that is, you only - are near, Shirley. Do you
believe me now?"

"I am always easy of belief when the creed pleases me. We really are
friends, then, Lina, in spite of the black eclipse?"

"We really are," returned the other, drawing Shirley towards her, and
making her sit down, "chance what may."

"Come, then; we will talk of something else than the Troubler." But at
this moment the rector came in, and the 'something else" of which Miss
Keeldar was about to talk was not again alluded to till the moment of
her departure. She then delayed a few minutes in the passage to say,
"Caroline, I wish to tell you that I have a great weight on my mind; my
conscience is quite uneasy as if I had committed, or was going to
commit, a crime. It is not my private conscience, you must understand,
but my landed-proprietor and lord-of-the-manor conscience. I have got
into the clutch of an eagle with iron talons. I have fallen under a
stern influence, which I scarcely approve, but cannot resist. Something
will be done ere long, I fear, which it by no means pleases me to think
of. To ease my mind, and to prevent harm as far as I can, I mean to
enter on a series of good works. Don't  be surprised, therefore, if you
see me all at once turn outrageously charitable. I have no idea how to
begin, but you must give me some advice. We will talk more on the
subject to-morrow; and just ask that excellent person, Miss Ainley, to
step up to Fieldhead. I have some notion of putting myself under her
tuition. Won't  she have a precious pupil? Drop a hint to her, Lina,
that, though a well-meaning, I am rather a neglected character, and then
she will feel less scandalized at my ignorance about clothing societies
and such things."

On the morrow Caroline found Shirley sitting gravely at her desk, with
an account-book, a bundle of banknotes, and a well-filled purse before
her. She was looking mighty serious, but a little puzzled. She said she
had been "casting an eye" over the weekly expenditure in housekeeping at
the hall, trying to find out where she could retrench; that she had also
just given audience to Mrs. Gill, the cook, and had sent that person
away with a notion that her  Shirley's  brain was certainly crazed. "I
have lectured her on the duty of being careful," said she, "in a way
quite new to her. So eloquent was I on the text of economy that I
surprised myself; for, you see, it is altogether a fresh idea. I never
thought, much less spoke, on the subject till lately. But it is all
theory; for when I came to the practical part I could retrench nothing.
I had not firmness to take off a single pound of butter, or to prosecute
to any clear result an inquest into the destiny of either dripping,
lard, bread, cold meat, or other kitchen perquisite whatever. I know we
never get up illuminations at Fieldhead, but I could not ask the meaning
of sundry quite unaccountable pounds of candles. We do not wash for the
parish, yet I viewed in silence items of soap and bleaching-powder
calculated to satisfy the solicitude of the most anxious inquirer after
our position in reference to those articles. Carnivorous I am not, nor
is Mrs. Pryor, nor is Mrs. Gill herself, yet I only hemmed and opened my
eyes a little wide when I saw butchers' bills whose figures seemed to
prove that fact - falsehood, I mean. Caroline, you may laugh at me, but
you can't  change me. I am a poltroon on certain points; I feel it. There
is a base alloy of moral cowardice in my composition. I blushed and hung
my head before Mrs. Gill, when she ought to have been faltering
confessions to me. I found it impossible to get up the spirit even to
hint, much less to prove, to her that she was a cheat. I have no calm
dignity, no true courage about me."

"Shirley, what fit of self-injustice is this? My uncle, who is not given
to speak well of women, says there are not ten thousand men in England
as genuinely fearless as you."

"I am fearless, physically; I am never nervous about danger. I was not
startled from self-possession when Mr. Wynne's great red bull rose with
a bellow before my face, as I was crossing the cowslip lea alone,
stooped his begrimed, sullen head, and made a run at me; but I was
afraid of seeing Mrs. Gill brought to shame and confusion of face. You
have twice - ten times - my strength of mind on certain subjects,
Caroline. You, whom no persuasion can induce to pass a bull, however
quiet he looks, would have firmly shown my housekeeper she had done
wrong; then you would have gently and wisely admonished her; and at
last, I dare say, provided she had seemed penitent, you would have very
sweetly forgiven her. Of this conduct I am incapable. However, in spite
of exaggerated imposition, I still find we live within our means. I have
money in hand, and I really must do some good with it. The Briarfield
poor are badly off; they must be helped. What ought I to do, think you,
Lina? Had I not better distribute the cash at once?"

"No, indeed, Shirley; you will not manage properly. I have often noticed
that your only notion of charity is to give shillings and half-crowns in
a careless, free-handed sort of way, which is liable to continual abuse.
You must have a prime minister, or you will get yourself into a series
of scrapes. You suggested Miss Ainley yourself; to Miss Ainley I will
apply. And, meantime, promise to keep quiet, and not begin throwing away
your money. What a great deal you have, Shirley! You must feel very rich
with all that?"

"Yes; I feel of consequence. It is not an immense sum, but I feel
responsible for its disposal; and really this responsibility weighs on
my mind more heavily than I could have expected. They say that there are
some families almost starving to death in Briarfield. Some of my own
cottagers are in wretched circumstances. I must and will help them."

"Some people say we shouldn't  give alms to the poor, Shirley."

"They are great fools for their pains. For those who are not hungry, it
is easy to palaver about the degradation of charity, and so on: but they
forget the brevity of life, as well as its bitterness. We have none of
us long to live. Let us help each other through seasons of want and woe
as well as we can, without heeding in the least the scruples of vain
philosophy."

"But you do help others, Shirley. You give a great deal as it is."

"Not enough. I must give more, or, I tell you, my brother's blood will
some day be crying to Heaven against me. For, after all, if political
incendiaries come here to kindle conflagration in the neighbourhood, and
my property is attacked, I shall defend it like a tigress - I know I
shall. Let me listen to Mercy as long as she is near me. Her voice once
drowned by the shout of ruffian defiance, and I shall be full of
impulses to resist and quell. If once the poor gather and rise in the
form of the mob, I shall turn against them as an aristocrat; if they
bully me, I must defy: if they attack, I must resist, and I will."

"You talk like Robert."

"I feel like Robert, only more fierily. Let them meddle with Robert, or
Robert's mill, or Robert's interests, and I shall hate them. At present
I am no patrician, nor do I regard the poor around me as plebeians; but
if once they violently wrong me or mine, and then presume to dictate to
us, I shall quite forget pity for their wretchedness and respect for
their poverty, in scorn of their ignorance and wrath at their
insolence."

"Shirley, how your eyes flash!"

"Because my soul burns. Would you, any more than me, let Robert be borne
down by numbers?"

"If I had your power to aid Robert, I would use it as you mean to use
it. If I could be such a friend to him as you can be, I would stand by
him, as you mean to stand by him, till death."

"And now, Lina, though your eyes don't  flash, they glow. You drop your
lids; but I saw a kindled spark. However, it is not yet come to
fighting. What I want to do is to prevent mischief. I cannot forget,
either day or night, that these embittered feelings of the poor against
the rich have been generated in suffering: they would neither hate nor
envy us if they did not deem us so much happier than themselves. To
allay this suffering, and thereby lessen this hate, let me, out of my
abundance, give abundantly; and that the donation may go farther, let it
be made wisely. To that intent, we must introduce some clear, calm,
practical sense into our councils. So go and fetch Miss Ainley."

Without another word Caroline put on her bonnet and departed. It may,
perhaps, appear strange that neither she nor Shirley thought of
consulting Mrs. Pryor on their scheme; but they were wise in abstaining.
To have consulted her - and this they knew by instinct - would only have
been to involve her in painful embarrassment. She was far better
informed, better read, a deeper thinker than Miss Ainley, but of
administrative energy, of executive activity, she had none. She would
subscribe her own modest mite to a charitable object willingly - secret
almsgiving suited her; but in public plans, on a large scale, she could
take no part; as to originating them, that was out of the question. This
Shirley knew, and therefore she did not trouble Mrs. Pryor by unavailing
conferences, which could only remind her of her own deficiencies, and do
no good.

It was a bright day for Miss Ainley when she was summoned to Fieldhead
to deliberate on projects so congenial to her; when she was seated with
all honour and deference at a table with paper, pen, ink, and - what was
best of all - cash before her, and requested to draw up a regular plan
for administering relief to the destitute poor of Briarfield. She, who
knew them all, had studied their wants, had again and again felt in what
way they might best be succoured, could the means of succour only be
found, was fully competent to the undertaking, and a meek exultation
gladdened her kind heart as she felt herself able to answer clearly and
promptly the eager questions put by the two young girls, as she showed
them in her answers how much and what serviceable knowledge she had
acquired of the condition of her fellow-creatures around her.

Shirley placed at her disposal L300, and at sight of the money Miss
Ainley's eyes filled with joyful tears; for she already saw the hungry
fed, the naked clothed, the sick comforted thereby. She quickly drew up
a simple, sensible plan for its expenditure; and she assured them
brighter times would now come round, for she doubted not the lady of
Fieldhead's example would be followed by others. She should try to get
additional subscriptions, and to form a fund; but first she must consult
the clergy. Yes, on that point she was peremptory. Mr. Helstone, Dr.
Boultby, Mr. Hall, must be consulted  for not only must Briarfield be
relieved, but Whinbury and Nunnely . It would, she averred, be
presumption in her to take a single step unauthorized by them.

The clergy were sacred beings in Miss Ainley's eyes; no matter what
might be the insignificance of the individual, his station made him
holy. The very curates - who, in their trivial arrogance, were hardly
worthy to tie her patten-strings, or carry her cotton umbrella, or check
woollen shawl - she, in her pure, sincere enthusiasm, looked upon as
sucking saints. No matter how clearly their little vices and enormous
absurdities were pointed out to her, she could not see them; she was
blind to ecclesiastical defects; the white surplice covered a multitude
of sins.

Shirley, knowing this harmless infatuation on the part of her
recently-chosen prime minister, stipulated expressly that the curates
were to have no voice in the disposal of the money, that their meddling
fingers were not to be inserted into the pie. The rectors, of course,
must be paramount, and they might be trusted. They had some experience,
some sagacity, and Mr. Hall, at least, had sympathy and loving-kindness
for his fellow-men; but as for the youth under them, they must be set
aside, kept down, and taught that subordination and silence best became
their years and capacity.

It was with some horror Miss Ainley heard this language. Caroline,
however, interposing with a mild word or two in praise of Mr Sweeting,
calmed her again. Sweeting was, indeed, her own favourite. She
endeavoured to respect Messrs. Malone and Donne, but the slices of
sponge-cake and glasses of cowslip or primrose wine she had at different
times administered to Sweeting, when he came to see her in her little
cottage, were ever offered with sentiments of truly motherly regard. The
same innocuous collation she had once presented to Malone; but that
personage evinced such open scorn of the offering, she had never
ventured to renew it. To Donne she always served the treat, and was
happy to see his approbation of it proved beyond a doubt by the fact of
his usually eating two pieces of cake, and putting a third in his
pocket.

Indefatigable in her exertions where good was to be done, Miss Ainley
would immediately have set out on a walk of ten miles round to the three
rectors, in order to show her plan, and humbly solicit their approval;
but Miss Keeldar interdicted this, and proposed, as an amendment, to
collect the clergy in a small select reunion that evening at Fieldhead.
Miss Ainley was to meet them, and the plan was to be discussed in full
privy council.

Shirley managed to get the senior priesthood together accordingly, and
before the old maid's arrival, she had, further, talked all the
gentlemen into the most charming mood imaginable. She herself had taken
in hand Dr. Boultby and Mr. Helstone. The first was a stubborn old
Welshman, hot, opinionated, and obstinate, but withal a man who did a
great deal of good, though not without making some noise about it. The
latter we know. She had rather a friendly feeling for both, especially
for old Helstone; and it cost her no trouble to be quite delightful to
them. She took them round the garden; she gathered them flowers; she was
like a kind daughter to them. Mr. Hall she left to Caroline - or rather,
it was to Caroline's care Mr. Hall consigned himself.

He generally sought Caroline in every party where she and he happened to
be. He was not in general a lady's man, though all ladies liked him;
something of a book-worm he was, near-sighted, spectacled, now and then
abstracted. To old ladies he was kind as a son. To men of every
occupation and grade he was acceptable. The truth, simplicity, frankness
of his manners, the nobleness of his integrity, the reality and
elevation of his piety, won him friends in every grade. His poor clerk
and sexton delighted in him; the noble patron of his living esteemed him
highly. It was only with young, handsome, fashionable, and stylish
ladies he felt a little shy. Being himself a plain man - plain in aspect,
plain in manners, plain in speech - he seemed to fear their dash,
elegance, and airs. But Miss Helstone had neither dash nor airs, and her
native elegance was of a very quiet order - quiet as the beauty of a
ground-loving hedge-flower. He was a fluent, cheerful, agreeable talker.
Caroline could talk too in a tete-a-tete . She liked Mr. Hall to come
and take the seat next her in a party, and thus secure her from Peter
Augustus Malone, Joseph Donne, or John Sykes; and Mr. Hall never failed
to avail himself of this privilege when he possibly could. Such
preference shown by a single gentleman to a single lady would certainly,
in ordinary cases, have set in motion the tongues of the gossips; but
Cyril Hall was forty-five years old, slightly bald, and slightly gray,
and nobody ever said or thought he was likely to be married to Miss
Helstone. Nor did he think so himself. He was wedded already to his
books and his parish. His kind sister Margaret, spectacled and learned
like himself, made him happy in his single state; he considered it too
late to change. Besides, he had known Caroline as a pretty little girl.
She had sat on his knee many a time; he had bought her toys and given
her books; he felt that her friendship for him was mixed with a sort of
filial respect; he could not have brought himself to attempt to give
another colour to her sentiments, and his serene mind could glass a fair
image without feeling its depths troubled by the reflection.

When Miss Ainley arrived, she was made kindly welcome by every one. Mrs.
Pryor and Margaret Hall made room for her on the sofa between them; and
when the three were seated, they formed a trio which the gay and
thoughtless would have scorned, indeed, as quite worthless and
unattractive - a middle-aged widow and two plain, spectacled old
maids - yet which had its own quiet value, as many a suffering and
friendless human being knew.

Shirley opened the business and showed the plan.

"I know the hand which drew up that," said Mr. Hall, glancing at Miss
Ainley, and smiling benignantly. His approbation was won at once.
Boultby heard and deliberated with bent brow and protruded under lip.
His consent he considered too weighty to be given in a hurry. Helstone
glanced sharply round with an alert, suspicious expression, as if he
apprehended that female craft was at work, and that something in
petticoats was somehow trying underhand to acquire too much influence,
and make itself of too much importance. Shirley caught and comprehended
the expression. "This scheme is nothing," said she carelessly. "It is
only an outline - a mere suggestion. You, gentlemen, are requested to
draw up rules of your own."

And she directly fetched her writing-case, smiling queerly to herself as
she bent over the table where it stood. She produced a sheet of paper, a
new pen, drew an arm-chair to the table, and presenting her hand to old
Helstone, begged permission to install him in it. For a minute he was a
little stiff, and stood wrinkling his copper-coloured forehead
strangely. At last he muttered, "Well, you are neither my wife nor my
daughter, so I'll be led for once; but mind - I know I am led. Your
little female manouvres don't  blind me."

"Oh!" said Shirley, dipping the pen in the ink, and putting it into his
hand, "you must regard me as Captain Keeldar to-day. This is quite a
gentleman's affair - yours and mine entirely, doctor"  so she had dubbed
the rector . "The ladies there are only to be our aides-de-camp, and at
their peril they speak, till we have settled the whole business."

He smiled a little grimly, and began to write. He soon interrupted
himself to ask questions, and consult his brethren, disdainfully lifting
his glance over the curly heads of the two girls and the demure caps of
the elder ladies, to meet the winking glasses and gray pates of the
priests. In the discussion which ensued, all three gentlemen, to their
infinite credit, showed a thorough acquaintance with the poor of their
parishes - an even minute knowledge of their separate wants. Each rector
knew where clothing was needed, where food would be most acceptable,
where money could be bestowed with a probability of it being judiciously
laid out. Wherever their memories fell short, Miss Ainley or Miss Hall,
if applied to, could help them out; but both ladies took care not to
speak unless spoken to. Neither of them wanted to be foremost, but each
sincerely desired to be useful; and useful the clergy consented to make
them - with which boon they were content.

Shirley stood behind the rectors, leaning over their shoulders now and
then to glance at the rules drawn up and the list of cases making out,
listening to all they said, and still at intervals smiling her queer
smile - a smile not ill-natured, but significant - too significant to be
generally thought amiable. Men rarely like such of their fellows as read
their inward nature too clearly and truly. It is good for women,
especially, to be endowed with a soft blindness; to have mild, dim eyes,
that never penetrate below the surface of things - that take all for what
it seems. Thousands, knowing this, keep their eyelids drooped on system;
but the most downcast glance has its loophole, through which it can, on
occasion, take its sentinel-survey of life. I remember once seeing a
pair of blue eyes, that were usually thought sleepy, secretly on the
alert, and I knew by their expression - an expression which chilled my
blood, it was in that quarter so wondrously unexpected - that for years
they had been accustomed to silent soul-reading. The world called the
owner of these blue eyes bonne petite femme  she was not an
Englishwoman . I learned her nature afterwards - got it off by
heart - studied it in its farthest, most hidden recesses. She was the
finest, deepest, subtlest schemer in Europe.

When all was at length settled to Miss Keeldar's mind, and the clergy
had entered so fully into the spirit of her plans as to head the
subscription-list with their signatures for L50 each, she ordered supper
to be served, having previously directed Mrs. Gill to exercise her
utmost skill in the preparation of this repast. Mr. Hall was no bon
vivant - he was naturally an abstemious man, indifferent to luxury; but
Boultby and Helstone both liked good cookery. The recherché supper
consequently put them into excellent humour. They did justice to it,
though in a gentlemanly way - not in the mode Mr. Donne would have done
had he been present. A glass of fine wine was likewise tasted, with
discerning though most decorous relish. Captain Keeldar was complimented
on his taste; the compliment charmed him. It had been his aim to gratify
and satisfy his priestly guests. He had succeeded, and was radiant with
glee.




CHAPTER XV.

MR. DONNE'S EXODUS.


The next day Shirley expressed to Caroline how delighted she felt that
the little party had gone off so well.

"I rather like to entertain a circle of gentlemen," said she. "It is
amusing to observe how they enjoy a judiciously concocted repast. For
ourselves, you see, these choice wines and these scientific dishes are
of no importance to us; but gentlemen seem to retain something of the
 naiveté of children about food, and one likes to please them - that is,
when they show the becoming, decent self-government of our admirable
rectors. I watch Moore sometimes, to try and discover how he can be
pleased; but he has not that child's simplicity about him. Did you ever
find out his accessible point, Caroline? you have seen more of him than
I."

"It is not, at any rate, that of my uncle and Dr. Boultby," returned
Caroline, smiling. She always felt a sort of shy pleasure in following
Miss Keeldar's lead respecting the discussion of her cousin's character.
Left to herself, she would never have touched on the subject; but when
invited, the temptation of talking about him of whom she was ever
thinking was irresistible. "But," she added, "I really don't  know what
it is, for I never watched Robert in my life but my scrutiny was
presently baffled by finding he was watching me."

"There it is!" exclaimed Shirley. "You can't  fix your eyes on him but
his presently flash on you. He is never off his guard. He won't  give you
an advantage. Even when he does not look at you, his thoughts seem to be
busy amongst your own thoughts, tracing your words and actions to their
source, contemplating your motives at his ease. Oh! I know that sort of
character, or something in the same style. It is one that piques me
singularly. How does it affect you?"

This question was a specimen of one of Shirley's sharp, sudden turns.
Caroline used to be fluttered by them at first, but she had now got into
the way of parrying these home-thrusts like a little Quakeress.

"Pique you? In what way does it pique you?" she said.

"Here he comes!" suddenly exclaimed Shirley, breaking off, starting up
and running to the window. "Here comes a diversion. I never told you of
a superb conquest I have made lately - made at those parties to which I
can never persuade you to accompany me; and the thing has been done
without effort or intention on my part - that I aver. There is the
bell - and, by all that's delicious! there are two of them. Do they never
hunt, then, except in couples? You may have one, Lina, and you may take
your choice. I hope I am generous enough. Listen to Tartar!"

The black-muzzled, tawny dog, a glimpse of which was seen in the chapter
which first introduced its mistress to the reader, here gave tongue in
the hall, amidst whose hollow space the deep bark resounded formidably.
A growl more terrible than the bark, menacing as muttered thunder,
succeeded.

"Listen!" again cried Shirley, laughing. "You would think that the
prelude to a bloody onslaught. They will be frightened. They don't  know
old Tartar as I do. They are not aware his uproars are all sound and
fury, signifying nothing!"

Some bustle was heard. "Down, sir, down!" exclaimed a high-toned,
imperious voice, and then came a crack of a cane or whip. Immediately
there was a yell - a scutter - a run - a positive tumult.

"O Malone, Malone!"

"Down! down! down!" cried the high voice.

"He really is worrying them!" exclaimed Shirley. "They have struck him.
A blow is what he is not used to, and will not take."

Out she ran. A gentleman was fleeing up the oak staircase, making for
refuge in the gallery or chambers in hot haste; another was backing fast
to the stairfoot, wildly flourishing a knotty stick, at the same time
reiterating, "Down! down! down!" while the tawny dog bayed, bellowed,
howled at him, and a group of servants came bundling from the kitchen.
The dog made a spring; the second gentleman turned tail and rushed after
his comrade. The first was already safe in a bedroom; he held the door
against his fellow - nothing so merciless as terror. But the other
fugitive struggled hard; the door was about to yield to his strength.

"Gentlemen," was uttered in Miss Keeldar's silvery but vibrating tones,
'spare my locks, if you please. Calm yourselves! Come down! Look at
Tartar; he won't  harm a cat."

She was caressing the said Tartar. He lay crouched at her feet, his fore
paws stretched out, his tail still in threatening agitation, his
nostrils snorting, his bulldog eyes conscious of a dull fire. He was an
honest, phlegmatic, stupid, but stubborn canine character. He loved his
mistress and John - the man who fed him - but was mostly indifferent to
the rest of the world. Quiet enough he was, unless struck or threatened
with a stick, and that put a demon into him at once.

"Mr. Malone, how do you do?" continued Shirley, lifting up her mirth-lit
face to the gallery. "That is not the way to the oak parlour; that is
Mrs. Pryor's apartment. Request your friend Mr. Donne to evacuate. I
shall have the greatest pleasure in receiving him in a lower room."

"Ha! ha!" cried Malone, in hollow laughter, quitting the door, and
leaning over the massive balustrade. "Really that animal alarmed Donne.
He is a little timid," he proceeded, stiffening himself, and walking
trimly to the stairhead. "I thought it better to follow, in order to
reassure him."

"It appears you did. Well, come down, if you please. - John"  turning to
her manservant , "go upstairs and liberate Mr. Donne. - Take care, Mr.
Malone; the stairs are slippery."

In truth they were, being of polished oak. The caution came a little
late for Malone. He had slipped already in his stately descent, and was
only saved from falling by a clutch at the banisters, which made the
whole structure creak again.

Tartar seemed to think the visitor's descent effected with unwarranted
 éclat , and accordingly he growled once more. Malone, however, was no
coward. The spring of the dog had taken him by surprise, but he passed
him now in suppressed fury rather than fear. If a look could have
strangled Tartar, he would have breathed no more. Forgetting politeness
in his sullen rage, Malone pushed into the parlour before Miss Keeldar.
He glanced at Miss Helstone; he could scarcely bring himself to bend to
her. He glared on both the ladies. He looked as if, had either of them
been his wife, he would have made a glorious husband at the moment. In
each hand he seemed as if he would have liked to clutch one and gripe
her to death.

However, Shirley took pity. She ceased to laugh; and Caroline was too
true a lady to smile even at any one under mortification. Tartar was
dismissed; Peter Augustus was soothed - for Shirley had looks and tones
that might soothe a very bull. He had sense to feel that, since he could
not challenge the owner of the dog, he had better be civil. And civil he
tried to be; and his attempts being well received, he grew presently
 very civil and quite himself again. He had come, indeed, for the
express purpose of making himself charming and fascinating. Rough
portents had met him on his first admission to Fieldhead; but that
passage got over, charming and fascinating he resolved to be. Like
March, having come in like a lion, he purposed to go out like a lamb.

For the sake of air, as it appeared, or perhaps for that of ready exit
in case of some new emergency arising, he took his seat, - not on the
sofa, where Miss Keeldar offered him enthronization, nor yet near the
fireside, to which Caroline, by a friendly sign, gently invited him, but
on a chair close to the door. Being no longer sullen or furious, he
grew, after his fashion, constrained and embarrassed. He talked to the
ladies by fits and starts, choosing for topics whatever was most
intensely commonplace. He sighed deeply, significantly, at the close of
every sentence; he sighed in each pause; he sighed ere he opened his
mouth. At last, finding it desirable to add ease to his other charms, he
drew forth to aid him an ample silk pocket-handkerchief. This was to be
the graceful toy with which his unoccupied hands were to trifle. He went
to work with a certain energy. He folded the red-and-yellow square
cornerwise; he whipped it open with a waft; again he folded it in
narrower compass; he made of it a handsome band. To what purpose would
he proceed to apply the ligature? Would he wrap it about his throat - his
head? Should it be a comforter or a turban? Neither. Peter Augustus had
an inventive, an original genius. He was about to show the ladies graces
of action possessing at least the charm of novelty. He sat on the chair
with his athletic Irish legs crossed, and these legs, in that attitude,
he circled with the bandana and bound firmly together. It was evident
he felt this device to be worth an encore; he repeated it more than
once. The second performance sent Shirley to the window, to laugh her
silent but irrepressible laugh unseen; it turned Caroline's head aside,
that her long curls might screen the smile mantling on her features.
Miss Helstone, indeed, was amused by more than one point in Peter's
demeanour. She was edified at the complete though abrupt diversion of
his homage from herself to the heiress. The L5,000 he supposed her
likely one day to inherit were not to be weighed in the balance against
Miss Keeldar's estate and hall. He took no pains to conceal his
calculations and tactics. He pretended to no gradual change of views; he
wheeled about at once. The pursuit of the lesser fortune was openly
relinquished for that of the greater. On what grounds he expected to
succeed in his chase himself best knew; certainly not by skilful
management.

From the length of time that elapsed, it appeared that John had some
difficulty in persuading Mr. Donne to descend. At length, however, that
gentleman appeared; nor, as he presented himself at the oak-parlour
door, did he seem in the slightest degree ashamed or confused - not a
whit. Donne, indeed, was of that coldly phlegmatic, immovably
complacent, densely self-satisfied nature which is insensible to shame.
He had never blushed in his life; no humiliation could abash him; his
nerves were not capable of sensation enough to stir his life and make
colour mount to his cheek; he had no fire in his blood and no modesty in
his soul; he was a frontless, arrogant, decorous slip of the
commonplace - conceited, inane, insipid; and this gentleman had a notion
of wooing Miss Keeldar! He knew no more, however, how to set about the
business than if he had been an image carved in wood. He had no idea of
a taste to be pleased, a heart to be reached in courtship. His notion
was, when he should have formally visited her a few times, to write a
letter proposing marriage. Then he calculated she would accept him for
love of his office; then they would be married; then he should be master
of Fieldhead; and he should live very comfortably, have servants at his
command, eat and drink of the best, and be a great man. You would not
have suspected his intentions when he addressed his intended bride in an
impertinent, injured tone - "A very dangerous dog that, Miss Keeldar. I
wonder you should keep such an animal."

"Do you, Mr. Donne? Perhaps you will wonder more when I tell you I am
very fond of him."

"I should say you are not serious in the assertion. Can't  fancy a lady
fond of that brute - 'tis so ugly - a mere carter's dog. Pray hang him."

"Hang what I am fond of!"

"And purchase in his stead some sweetly pooty pug or poodle - something
appropriate to the fair sex. Ladies generally like lap-dogs."

"Perhaps I am an exception."

"Oh, you can't  be, you know. All ladies are alike in those matters. That
is universally allowed."

"Tartar frightened you terribly, Mr. Donne. I hope you won't  take any
harm."

"That I shall, no doubt. He gave me a turn I shall not soon forget. When
I sor him"  such was Mr. Donne's pronunciation  "about to spring, I
thought I should have fainted."

"Perhaps you did faint in the bedroom; you were a long time there."

"No; I bore up that I might hold the door fast. I was determined not to
let any one enter. I thought I would keep a barrier between me and the
enemy."

"But what if your friend Mr. Malone had been worried?"

"Malone must take care of himself. Your man persuaded me to come out at
last by saying the dog was chained up in his kennel. If I had not been
assured of this, I would have remained all day in the chamber. But what
is that? I declare the man has told a falsehood! The dog is there!"

And indeed Tartar walked past the glass door opening to the garden,
stiff, tawny, and black-muzzled as ever. He still seemed in bad humour.
He was growling again, and whistling a half-strangled whistle, being an
inheritance from the bulldog side of his ancestry.

"There are other visitors coming," observed Shirley, with that provoking
coolness which the owners of formidable-looking dogs are apt to show
while their animals are all bristle and bay. Tartar sprang down the
pavement towards the gate, bellowing avec explosion . His mistress
quietly opened the glass door, and stepped out chirruping to him. His
bellow was already silenced, and he was lifting up his huge, blunt,
stupid head to the new callers to be patted.

"What! Tartar, Tartar!" said a cheery, rather boyish voice, "don't  you
know us? Good-morning, old boy!"

And little Mr. Sweeting, whose conscious good nature made him
comparatively fearless of man, woman, child, or brute, came through the
gate, caressing the guardian. His vicar, Mr. Hall, followed. He had no
fear of Tartar either, and Tartar had no ill-will to him. He snuffed
both the gentlemen round, and then, as if concluding that they were
harmless, and might be allowed to pass, he withdrew to the sunny front
of the hall, leaving the archway free. Mr. Sweeting followed, and would
have played with him; but Tartar took no notice of his caresses. It was
only his mistress's hand whose touch gave him pleasure; to all others he
showed himself obstinately insensible.

Shirley advanced to meet Messrs. Hall and Sweeting, shaking hands with
them cordially. They were come to tell her of certain successes they had
achieved that morning in applications for subscriptions to the fund. Mr.
Hall's eyes beamed benignantly through his spectacles, his plain face
looked positively handsome with goodness; and when Caroline, seeing who
was come, ran out to meet him, and put both her hands into his, he gazed
down on her with a gentle, serene, affectionate expression that gave him
the aspect of a smiling Melanchthon.

Instead of re-entering the house, they strayed through the garden, the
ladies walking one on each side of Mr. Hall. It was a breezy sunny day;
the air freshened the girls' cheeks and gracefully dishevelled their
ringlets. Both of them looked pretty - one gay. Mr. Hall spoke oftenest
to his brilliant companion, looked most frequently at the quiet one.
Miss Keeldar gathered handfuls of the profusely blooming flowers whose
perfume filled the enclosure. She gave some to Caroline, telling her to
choose a nosegay for Mr. Hall; and with her lap filled with delicate and
splendid blossoms, Caroline sat down on the steps of a summer-house. The
vicar stood near her, leaning on his cane.

Shirley, who could not be inhospitable, now called out the neglected
pair in the oak parlour. She convoyed Donne past his dread enemy Tartar,
who, with his nose on his fore paws, lay snoring under the meridian sun.
Donne was not grateful - he never was grateful for kindness and
attention - but he was glad of the safeguard. Miss Keeldar, desirous of
being impartial, offered the curates flowers. They accepted them with
native awkwardness. Malone seemed specially at a loss, when a bouquet
filled one hand, while his shillelah occupied the other. Donne's "Thank
you!" was rich to hear. It was the most fatuous and arrogant of sounds,
implying that he considered this offering a homage to his merits, and an
attempt on the part of the heiress to ingratiate herself into his
priceless affections. Sweeting alone received the posy like a smart,
sensible little man, as he was, putting it gallantly and nattily into
his buttonhole.

As a reward for his good manners, Miss Keeldar, beckoning him apart,
gave him some commission, which made his eyes sparkle with glee. Away he
flew, round by the courtyard to the kitchen. No need to give him
directions; he was always at home everywhere. Ere long he reappeared,
carrying a round table, which he placed under the cedar; then he
collected six garden-chairs from various nooks and bowers in the
grounds, and placed them in a circle. The parlour-maid - Miss Keeldar
kept no footman - came out, bearing a napkin-covered tray. Sweeting's
nimble fingers aided in disposing glasses, plates, knives, and forks; he
assisted her too in setting forth a neat luncheon, consisting of cold
chicken, ham, and tarts.

This sort of impromptu regale it was Shirley's delight to offer any
chance guests; and nothing pleased her better than to have an alert,
obliging little friend, like Sweeting, to run about her hand, cheerily
receive and briskly execute her hospitable hints. David and she were on
the best terms in the world; and his devotion to the heiress was quite
disinterested, since it prejudiced in nothing his faithful allegiance to
the magnificent Dora Sykes.

The repast turned out a very merry one. Donne and Malone, indeed,
contributed but little to its vivacity, the chief part they played in it
being what concerned the knife, fork, and wine-glass; but where four
such natures as Mr. Hall, David Sweeting, Shirley, and Caroline were
assembled in health and amity, on a green lawn, under a sunny sky,
amidst a wilderness of flowers, there could not be ungenial dullness.

In the course of conversation Mr. Hall reminded the ladies that
Whitsuntide was approaching, when the grand united Sunday-school
tea-drinking and procession of the three parishes of Briarfield,
Whinbury, and Nunnely were to take place. Caroline, he knew, would be at
her post as teacher, he said, and he hoped Miss Keeldar would not be
wanting. He hoped she would make her first public appearance amongst
them at that time. Shirley was not the person to miss an occasion of
this sort. She liked festive excitement, a gathering of happiness, a
concentration and combination of pleasant details, a throng of glad
faces, a muster of elated hearts. She told Mr. Hall they might count on
her with security. She did not know what she would have to do, but they
might dispose of her as they pleased.

"And," said Caroline, "you will promise to come to my table, and to sit
near me, Mr. Hall?"

"I shall not fail, Deo volente ," said he. - "I have occupied the place
on her right hand at these monster tea-drinkings for the last six
years," he proceeded, turning to Miss Keeldar. "They made her a
Sunday-school teacher when she was a little girl of twelve. She is not
particularly self-confident by nature, as you may have observed; and the
first time she had to 'take a tray,' as the phrase is, and make tea in
public, there was some piteous trembling and flushing. I observed the
speechless panic, the cups shaking in the little hand, and the
overflowing teapot filled too full from the urn. I came to her aid, took
a seat near her, managed the urn and the slop-basin, and in fact made
the tea for her like any old woman."

"I was very grateful to you," interposed Caroline.

"You were. You told me so with an earnest sincerity that repaid me well,
inasmuch as it was not like the majority of little ladies of twelve,
whom you may help and caress for ever without their evincing any quicker
sense of the kindness done and meant than if they were made of wax and
wood instead of flesh and nerves. - She kept close to me, Miss Keeldar,
the rest of the evening, walking with me over the grounds where the
children were playing; she followed me into the vestry when all were
summoned into church; she would, I believe, have mounted with me to the
pulpit, had I not taken the previous precaution of conducting her to the
rectory pew."

"And he has been my friend ever since," said Caroline.

"And always sat at her table, near her tray, and handed the cups - that
is the extent of my services. The next thing I do for her will be to
marry her some day to some curate or mill-owner. - But mind, Caroline, I
shall inquire about the bridegroom's character; and if he is not a
gentleman likely to render happy the little girl who walked with me
hand in hand over Nunnely Common, I will not officiate. So take care."

"The caution is useless. I am not going to be married. I shall live
single, like your sister Margaret, Mr. Hall."

"Very well. You might do worse. Margaret is not unhappy. She has her
books for a pleasure, and her brother for a care, and is content. If
ever you want a home, if the day should come when Briarfield rectory is
yours no longer, come to Nunnely vicarage. Should the old maid and
bachelor be still living, they will make you tenderly welcome."

"There are your flowers. Now," said Caroline, who had kept the nosegay
she had selected for him till this moment, " you don't  care for a
bouquet, but you must give it to Margaret; only - to be sentimental for
once - keep that little forget-me-not, which is a wild flower I gathered
from the grass; and - to be still more sentimental - let me take two or
three of the blue blossoms and put them in my souvenir."

And she took out a small book with enamelled cover and silver clasp,
wherein, having opened it, she inserted the flowers, writing round them
in pencil, "To be kept for the sake of the Rev. Cyril Hall, my friend.
May - , 18 - ."

The Rev. Cyril Hall, on his part, also placed a sprig in safety between
the leaves of a pocket Testament. He only wrote on the margin,
"Caroline."

"Now," said he, smiling, "I trust we are romantic enough. Miss Keeldar,"
he continued  the curates, by-the-bye, during this conversation, were
too much occupied with their own jokes to notice what passed at the
other end of the table , "I hope you are laughing at this trait of
' exaltation ' in the old gray-headed vicar; but the fact is, I am so
used to comply with the requests of this young friend of yours, I don't 
know how to refuse her when she tells me to do anything. You would say
it is not much in my way to traffic with flowers and forget-me-nots;
but, you see, when requested to be sentimental, I am obedient."

"He is naturally rather sentimental," remarked Caroline. "Margaret told
me so, and I know what pleases him."

"That you should be good and happy? Yes; that is one of my greatest
pleasures. May God long preserve to you the blessings of peace and
innocence! By which phrase I mean comparative innocence; for in His
sight, I am well aware, none are pure. What to our human perceptions
looks spotless as we fancy angels, is to Him but frailty, needing the
blood of His Son to cleanse, and the strength of His Spirit to sustain.
Let us each and all cherish humility - I, as you, my young friends; and
we may well do it when we look into our own hearts, and see there
temptations, inconsistencies, propensities, even we blush to recognize.
And it is not youth, nor good looks, nor grace, nor any gentle outside
charm which makes either beauty or goodness in God's eyes. - Young
ladies, when your mirror or men's tongues flatter you, remember that, in
the sight of her Maker, Mary Ann Ainley - a woman whom neither glass nor
lips have ever panegyrized - is fairer and better than either of you. She
is indeed," he added, after a pause - 'she is indeed. You young things,
wrapt up in yourselves and in earthly hopes, scarcely live as Christ
lived. Perhaps you cannot do it yet, while existence is so sweet and
earth so smiling to you; it would be too much to expect. She, with meek
heart and due reverence, treads close in her Redeemer's steps."

Here the harsh voice of Donne broke in on the mild tones of Mr. Hall.
"Ahem!" he began, clearing his throat evidently for a speech of some
importance - "ahem! Miss Keeldar, your attention an instant, if you
please."

"Well," said Shirley nonchalantly, "what is it? I listen. All of me is
ear that is not eye."

"I hope part of you is hand also," returned Donne, in his vulgarly
presumptuous and familiar style, "and part purse. It is to the hand and
purse I propose to appeal. I came here this morning with a view to beg
of you - - "

"You should have gone to Mrs. Gill; she is my almoner."

"To beg of you a subscription to a school. I and Dr. Boultby intend to
erect one in the hamlet of Ecclefigg, which is under our vicarage of
Whinbury. The Baptists have got possession of it. They have a chapel
there, and we want to dispute the ground."

"But I have nothing to do with Ecclefigg. I possess no property there."

"What does that signify? You're a churchwoman, ain't  you?"

"Admirable creature!" muttered Shirley, under her breath. "Exquisite
address! Fine style! What raptures he excites in me!" Then aloud, "I am
a churchwoman, certainly."

"Then you can't  refuse to contribute in this case. The population of
Ecclefigg are a parcel of brutes; we want to civilize them."

"Who is to be the missionary?"

"Myself, probably."

"You won't  fail through lack of sympathy with your flock."

"I hope not - I expect success; but we must have money. There is the
paper. Pray give a handsome sum."

When asked for money, Shirley rarely held back. She put down her name
for L5. After the L300 she had lately given, and the many smaller sums
she was giving constantly, it was as much as she could at present
afford. Donne looked at it, declared the subscription 'shabby," and
clamorously demanded more. Miss Keeldar flushed up with some indignation
and more astonishment.

"At present I shall give no more," said she.

"Not give more! Why, I expected you to head the list with a cool
hundred. With your property, you should never put down a signature for
less."

She was silent.

"In the south," went on Donne, "a lady with a thousand a year would be
ashamed to give five pounds for a public object."

Shirley, so rarely haughty, looked so now. Her slight frame became
nerved; her distinguished face quickened with scorn.

"Strange remarks?" said she - "most inconsiderate! Reproach in return for
bounty is misplaced."

"Bounty! Do you call five pounds bounty?"

"I do; and bounty which, had I not given it to Dr. Boultby's intended
school, of the erection of which I approve, and in no sort to his
curate, who seems ill-advised in his manner of applying for, or rather
extorting, subscriptions - bounty, I repeat, which, but for this
consideration, I should instantly reclaim."

Donne was thick-skinned. He did not feel all or half that the tone, air,
glance of the speaker expressed. He knew not on what ground he stood.

"Wretched place this Yorkshire," he went on. "I could never have formed
an idea r of the country had I not seen it. And the people - rich and
poor - what a set! How corse and uncultivated! They would be scouted in
the south."

Shirley leaned forwards on the table, her nostrils dilating a little,
her taper fingers interlaced and compressing each other hard.

"The rich," pursued the infatuated and unconscious Donne, "are a parcel
of misers, never living as persons with their incomes ought to live. You
scarsley" -  you must excuse Mr. Donne's pronunciation, reader; it was
very choice; he considered it genteel, and prided himself on his
southern accent; northern ears received with singular sensations his
utterance of certain words  - "you scarsley ever see a fam'ly where a
propa carriage or a reg'la butla is kep; and as to the poor - just look
at them when they come crowding about the church doors on the occasion
of a marriage or a funeral, clattering in clogs; the men in their
shirt-sleeves and wool-combers' aprons, the women in mob-caps and
bed-gowns. They positively deserve that one should turn a mad cow in
amongst them to rout their rabble-ranks. He-he! what fun it would be!"

"There! you have reached the climax," said Shirley quietly. "You have
reached the climax," she repeated, turning her glowing glance towards
him. "You cannot go beyond it, and," she added with emphasis, "you
 shall not, in my house."

Up she rose - nobody could control her now, for she was
exasperated - straight she walked to her garden gates, wide she flung
them open.

"Walk through," she said austerely, "and pretty quickly, and set foot on
this pavement no more."

Donne was astounded. He had thought all the time he was showing himself
off to high advantage, as a lofty-souled person of the first "ton;" he
imagined he was producing a crushing impression. Had he not expressed
disdain of everything in Yorkshire? What more conclusive proof could be
given that he was better than anything there? And yet here was he about
to be turned like a dog out of a Yorkshire garden! Where, under such
circumstances, was the "concatenation accordingly"?

"Rid me of you instantly - instantly!" reiterated Shirley, as he
lingered.

"Madam - a clergyman! turn out a clergyman!"

"Off! Were you an archbishop you have proved yourself no gentleman, and
must go. Quick!"

She was quite resolved. There was no trifling with her. Besides, Tartar
was again rising; he perceived symptoms of a commotion; he manifested a
disposition to join in. There was evidently nothing for it but to go,
and Donne made his exodus, the heiress sweeping him a deep curtsy as she
closed the gates on him.

"How dare the pompous priest abuse his flock! How dare the lisping
cockney revile Yorkshire!" was her sole observation on the circumstance,
as she returned to the table.

Ere long the little party broke up; Miss Keeldar's ruffled and darkened
brow, curled lip, and incensed eye gave no invitation to further social
enjoyment.




CHAPTER XVI.

WHITSUNTIDE.


The fund prospered. By dint of Miss Keeldar's example, the three
rectors' vigorous exertions, and the efficient though quiet aid of their
spinster and spectacled lieutenants, Mary Ann Ainley and Margaret Hall,
a handsome sum was raised; and this being judiciously managed, served
for the present greatly to alleviate the distress of the unemployed
poor. The neighbourhood seemed to grow calmer. For a fortnight past no
cloth had been destroyed; no outrage on mill or mansion had been
committed in the three parishes. Shirley was sanguine that the evil she
wished to avert was almost escaped, that the threatened storm was
passing over. With the approach of summer she felt certain that trade
would improve - it always did; and then this weary war could not last for
ever; peace must return one day. With peace, what an impulse would be
given to commerce!

Such was the usual tenor of her observations to her tenant, Gérard
Moore, whenever she met him where they could converse; and Moore would
listen very quietly - too quietly to satisfy her. She would then by her
impatient glance demand something more from him - some explanation, or at
least some additional remark. Smiling in his way, with that expression
which gave a remarkable cast of sweetness to his mouth, while his brow
remained grave, he would answer to the effect that himself too trusted
in the finite nature of the war; that it was indeed on that ground the
anchor of his hopes was fixed; thereon his speculations depended. "For
you are aware," he would continue, "that I now work Hollow's Mill
entirely on speculation. I sell nothing; there is no market for my
goods. I manufacture for a future day. I make myself ready to take
advantage of the first opening that shall occur. Three months ago this
was impossible to me; I had exhausted both credit and capital. You well
know who came to my rescue, from what hand I received the loan which
saved me. It is on the strength of that loan I am enabled to continue
the bold game which, a while since, I feared I should never play more.
Total ruin I know will follow loss, and I am aware that gain is
doubtful; but I am quite cheerful. So long as I can be active, so long
as I can strive, so long, in short, as my hands are not tied, it is
impossible for me to be depressed. One year - nay, but six months - of the
reign of the olive, and I am safe; for, as you say, peace will give an
impulse to commerce. In this you are right; but as to the restored
tranquillity of the neighbourhood, as to the permanent good effect of
your charitable fund, I doubt. Eleemosynary relief never yet
tranquillized the working-classes - it never made them grateful; it is
not in human nature that it should. I suppose, were all things ordered
aright, they ought not to be in a position to need that humiliating
relief; and this they feel. We should feel it were we so placed.
Besides, to whom should they be grateful? To you, to the clergy perhaps,
but not to us mill-owners. They hate us worse than ever. Then the
disaffected here are in correspondence with the disaffected elsewhere.
Nottingham is one of their headquarters, Manchester another, Birmingham
a third. The subalterns receive orders from their chiefs; they are in a
good state of discipline; no blow is struck without mature deliberation.
In sultry weather you have seen the sky threaten thunder day by day, and
yet night after night the clouds have cleared, and the sun has set
quietly; but the danger was not gone - it was only delayed. The
long-threatening storm is sure to break at last. There is analogy
between the moral and physical atmosphere."

"Well, Mr. Moore"  so these conferences always ended , "take care of
yourself. If you think that I have ever done you any good, reward me by
promising to take care of yourself."

"I do; I will take close and watchful care. I wish to live, not to die.
The future opens like Eden before me; and still, when I look deep into
the shades of my paradise, I see a vision that I like better than seraph
or cherub glide across remote vistas."

"Do you? Pray, what vision?"

"I see - - "

The maid came bustling in with the tea-things.

The early part of that May, as we have seen, was fine; the middle was
wet; but in the last week, at change of moon, it cleared again. A fresh
wind swept off the silver-white, deep-piled rain-clouds, bearing them,
mass on mass, to the eastern horizon, on whose verge they dwindled, and
behind whose rim they disappeared, leaving the vault behind all pure
blue space, ready for the reign of the summer sun. That sun rose broad
on Whitsuntide. The gathering of the schools was signalized by splendid
weather.

Whit-Tuesday was the great day, in preparation for which the two large
schoolrooms of Briarfield, built by the present rector, chiefly at his
own expense, were cleaned out, whitewashed, repainted, and decorated
with flowers and evergreens - some from the rectory garden, two cartloads
from Fieldhead, and a wheel-barrowful from the more stingy domain of De
Walden, the residence of Mr. Wynne. In these schoolrooms twenty tables,
each calculated to accommodate twenty guests, were laid out, surrounded
with benches, and covered with white cloths. Above them were suspended
at least some twenty cages, containing as many canaries, according to a
fancy of the district, specially cherished by Mr. Helstone's clerk, who
delighted in the piercing song of these birds, and knew that amidst
confusion of tongues they always carolled loudest. These tables, be it
understood, were not spread for the twelve hundred scholars to be
assembled from the three parishes, but only for the patrons and teachers
of the schools. The children's feast was to be spread in the open air.
At one o'clock the troops were to come in; at two they were to be
marshalled; till four they were to parade the parish; then came the
feast, and afterwards the meeting, with music and speechifying in the
church.

Why Briarfield was chosen for the point of rendezvous - the scene of the
 fete - should be explained. It was not because it was the largest or
most populous parish - Whinbury far outdid it in that respect; nor
because it was the oldest, antique as were the hoary church and
rectory - Nunnely's low-roofed temple and mossy parsonage, buried both in
coeval oaks, outstanding sentinels of Nunnwood, were older still. It was
simply because Mr. Helstone willed it so, and Mr. Helstone's will was
stronger than that of Boultby or Hall; the former could not, the
latter would not, dispute a point of precedence with their resolute
and imperious brother. They let him lead and rule.

This notable anniversary had always hitherto been a trying day to
Caroline Helstone, because it dragged her perforce into public,
compelling her to face all that was wealthy, respectable, influential in
the neighbourhood; in whose presence, but for the kind countenance of
Mr. Hall, she would have appeared unsupported. Obliged to be
conspicuous; obliged to walk at the head of her regiment as the rector's
niece, and first teacher of the first class; obliged to make tea at the
first table for a mixed multitude of ladies and gentlemen, and to do all
this without the countenance of mother, aunt, or other chaperon - she,
meantime, being a nervous person, who mortally feared publicity - it will
be comprehended that, under these circumstances, she trembled at the
approach of Whitsuntide.

But this year Shirley was to be with her, and that changed the aspect of
the trial singularly - it changed it utterly. It was a trial no
longer - it was almost an enjoyment. Miss Keeldar was better in her
single self than a host of ordinary friends. Quite self-possessed, and
always spirited and easy; conscious of her social importance, yet never
presuming upon it - it would be enough to give one courage only to look
at her. The only fear was lest the heiress should not be punctual to
tryst. She often had a careless way of lingering behind time, and
Caroline knew her uncle would not wait a second for any one. At the
moment of the church clock tolling two, the bells would clash out and
the march begin. She must look after Shirley, then, in this matter, or
her expected companion would fail her.

Whit-Tuesday saw her rise almost with the sun. She, Fanny, and Eliza
were busy the whole morning arranging the rectory parlours in first-rate
company order, and setting out a collation of cooling
refreshments - wine, fruit, cakes - on the dining-room sideboard. Then she
had to dress in her freshest and fairest attire of white muslin: the
perfect fineness of the day and the solemnity of the occasion warranted,
and even exacted, such costume. Her new sash - a birthday present from
Margaret Hall, which she had reason to believe Cyril himself had bought,
and in return for which she had indeed given him a set of cambric bands
in a handsome case - was tied by the dexterous fingers of Fanny, who took
no little pleasure in arraying her fair young mistress for the occasion.
Her simple bonnet had been trimmed to correspond with her sash; her
pretty but inexpensive scarf of white crape suited her dress. When ready
she formed a picture, not bright enough to dazzle, but fair enough to
interest; not brilliantly striking, but very delicately pleasing - a
picture in which sweetness of tint, purity of air, and grace of mien
atoned for the absence of rich colouring and magnificent contour. What
her brown eye and clear forehead showed of her mind was in keeping with
her dress and face - modest, gentle, and, though pensive, harmonious. It
appeared that neither lamb nor dove need fear her, but would welcome
rather, in her look of simplicity and softness, a sympathy with their
own natures, or with the natures we ascribe to them.

After all, she was an imperfect, faulty human being, fair enough of
form, hue, and array, but, as Cyril Hall said, neither so good nor so
great as the withered Miss Ainley, now putting on her best black gown
and Quaker drab shawl and bonnet in her own narrow cottage chamber.

Away Caroline went, across some very sequestered fields and through some
quite hidden lanes, to Fieldhead. She glided quickly under the green
hedges and across the greener leas. There was no dust, no moisture, to
soil the hem of her stainless garment, or to damp her slender sandal.
After the late rains all was clean, and under the present glowing sun
all was dry. She walked fearlessly, then, on daisy and turf, and through
thick plantations; she reached Fieldhead, and penetrated to Miss
Keeldar's dressing-room.

It was well she had come, or Shirley would have been too late. Instead
of making ready with all speed, she lay stretched on a couch, absorbed
in reading. Mrs. Pryor stood near, vainly urging her to rise and dress.
Caroline wasted no words. She immediately took the book from her, and
with her own hands commenced the business of disrobing and rerobing her.
Shirley, indolent with the heat, and gay with her youth and pleasurable
nature, wanted to talk, laugh, and linger; but Caroline, intent on being
in time, persevered in dressing her as fast as fingers could fasten
strings or insert pins. At length, as she united a final row of hooks
and eyes, she found leisure to chide her, saying she was very naughty to
be so unpunctual, that she looked even now the picture of incorrigible
carelessness; and so Shirley did, but a very lovely picture of that
tiresome quality.

She presented quite a contrast to Caroline. There was style in every
fold of her dress and every line of her figure. The rich silk suited her
better than a simpler costume; the deep embroidered scarf became her.
She wore it negligently but gracefully. The wreath on her bonnet
crowned her well. The attention to fashion, the tasteful appliance of
ornament in each portion of her dress, were quite in place with her. All
this suited her, like the frank light in her eyes, the rallying smile
about her lips, like her shaft-straight carriage and lightsome step.
Caroline took her hand when she was dressed, hurried her downstairs, out
of doors; and thus they sped through the fields, laughing as they went,
and looking very much like a snow-white dove and gem-tinted bird of
paradise joined in social flight.

Thanks to Miss Helstone's promptitude, they arrived in good time. While
yet trees hid the church, they heard the bell tolling a measured but
urgent summons for all to assemble. The trooping in of numbers, the
trampling of many steps and murmuring of many voices, were likewise
audible. From a rising ground, they presently saw, on the Whinbury road,
the Whinbury school approaching. It numbered five hundred souls. The
rector and curate, Boultby and Donne, headed it - the former looming
large in full canonicals, walking as became a beneficed priest, under
the canopy of a shovel-hat, with the dignity of an ample corporation,
the embellishment of the squarest and vastest of black coats, and the
support of the stoutest of gold-headed canes. As the doctor walked, he
now and then slightly flourished his cane, and inclined his shovel-hat
with a dogmatical wag towards his aide-de-camp. That
aide-de-camp - Donne, to wit - narrow as the line of his shape was,
compared to the broad bulk of his principal, contrived, notwithstanding,
to look every inch a curate. All about him was pragmatical and
self-complacent, from his turned-up nose and elevated chin to his
clerical black gaiters, his somewhat short, strapless trousers, and his
square-toed shoes.

Walk on, Mr. Donne! You have undergone scrutiny. You think you look
well. Whether the white and purple figures watching you from yonder hill
think so is another question.

These figures come running down when the regiment has marched by. The
churchyard is full of children and teachers, all in their very best
holiday attire; and, distressed as is the district, bad as are the
times, it is wonderful to see how respectably, how handsomely even, they
have contrived to clothe themselves. That British love of decency will
work miracles. The poverty which reduces an Irish girl to rags is
impotent to rob the English girl of the neat wardrobe she knows
necessary to her self-respect. Besides, the lady of the manor - that
Shirley, now gazing with pleasure on this well-dressed and happy-looking
crowd - has really done them good. Her seasonable bounty consoled many a
poor family against the coming holiday, and supplied many a child with a
new frock or bonnet for the occasion. She knows it, and is elate with
the consciousness - glad that her money, example, and influence have
really, substantially, benefited those around her. She cannot be
charitable like Miss Ainley: it is not in her nature. It relieves her to
feel that there is another way of being charitable, practicable for
other characters, and under other circumstances.

Caroline, too, is pleased, for she also has done good in her small
way - robbed herself of more than one dress, ribbon, or collar she could
ill spare, to aid in fitting out the scholars of her class; and as she
could not give money, she has followed Miss Ainley's example in giving
her time and her industry to sew for the children.

Not only is the churchyard full, but the rectory garden is also
thronged. Pairs and parties of ladies and gentlemen are seen walking
amongst the waving lilacs and laburnums. The house also is occupied: at
the wide-open parlour windows gay groups are standing. These are the
patrons and teachers, who are to swell the procession. In the parson's
croft, behind the rectory, are the musicians of the three parish bands,
with their instruments. Fanny and Eliza, in the smartest of caps and
gowns, and the whitest of aprons, move amongst them, serving out quarts
of ale, whereof a stock was brewed very sound and strong some weeks
since by the rector's orders, and under his special superintendence.
Whatever he had a hand in must be managed handsomely. "Shabby doings" of
any description were not endured under his sanction. From the erection
of a public building, a church, school, or court-house, to the cooking
of a dinner, he still advocated the lordly, liberal, and effective. Miss
Keeldar was like him in this respect, and they mutually approved each
other's arrangements.

Caroline and Shirley were soon in the midst of the company. The former
met them very easily for her. Instead of sitting down in a retired
corner, or stealing away to her own room till the procession should be
marshalled, according to her wont, she moved through the three
parlours, conversed and smiled, absolutely spoke once or twice ere she
was spoken to, and, in short, seemed a new creature. It was Shirley's
presence which thus transformed her; the view of Miss Keeldar's air and
manner did her a world of good. Shirley had no fear of her kind, no
tendency to shrink from, to avoid it. All human beings - men, women, or
children - whom low breeding or coarse presumption did not render
positively offensive, were welcome enough to her - some much more so than
others, of course; but, generally speaking, till a man had indisputably
proved himself bad and a nuisance, Shirley was willing to think him good
and an acquisition, and to treat him accordingly. This disposition made
her a general favourite, for it robbed her very raillery of its sting,
and gave her serious or smiling conversation a happy charm; nor did it
diminish the value of her intimate friendship, which was a distinct
thing from this social benevolence - depending, indeed, on quite a
different part of her character. Miss Helstone was the choice of her
affection and intellect; the Misses Pearson, Sykes, Wynne, etc., etc.,
only the profiteers by her good-nature and vivacity.

Donne happened to come into the drawing-room while Shirley, sitting on
the sofa, formed the centre of a tolerably wide circle. She had already
forgotten her exasperation against him, and she bowed and smiled
good-humouredly. The disposition of the man was then seen. He knew
neither how to decline the advance with dignity, as one whose just pride
has been wounded, nor how to meet it with frankness, as one who is glad
to forget and forgive. His punishment had impressed him with no sense of
shame, and he did not experience that feeling on encountering his
chastiser. He was not vigorous enough in evil to be actively
malignant - he merely passed by sheepishly with a rated, scowling look.
Nothing could ever again reconcile him to his enemy; while no passion of
resentment, for even sharper and more ignominious inflictions, could his
lymphatic nature know.

"He was not worth a scene!" said Shirley to Caroline. "What a fool I
was! To revenge on poor Donne his silly spite at Yorkshire is something
like crushing a gnat for attacking the hide of a rhinoceros. Had I been
a gentleman, I believe I should have helped him off the premises by dint
of physical force. I am glad now I only employed the moral weapon. But
he must come near me no more. I don't  like him. He irritates me. There
is not even amusement to be had out of him. Malone is better sport."

It seemed as if Malone wished to justify the preference, for the words
were scarcely out of the speaker's mouth when Peter Augustus came up,
all in grande tenue , gloved and scented, with his hair oiled and
brushed to perfection, and bearing in one hand a huge bunch of
cabbage-roses, five or six in full blow. These he presented to the
heiress with a grace to which the most cunning pencil could do but
defective justice. And who, after this, could dare to say that Peter was
not a lady's man? He had gathered and he had given flowers; he had
offered a sentimental, a poetic tribute at the shrine of Love or Mammon.
Hercules holding the distaff was but a faint type of Peter bearing the
roses. He must have thought this himself, for he seemed amazed at what
he had done. He backed without a word; he was going away with a husky
chuckle of self-satisfaction; then he bethought himself to stop and
turn, to ascertain by ocular testimony that he really had presented a
bouquet. Yes, there were the six red cabbages on the purple satin lap, a
very white hand, with some gold rings on the fingers, slightly holding
them together, and streaming ringlets, half hiding a laughing face,
drooped over them. Only half hiding! Peter saw the laugh; it was
unmistakable. He was made a joke of; his gallantry, his chivalry, were
the subject of a jest for a petticoat - for two petticoats: Miss Helstone
too was smiling. Moreover, he felt he was seen through, and Peter grew
black as a thunder-cloud. When Shirley looked up, a fell eye was
fastened on her. Malone, at least, had energy enough in hate. She saw it
in his glance.

"Peter is worth a scene, and shall have it, if he likes, one day," she
whispered to her friend.

And now - solemn and sombre as to their colour, though bland enough as to
their faces - appeared at the dining-room door the three rectors. They
had hitherto been busy in the church, and were now coming to take some
little refreshment for the body, ere the march commenced. The large
morocco-covered easy-chair had been left vacant for Dr. Boultby. He was
put into it, and Caroline, obeying the instigations of Shirley, who told
her now was the time to play the hostess, hastened to hand to her
uncle's vast, revered, and, on the whole, worthy friend, a glass of
wine and a plate of macaroons. Boultby's churchwardens, patrons of the
Sunday school both, as he insisted on their being, were already beside
him; Mrs. Sykes and the other ladies of his congregation were on his
right hand and on his left, expressing their hopes that he was not
fatigued, their fears that the day would be too warm for him. Mrs.
Boultby, who held an opinion that when her lord dropped asleep after a
good dinner his face became as the face of an angel, was bending over
him, tenderly wiping some perspiration, real or imaginary, from his
brow. Boultby, in short, was in his glory, and in a round, sound voix
de poitrine he rumbled out thanks for attentions and assurances of his
tolerable health. Of Caroline he took no manner of notice as she came
near, save to accept what she offered. He did not see her - he never did
see her; he hardly knew that such a person existed. He saw the
macaroons, however, and being fond of sweets, possessed himself of a
small handful thereof. The wine Mrs. Boultby insisted on mingling with
hot water, and qualifying with sugar and nutmeg.

Mr. Hall stood near an open window, breathing the fresh air and scent of
flowers, and talking like a brother to Miss Ainley. To him Caroline
turned her attention with pleasure. "What should she bring him? He must
not help himself - he must be served by her." And she provided herself
with a little salver, that she might offer him variety. Margaret Hall
joined them; so did Miss Keeldar. The four ladies stood round their
favourite pastor. They also had an idea that they looked on the face of
an earthly angel. Cyril Hall was their pope, infallible to them as Dr.
Thomas Boultby to his admirers. A throng, too, enclosed the rector of
Briarfield - twenty or more pressed round him; and no parson was ever
more potent in a circle than old Helstone. The curates, herding together
after their manner, made a constellation of three lesser planets. Divers
young ladies watched them afar off, but ventured not nigh.

Mr. Helstone produced his watch. "Ten minutes to two," he announced
aloud. "Time for all to fall into line. Come." He seized his shovel-hat
and marched away. All rose and followed en masse .

The twelve hundred children were drawn up in three bodies of four
hundred souls each; in the rear of each regiment was stationed a band;
between every twenty there was an interval, wherein Helstone posted the
teachers in pairs. To the van of the armies he summoned, - 

"Grace Boultby and Mary Sykes lead out Whinbury.

"Margaret Hall and Mary Ann Ainley conduct Nunnely.

"Caroline Helstone and Shirley Keeldar head Briarfield."

Then again he gave command, - 

"Mr. Donne to Whinbury; Mr. Sweeting to Nunnely; Mr. Malone to
Briarfield."

And these gentlemen stepped up before the lady-generals.

The rectors passed to the full front; the parish clerks fell to the
extreme rear. Helstone lifted his shovel-hat. In an instant out clashed
the eight bells in the tower, loud swelled the sounding bands, flute
spoke and clarion answered, deep rolled the drums, and away they
marched.

The broad white road unrolled before the long procession, the sun and
sky surveyed it cloudless, the wind tossed the tree boughs above it, and
the twelve hundred children and one hundred and forty adults of which it
was composed trod on in time and tune, with gay faces and glad hearts.
It was a joyous scene, and a scene to do good. It was a day of happiness
for rich and poor - the work, first of God, and then of the clergy. Let
England's priests have their due. They are a faulty set in some
respects, being only of common flesh and blood like us all; but the land
would be badly off without them. Britain would miss her church, if that
church fell. God save it! God also reform it!




CHAPTER XVII.

THE SCHOOL FEAST.


Not on combat bent, nor of foemen in search, was this priest-led and
woman-officered company; yet their music played martial tunes, and, to
judge by the eyes and carriage of some - Miss Keeldar, for
instance - these sounds awoke, if not a martial, yet a longing spirit.
Old Helstone, turning by chance, looked into her face; and he laughed,
and she laughed at him.

"There is no battle in prospect," he said; "our country does not want us
to fight for it. No foe or tyrant is questioning or threatening our
liberty. There is nothing to be done. We are only taking a walk. Keep
your hand on the reins, captain, and slack the fire of that spirit. It
is not wanted, the more's the pity."

"Take your own advice, doctor," was Shirley's response. To Caroline she
murmured, "I'll borrow of imagination what reality will not give me. We
are not soldiers - bloodshed is not my desire - or if we are, we are
soldiers of the Cross. Time has rolled back some hundreds of years, and
we are bound on a pilgrimage to Palestine. But no; that is too
visionary. I need a sterner dream. We are Lowlanders of Scotland,
following a Covenanting captain up into the hills to hold a meeting out
of the reach of persecuting troopers. We know that battle may follow
prayer; and as we believe that in the worst issue of battle heaven must
be our reward, we are ready and willing to redden the peat-moss with our
blood. That music stirs my soul; it wakens all my life; it makes my
heart beat - not with its temperate daily pulse, but with a new,
thrilling vigour. I almost long for danger - for a faith, a land, or at
least a lover to defend."

"Look, Shirley!" interrupted Caroline. "What is that red speck above
Stilbro' Brow? You have keener sight than I. Just turn your eagle eye to
it."

Miss Keeldar looked. "I see," she said; then added presently, "there is
a line of red. They are soldiers - cavalry soldiers," she subjoined
quickly. "They ride fast. There are six of them. They will pass us. No;
they have turned off to the right. They saw our procession, and avoid it
by making a circuit. Where are they going?"

"Perhaps they are only exercising their horses."

"Perhaps so. We see them no more now."

Mr. Helstone here spoke.

"We shall pass through Royd Lane, to reach Nunnely Common by a short
cut," said he.

And into the straits of Royd Lane they accordingly defiled. It was very
narrow - so narrow that only two could walk abreast without falling into
the ditch which ran along each side. They had gained the middle of it,
when excitement became obvious in the clerical commanders. Boultby's
spectacles and Helstone's Rehoboam were agitated; the curates nudged
each other; Mr. Hall turned to the ladies and smiled.

"What is the matter?" was the demand.

He pointed with his staff to the end of the lane before them. Lo and
behold! another, an opposition, procession was there entering, headed
also by men in black, and followed also, as they could now hear, by
music.

"Is it our double?" asked Shirley, "our manifold wraith? Here is a card
turned up."

"If you wanted a battle, you are likely to get one - at least of looks,"
whispered Caroline, laughing.

"They shall not pass us!" cried the curates unanimously; "we'll not give
way!"

"Give way!" retorted Helstone sternly, turning round; "who talks of
giving way? You, boys, mind what you are about. The ladies, I know, will
be firm. I can trust them. There is not a churchwoman here but will
stand her ground against these folks, for the honour of the
Establishment. - What does Miss Keeldar say?"

"She asks what is it."

"The Dissenting and Methodist schools, the Baptists, Independents, and
Wesleyans, joined in unholy alliance, and turning purposely into this
lane with the intention of obstructing our march and driving us back."

"Bad manners!" said Shirley, "and I hate bad manners. Of course, they
must have a lesson."

"A lesson in politeness," suggested Mr. Hall, who was ever for peace;
"not an example of rudeness."

Old Helstone moved on. Quickening his step, he marched some yards in
advance of his company. He had nearly reached the other sable leaders,
when he who appeared to act as the hostile commander-in-chief - a large,
greasy man, with black hair combed flat on his forehead - called a halt.
The procession paused. He drew forth a hymn book, gave out a verse, set
a tune, and they all struck up the most dolorous of canticles.

Helstone signed to his bands. They clashed out with all the power of
brass. He desired them to play "Rule, Britannia!" and ordered the
children to join in vocally, which they did with enthusiastic spirit.
The enemy was sung and stormed down, his psalm quelled. As far as noise
went, he was conquered.

"Now, follow me!" exclaimed Helstone; "not at a run, but at a firm,
smart pace. Be steady, every child and woman of you. Keep together. Hold
on by each other's skirts, if necessary."

And he strode on with such a determined and deliberate gait, and was,
besides, so well seconded by his scholars and teachers, who did exactly
as he told them, neither running nor faltering, but marching with cool,
solid impetus - the curates, too, being compelled to do the same, as they
were between two fires, Helstone and Miss Keeldar, both of whom watched
any deviation with lynx-eyed vigilance, and were ready, the one with his
cane, the other with her parasol, to rebuke the slightest breach of
orders, the least independent or irregular demonstration - that the body
of Dissenters were first amazed, then alarmed, then borne down and
pressed back, and at last forced to turn tail and leave the outlet from
Royd Lane free. Boultby suffered in the onslaught, but Helstone and
Malone, between them, held him up, and brought him through the business,
whole in limb, though sorely tried in wind.

The fat Dissenter who had given out the hymn was left sitting in the
ditch. He was a spirit merchant by trade, a leader of the
Nonconformists, and, it was said, drank more water in that one afternoon
than he had swallowed for a twelvemonth before. Mr. Hall had taken care
of Caroline, and Caroline of him. He and Miss Ainley made their own
quiet comments to each other afterwards on the incident. Miss Keeldar
and Mr. Helstone shook hands heartily when they had fairly got the whole
party through the lane. The curates began to exult, but Mr. Helstone
presently put the curb on their innocent spirits. He remarked that they
never had sense to know what to say, and had better hold their tongues;
and he reminded them that the business was none of their managing.

About half-past three the procession turned back, and at four once more
regained the starting-place. Long lines of benches were arranged in the
close-shorn fields round the school. There the children were seated, and
huge baskets, covered up with white cloths, and great smoking tin
vessels were brought out. Ere the distribution of good things commenced,
a brief grace was pronounced by Mr. Hall and sung by the children. Their
young voices sounded melodious, even touching, in the open air. Large
currant buns and hot, well-sweetened tea were then administered in the
proper spirit of liberality. No stinting was permitted on this day, at
least; the rule for each child's allowance being that it was to have
about twice as much as it could possibly eat, thus leaving a reserve to
be carried home for such as age, sickness, or other impediment prevented
from coming to the feast. Buns and beer circulated, meantime, amongst
the musicians and church-singers; afterwards the benches were removed,
and they were left to unbend their spirits in licensed play.

A bell summoned the teachers, patrons, and patronesses to the
schoolroom. Miss Keeldar, Miss Helstone, and many other ladies were
already there, glancing over the arrangement of their separate trays and
tables. Most of the female servants of the neighbourhood, together with
the clerks', the singers', and the musicians' wives, had been pressed
into the service of the day as waiters. Each vied with the other in
smartness and daintiness of dress, and many handsome forms were seen
amongst the younger ones. About half a score were cutting bread and
butter, another half-score supplying hot water, brought from the coppers
of the rector's kitchen. The profusion of flowers and evergreens
decorating the white walls, the show of silver teapots and bright
porcelain on the tables, the active figures, blithe faces, gay dresses
flitting about everywhere, formed altogether a refreshing and lively
spectacle. Everybody talked, not very loudly, but merrily, and the
canary birds sang shrill in their high-hung cages.

Caroline, as the rector's niece, took her place at one of the three
first tables; Mrs. Boultby and Margaret Hall officiated at the others.
At these tables the élite of the company were to be entertained,
strict rules of equality not being more in fashion at Briarfield than
elsewhere. Miss Helstone removed her bonnet and scarf, that she might be
less oppressed with the heat. Her long curls, falling on her neck,
served almost in place of a veil; and for the rest, her muslin dress was
fashioned modestly as a nun's robe, enabling her thus to dispense with
the encumbrance of a shawl.

The room was filling. Mr. Hall had taken his post beside Caroline, who
now, as she rearranged the cups and spoons before her, whispered to him
in a low voice remarks on the events of the day. He looked a little
grave about what had taken place in Royd Lane, and she tried to smile
him out of his seriousness. Miss Keeldar sat near - for a wonder, neither
laughing nor talking; on the contrary, very still, and gazing round her
vigilantly. She seemed afraid lest some intruder should take a seat she
apparently wished to reserve next her own. Ever and anon she spread her
satin dress over an undue portion of the bench, or laid her gloves or
her embroidered handkerchief upon it. Caroline noticed this manege at
last, and asked her what friend she expected. Shirley bent towards her,
almost touched her ear with her rosy lips, and whispered with a musical
softness that often characterized her tones when what she said tended
even remotely to stir some sweet secret source of feeling in her heart,
"I expect Mr. Moore. I saw him last night, and I made him promise to
come with his sister, and to sit at our table. He won't  fail me, I feel
certain; but I apprehend his coming too late, and being separated from
us. Here is a fresh batch arriving; every place will be taken.
Provoking!"

In fact, Mr. Wynne the magistrate, his wife, his son, and his two
daughters now entered in high state. They were Briarfield gentry. Of
course their place was at the first table, and being conducted thither,
they filled up the whole remaining space. For Miss Keeldar's comfort,
Mr. Sam Wynne inducted himself into the very vacancy she had kept for
Moore, planting himself solidly on her gown, her gloves, and her
handkerchief. Mr. Sam was one of the objects of her aversion, and the
more so because he showed serious symptoms of an aim at her hand. The
old gentleman, too, had publicly declared that the Fieldhead estate and
the De Walden estate were delightfully contagious - a malapropism which
rumour had not failed to repeat to Shirley.

Caroline's ears yet rung with that thrilling whisper, "I expect Mr.
Moore," her heart yet beat and her cheek yet glowed with it, when a note
from the organ pealed above the confused hum of the place. Dr. Boultby,
Mr. Helstone, and Mr. Hall rose, so did all present, and grace was sung
to the accompaniment of the music; and then tea began. She was kept too
busy with her office for a while to have leisure for looking round, but
the last cup being filled, she threw a restless glance over the room.
There were some ladies and several gentlemen standing about yet
unaccommodated with seats. Amidst a group she recognized her spinster
friend, Miss Mann, whom the fine weather had tempted, or some urgent
friend had persuaded, to leave her drear solitude for one hour of social
enjoyment. Miss Mann looked tired of standing; a lady in a yellow bonnet
brought her a chair. Caroline knew well that chapeau en satin jaune ;
she knew the black hair, and the kindly though rather opinionated and
froward-looking face under it; she knew that robe de soie noire , she
knew even that schall gris de lin ; she knew, in short, Hortense Moore,
and she wanted to jump up and run to her and kiss her - to give her one
embrace for her own sake and two for her brother's. She half rose,
indeed, with a smothered exclamation, and perhaps - for the impulse was
very strong - she would have run across the room and actually saluted
her; but a hand replaced her in her seat, and a voice behind her
whispered, "Wait till after tea, Lina, and then I'll bring her to you."

And when she could look up she did, and there was Robert himself close
behind, smiling at her eagerness, looking better than she had ever seen
him look - looking, indeed, to her partial eyes, so very handsome that
she dared not trust herself to hazard a second glance; for his image
struck on her vision with painful brightness, and pictured itself on her
memory as vividly as if there daguerreotyped by a pencil of keen
lightning.

He moved on, and spoke to Miss Keeldar. Shirley, irritated by some
unwelcome attentions from Sam Wynne, and by the fact of that gentleman
being still seated on her gloves and handkerchief - and probably, also,
by Moore's want of punctuality - was by no means in good humour. She
first shrugged her shoulders at him, and then she said a bitter word or
two about his "insupportable tardiness." Moore neither apologized nor
retorted. He stood near her quietly, as if waiting to see whether she
would recover her temper; which she did in little more than three
minutes, indicating the change by offering him her hand. Moore took it
with a smile, half-corrective, half-grateful. The slightest possible
shake of the head delicately marked the former quality; it is probable a
gentle pressure indicated the latter.

"You may sit where you can now, Mr. Moore," said Shirley, also smiling.
"You see there is not an inch of room for you here; but I discern plenty
of space at Mrs. Boultby's table, between Miss Armitage and Miss
Birtwhistle. Go! John Sykes will be your vis-a-vis , and you will sit
with your back towards us."

Moore, however, preferred lingering about where he was. He now and then
took a turn down the long room, pausing in his walk to interchange
greetings with other gentlemen in his own placeless predicament; but
still he came back to the magnet, Shirley, bringing with him, each time
he returned, observations it was necessary to whisper in her ear.

Meantime poor Sam Wynne looked far from comfortable. His fair neighbour,
judging from her movements, appeared in a mood the most unquiet and
unaccommodating. She would not sit still two seconds. She was hot; she
fanned herself; complained of want of air and space. She remarked that,
in her opinion, when people had finished their tea they ought to leave
the tables, and announced distinctly that she expected to faint if the
present state of things continued. Mr. Sam offered to accompany her into
the open air; just the way to give her her death of cold, she alleged.
In short, his post became untenable; and having swallowed his quantum of
tea, he judged it expedient to evacuate.

Moore should have been at hand, whereas he was quite at the other
extremity of the room, deep in conference with Christopher Sykes. A
large corn-factor, Timothy Ramsden, Esq., happened to be nearer; and
feeling himself tired of standing, he advanced to fill the vacant seat.
Shirley's expedients did not fail her. A sweep of her scarf upset her
teacup: its contents were shared between the bench and her own satin
dress. Of course, it became necessary to call a waiter to remedy the
mischief. Mr. Ramsden, a stout, puffy gentleman, as large in person as
he was in property, held aloof from the consequent commotion. Shirley,
usually almost culpably indifferent to slight accidents affecting dress,
etc., now made a commotion that might have become the most delicate and
nervous of her sex. Mr. Ramsden opened his mouth, withdrew slowly, and,
as Miss Keeldar again intimated her intention to "give way" and swoon on
the spot, he turned on his heel, and beat a heavy retreat.

Moore at last returned. Calmly surveying the bustle, and somewhat
quizzically scanning Shirley's enigmatical-looking countenance, he
remarked that in truth this was the hottest end of the room, that he
found a climate there calculated to agree with none but cool
temperaments like his own; and putting the waiters, the napkins, the
satin robe - the whole turmoil, in short - to one side, he installed
himself where destiny evidently decreed he should sit. Shirley subsided;
her features altered their lines; the raised knit brow and inexplicable
curve of the mouth became straight again; wilfulness and roguery gave
place to other expressions; and all the angular movements with which she
had vexed the soul of Sam Wynne were conjured to rest as by a charm.
Still no gracious glance was cast on Moore. On the contrary, he was
accused of giving her a world of trouble, and roundly charged with being
the cause of depriving her of the esteem of Mr. Ramsden and the
invaluable friendship of Mr. Samuel Wynne.

"Wouldn't  have offended either gentleman for the world," she averred. "I
have always been accustomed to treat both with the most respectful
consideration, and there, owing to you, how they have been used! I shall
not be happy till I have made it up. I never am happy till I am friends
with my neighbours. So to-morrow I must make a pilgrimage to Royd
corn-mill, soothe the miller, and praise the grain; and next day I must
call at De Walden - where I hate to go - and carry in my reticule half an
oatcake to give to Mr. Sam's favourite pointers."

"You know the surest path to the heart of each swain, I doubt not," said
Moore quietly. He looked very content to have at last secured his
present place; but he made no fine speech expressive of gratification,
and offered no apology for the trouble he had given. His phlegm became
him wonderfully. It made him look handsomer, he was so composed; it made
his vicinage pleasant, it was so peace-restoring. You would not have
thought, to look at him, that he was a poor, struggling man seated
beside a rich woman; the calm of equality stilled his aspect; perhaps
that calm, too, reigned in his soul. Now and then, from the way in which
he looked down on Miss Keeldar as he addressed her, you would have
fancied his station towered above hers as much as his stature did.
Almost stern lights sometimes crossed his brow and gleamed in his eyes.
Their conversation had become animated, though it was confined to a low
key; she was urging him with questions - evidently he refused to her
curiosity all the gratification it demanded. She sought his eye once
with hers. You read, in its soft yet eager expression, that it solicited
clearer replies. Moore smiled pleasantly, but his lips continued sealed.
Then she was piqued, and turned away; but he recalled her attention in
two minutes. He seemed making promises, which he soothed her into
accepting in lieu of information.

It appeared that the heat of the room did not suit Miss Helstone. She
grew paler and paler as the process of tea-making was protracted. The
moment thanks were returned she quitted the table, and hastened to
follow her cousin Hortense, who, with Miss Mann, had already sought the
open air. Robert Moore had risen when she did - perhaps he meant to speak
to her; but there was yet a parting word to exchange with Miss Keeldar,
and while it was being uttered Caroline had vanished.

Hortense received her former pupil with a demeanour of more dignity than
warmth. She had been seriously offended by Mr. Helstone's proceedings,
and had all along considered Caroline to blame in obeying her uncle too
literally.

"You are a very great stranger," she said austerely, as her pupil held
and pressed her hand. The pupil knew her too well to remonstrate or
complain of coldness. She let the punctilious whim pass, sure that her
natural bonté  I use this French word because it expresses just what I
mean - neither goodness nor good-nature, but something between the two 
would presently get the upper hand. It did. Hortense had no sooner
examined her face well, and observed the change its somewhat wasted
features betrayed, than her mien softened. Kissing her on both cheeks,
she asked anxiously after her health. Caroline answered gaily. It would,
however, have been her lot to undergo a long cross-examination, followed
by an endless lecture on this head, had not Miss Mann called off the
attention of the questioner by requesting to be conducted home. The poor
invalid was already fatigued. Her weariness made her cross - too cross
almost to speak to Caroline; and besides, that young person's white
dress and lively look were displeasing in the eyes of Miss Mann. The
everyday garb of brown stuff or gray gingham, and the everyday air of
melancholy, suited the solitary spinster better; she would hardly know
her young friend to-night, and quitted her with a cool nod. Hortense
having promised to accompany her home, they departed together.

Caroline now looked round for Shirley. She saw the rainbow scarf and
purple dress in the centre of a throng of ladies, all well known to
herself, but all of the order whom she systematically avoided whenever
avoidance was possible. Shyer at some moments than at others, she felt
just now no courage at all to join this company. She could not, however,
stand alone where all others went in pairs or parties; so she approached
a group of her own scholars, great girls, or rather young women, who
were standing watching some hundreds of the younger children playing at
blind-man's buff.

Miss Helstone knew these girls liked her, yet she was shy even with them
out of school. They were not more in awe of her than she of them. She
drew near them now, rather to find protection in their company than to
patronize them with her presence. By some instinct they knew her
weakness, and with natural politeness they respected it. Her knowledge
commanded their esteem when she taught them; her gentleness attracted
their regard; and because she was what they considered wise and good
when on duty, they kindly overlooked her evident timidity when off.
They did not take advantage of it. Peasant girls as they were, they had
too much of our own English sensibility to be guilty of the coarse
error. They stood round her still, civil, friendly, receiving her slight
smiles and rather hurried efforts to converse with a good feeling and
good breeding - the last quality being the result of the first - which
soon set her at her ease.

Mr. Sam Wynne coming up with great haste, to insist on the elder girls
joining in the game as well as the younger ones, Caroline was again left
alone. She was meditating a quiet retreat to the house, when Shirley,
perceiving from afar her isolation, hastened to her side.

"Let us go to the top of the fields," she said. "I know you don't  like
crowds, Caroline."

"But it will be depriving you of a pleasure, Shirley, to take you from
all these fine people, who court your society so assiduously, and to
whom you can, without art or effort, make yourself so pleasant."

"Not quite without effort; I am already tired of the exertion. It is but
insipid, barren work, talking and laughing with the good gentlefolks of
Briarfield. I have been looking out for your white dress for the last
ten minutes. I like to watch those I love in a crowd, and to compare
them with others. I have thus compared you. You resemble none of the
rest, Lina. There are some prettier faces than yours here. You are not a
model beauty like Harriet Sykes, for instance - beside her your person
appears almost insignificant - but you look agreeable, you look
reflective, you look what I call interesting."

"Hush, Shirley! you flatter me."

"I don't  wonder that your scholars like you."

"Nonsense, Shirley! Talk of something else."

"We will talk of Moore, then, and we will watch him. I see him even
now."

"Where?" And as Caroline asked the question she looked not over the
fields, but into Miss Keeldar's eyes, as was her wont whenever Shirley
mentioned any object she descried afar. Her friend had quicker vision
than herself, and Caroline seemed to think that the secret of her eagle
acuteness might be read in her dark gray irides, or rather, perhaps, she
only sought guidance by the direction of those discriminating and
brilliant spheres.

"There is Moore," said Shirley, pointing right across the wide field
where a thousand children were playing, and now nearly a thousand adult
spectators walking about. "There - can you miss the tall stature and
straight port? He looks amidst the set that surround him like Eliab
amongst humbler shepherds - like Saul in a war-council; and a war-council
it is, if I am not mistaken."

"Why so, Shirley?" asked Caroline, whose eye had at last caught the
object it sought. "Robert is just now speaking to my uncle, and they are
shaking hands. They are then reconciled."

"Reconciled not without good reason, depend on it - making common cause
against some common foe. And why, think you, are Messrs. Wynne and
Sykes, and Armitage and Ramsden, gathered in such a close circle round
them? And why is Malone beckoned to join them? Where he is summoned,
be sure a strong arm is needed."

Shirley, as she watched, grew restless; her eyes flashed.

"They won't  trust me," she said. "That is always the way when it comes
to the point."

"What about?"

"Cannot you feel? There is some mystery afloat; some event is expected;
some preparation is to be made, I am certain. I saw it all in Mr.
Moore's manner this evening. He was excited, yet hard."

"Hard to you , Shirley?"

"Yes, to me . He often is hard to me. We seldom converse tete-a-tete 
but I am made to feel that the basis of his character is not of eider
down."

"Yet he seemed to talk to you softly."

"Did he not? Very gentle tones and quiet manner. Yet the man is
peremptory and secret: his secrecy vexes me."

"Yes, Robert is secret."

"Which he has scarcely a right to be with me, especially as he commenced
by giving me his confidence. Having done nothing to forfeit that
confidence, it ought not to be withdrawn; but I suppose I am not
considered iron-souled enough to be trusted in a crisis."

"He fears, probably, to occasion you uneasiness."

"An unnecessary precaution. I am of elastic materials, not soon crushed.
He ought to know that. But the man is proud. He has his faults, say what
you will, Lina. Observe how engaged that group appear. They do not know
we are watching them."

"If we keep on the alert, Shirley, we shall perhaps find the clue to
their secret."

"There will be some unusual movements ere long - perhaps to-morrow,
possibly to-night. But my eyes and ears are wide open. Mr. Moore, you
shall be under surveillance. Be you vigilant also, Lina."

"I will. Robert is going; I saw him turn. I believe he noticed us. They
are shaking hands."

"Shaking hands, with emphasis," added Shirley, "as if they were
ratifying some solemn league and covenant."

They saw Robert quit the group, pass through a gate, and disappear.

"And he has not bid us good-bye," murmured Caroline.

Scarcely had the words escaped her lips when she tried by a smile to
deny the confession of disappointment they seemed to imply. An unbidden
suffusion for one moment both softened and brightened her eyes.

"Oh, that is soon remedied!" exclaimed Shirley: "we'll make him bid us
good-bye."

" Make him! That is not the same thing," was the answer.

"It shall be the same thing."

"But he is gone; you can't  overtake him."

"I know a shorter way than that he has taken. We will intercept him."

"But, Shirley, I would rather not go."

Caroline said this as Miss Keeldar seized her arm and hurried her down
the fields. It was vain to contend. Nothing was so wilful as Shirley
when she took a whim into her head. Caroline found herself out of sight
of the crowd almost before she was aware, and ushered into a narrow
shady spot, embowered above with hawthorns, and enamelled under foot
with daisies. She took no notice of the evening sun chequering the turf,
nor was she sensible of the pure incense exhaling at this hour from tree
and plant; she only heard the wicket opening at one end, and knew Robert
was approaching. The long sprays of the hawthorns, shooting out before
them, served as a screen. They saw him before he observed them. At a
glance Caroline perceived that his social hilarity was gone; he had left
it behind him in the joy-echoing fields round the school. What remained
now was his dark, quiet, business countenance. As Shirley had said, a
certain hardness characterized his air, while his eye was excited, but
austere. So much the worse timed was the present freak of Shirley's. If
he had looked disposed for holiday mirth, it would not have mattered
much; but now - - 

"I told you not to come," said Caroline, somewhat bitterly, to her
friend. She seemed truly perturbed. To be intruded on Robert thus,
against her will and his expectation, and when he evidently would rather
not be delayed, keenly annoyed her. It did not annoy Miss Keeldar in the
least. She stepped forward and faced her tenant, barring his way. "You
omitted to bid us good-bye," she said.

"Omitted to bid you good-bye! Where did you come from? Are you fairies?
I left two like you, one in purple and one in white, standing at the top
of a bank, four fields off, but a minute ago."

"You left us there and find us here. We have been watching you, and
shall watch you still. You must be questioned one day, but not now. At
present all you have to do is to say good-night, and then pass."

Moore glanced from one to the other without unbending his aspect. "Days
of fete have their privileges, and so have days of hazard," observed he
gravely.

"Come, don't  moralize. Say good-night, and pass," urged Shirley.

"Must I say good-night to you, Miss Keeldar?"

"Yes, and to Caroline likewise. It is nothing new, I hope. You have bid
us both good-night before."

He took her hand, held it in one of his, and covered it with the other.
He looked down at her gravely, kindly, yet commandingly. The heiress
could not make this man her subject. In his gaze on her bright face
there was no servility, hardly homage; but there were interest and
affection, heightened by another feeling. Something in his tone when he
spoke, as well as in his words, marked that last sentiment to be
gratitude.

"Your debtor bids you good-night! May you rest safely and serenely till
morning."

"And you, Mr. Moore - what are you going to do? What have you been saying
to Mr. Helstone, with whom I saw you shake hands? Why did all those
gentlemen gather round you? Put away reserve for once. Be frank with
me."

"Who can resist you? I will be frank. To-morrow, if there is anything to
relate, you shall hear it."

"Just now," pleaded Shirley; "don't  procrastinate."

"But I could only tell half a tale. And my time is limited; I have not a
moment to spare. Hereafter I will make amends for delay by candour."

"But are you going home?"

"Yes."

"Not to leave it any more to-night?"

"Certainly not. At present, farewell to both of you."

He would have taken Caroline's hand and joined it in the same clasp in
which he held Shirley's, but somehow it was not ready for him. She had
withdrawn a few steps apart. Her answer to Moore's adieu was only a
slight bend of the head and a gentle, serious smile. He sought no more
cordial token. Again he said "Farewell," and quitted them both.

"There! it is over," said Shirley when he was gone. "We have made him
bid us good-night, and yet not lost ground in his esteem, I think,
Cary."

"I hope not," was the brief reply.

"I consider you very timid and undemonstrative," remarked Miss Keeldar.
"Why did you not give Moore your hand when he offered you his? He is
your cousin; you like him. Are you ashamed to let him perceive your
affection?"

"He perceives all of it that interests him. No need to make a display of
feeling."

"You are laconic; you would be stoical if you could. Is love, in your
eyes, a crime, Caroline?"

"Love a crime! No, Shirley; love is a divine virtue. But why drag that
word into the conversation? It is singularly irrelevant."

"Good!" pronounced Shirley.

The two girls paced the green lane in silence. Caroline first resumed.

"Obtrusiveness is a crime, forwardness is a crime, and both disgust; but
love! no purest angel need blush to love. And when I see or hear either
man or woman couple shame with love, I know their minds are coarse,
their associations debased. Many who think themselves refined ladies and
gentlemen, and on whose lips the word 'vulgarity' is for ever hovering,
cannot mention 'love' without betraying their own innate and imbecile
degradation. It is a low feeling in their estimation, connected only
with low ideas for them."

"You describe three-fourths of the world, Caroline."

"They are cold - they are cowardly - they are stupid on the subject,
Shirley! They never loved - they never were loved!"

"Thou art right, Lina. And in their dense ignorance they blaspheme
living fire, seraph-brought from a divine altar."

"They confound it with sparks mounting from Tophet."

The sudden and joyous clash of bells here stopped the dialogue by
summoning all to the church.




CHAPTER XVIII.

WHICH THE GENTEEL READER IS RECOMMENDED TO SKIP, LOW PERSONS BEING HERE
INTRODUCED.


The evening was still and warm; close and sultry it even promised to
become. Round the descending sun the clouds glowed purple; summer tints,
rather Indian than English, suffused the horizon, and cast rosy
reflections on hillside, house-front, tree-bole, on winding road and
undulating pasture-ground. The two girls came down from the fields
slowly. By the time they reached the churchyard the bells were hushed;
the multitudes were gathered into the church. The whole scene was
solitary.

"How pleasant and calm it is!" said Caroline.

"And how hot it will be in the church!" responded Shirley. "And what a
dreary long speech Dr. Boultby will make! And how the curates will
hammer over their prepared orations! For my part, I would rather not
enter."

"But my uncle will be angry if he observes our absence."

"I will bear the brunt of his wrath; he will not devour me. I shall be
sorry to miss his pungent speech. I know it will be all sense for the
church, and all causticity for schism. He'll not forget the battle of
Royd Lane. I shall be sorry also to deprive you of Mr. Hall's sincere
friendly homily, with all its racy Yorkshireisms; but here I must stay.
The gray church and grayer tombs look divine with this crimson gleam on
them. Nature is now at her evening prayers; she is kneeling before those
red hills. I see her prostrate on the great steps of her altar, praying
for a fair night for mariners at sea, for travellers in deserts, for
lambs on moors, and unfledged birds in woods. Caroline, I see her, and I
will tell you what she is like. She is like what Eve was when she and
Adam stood alone on earth."

"And that is not Milton's Eve, Shirley."

"Milton's Eve! Milton's Eve! I repeat. No, by the pure Mother of God,
she is not! Cary, we are alone; we may speak what we think. Milton was
great; but was he good? His brain was right; how was his heart? He saw
heaven; he looked down on hell. He saw Satan, and Sin his daughter, and
Death their horrible offspring. Angels serried before him their
battalions; the long lines of adamantine shields flashed back on his
blind eyeballs the unutterable splendour of heaven. Devils gathered
their legions in his sight; their dim, discrowned, and tarnished armies
passed rank and file before him. Milton tried to see the first woman;
but, Cary, he saw her not."

"You are bold to say so, Shirley."

"Not more bold than faithful. It was his cook that he saw; or it was
Mrs. Gill, as I have seen her, making custards, in the heat of summer,
in the cool dairy, with rose-trees and nasturtiums about the latticed
window, preparing a cold collation for the rectors - preserves and
'dulcet creams;' puzzled 'what choice to choose for delicacy best; what
order so contrived as not to mix tastes, not well-joined, inelegant, but
bring taste after taste, upheld with kindliest change.'"

"All very well too, Shirley."

"I would beg to remind him that the first men of the earth were Titans,
and that Eve was their mother; from her sprang Saturn, Hyperion,
Oceanus; she bore Prometheus - - "

"Pagan that you are! what does that signify?"

"I say, there were giants on the earth in those days - giants that strove
to scale heaven. The first woman's breast that heaved with life on this
world yielded the daring which could contend with Omnipotence, the
strength which could bear a thousand years of bondage, the vitality
which could feed that vulture death through uncounted ages, the
unexhausted life and uncorrupted excellence, sisters to immortality,
which, after millenniums of crimes, struggles, and woes, could conceive
and bring forth a Messiah. The first woman was heaven-born. Vast was the
heart whence gushed the well-spring of the blood of nations, and grand
the undegenerate head where rested the consort-crown of creation."

"She coveted an apple, and was cheated by a snake; but you have got such
a hash of Scripture and mythology into your head that there is no making
any sense of you. You have not yet told me what you saw kneeling on
those hills."

"I saw - I now see - a woman-Titan. Her robe of blue air spreads to the
outskirts of the heath, where yonder flock is grazing; a veil white as
an avalanche sweeps from her head to her feet, and arabesques of
lightning flame on its borders. Under her breast I see her zone, purple
like that horizon; through its blush shines the star of evening. Her
steady eyes I cannot picture. They are clear, they are deep as lakes,
they are lifted and full of worship, they tremble with the softness of
love and the lustre of prayer. Her forehead has the expanse of a cloud,
and is paler than the early moon, risen long before dark gathers. She
reclines her bosom on the ridge of Stilbro' Moor; her mighty hands are
joined beneath it. So kneeling, face to face she speaks with God. That
Eve is Jehovah's daughter, as Adam was His son."

"She is very vague and visionary. Come, Shirley, we ought to go into
church."

"Caroline, I will not; I will stay out here with my mother Eve, in these
days called Nature. I love her - undying, mighty being! Heaven may have
faded from her brow when she fell in paradise, but all that is glorious
on earth shines there still. She is taking me to her bosom, and showing
me her heart. Hush, Caroline! You will see her and feel as I do, if we
are both silent."

"I will humour your whim; but you will begin talking again ere ten
minutes are over."

Miss Keeldar, on whom the soft excitement of the warm summer evening
seemed working with unwonted power, leaned against an upright headstone;
she fixed her eyes on the deep-burning west, and sank into a pleasurable
trance. Caroline, going a little apart, paced to and fro beneath the
rectory garden wall, dreaming too in her way. Shirley had mentioned the
word "mother." That word suggested to Caroline's imagination not the
mighty and mystical parent of Shirley's visions, but a gentle human
form - the form she ascribed to her own mother, unknown, unloved, but not
unlonged for.

"Oh that the day would come when she would remember her child! Oh that I
might know her, and knowing, love her!"

Such was her aspiration.

The longing of her childhood filled her soul again. The desire which
many a night had kept her awake in her crib, and which fear of its
fallacy had of late years almost extinguished, relit suddenly, and
glowed warm in her heart, that her mother might come some happy day,
and send for her to her presence, look upon her fondly with loving eyes,
and say to her tenderly, in a sweet voice, "Caroline, my child, I have a
home for you; you shall live with me. All the love you have needed, and
not tasted, from infancy, I have saved for you carefully. Come; it shall
cherish you now."

A noise on the road roused Caroline from her filial hopes, and Shirley
from her Titan visions. They listened, and heard the tramp of horses.
They looked, and saw a glitter through the trees. They caught through
the foliage glimpses of martial scarlet; helm shone, plume waved. Silent
and orderly, six soldiers rode softly by.

"The same we saw this afternoon," whispered Shirley. "They have been
halting somewhere till now. They wish to be as little noticed as
possible, and are seeking their rendezvous at this quiet hour, while the
people are at church. Did I not say we should see unusual things ere
long?"

Scarcely were sight and sound of the soldiers lost, when another and
somewhat different disturbance broke the night-hush - a child's impatient
scream. They looked. A man issued from the church, carrying in his arms
an infant - a robust, ruddy little boy of some two years old - roaring
with all the power of his lungs. He had probably just awaked from a
church-sleep. Two little girls, of nine and ten, followed. The influence
of the fresh air, and the attraction of some flowers gathered from a
grave, soon quieted the child. The man sat down with him, dandling him
on his knee as tenderly as any woman; the two little girls took their
places one on each side.

"Good-evening, William," said Shirley, after due scrutiny of the man. He
had seen her before, and apparently was waiting to be recognized. He now
took off his hat, and grinned a smile of pleasure. He was a
rough-headed, hard-featured personage, not old, but very weather-beaten.
His attire was decent and clean; that of his children singularly neat.
It was our old friend Farren. The young ladies approached him.

"You are not going into the church?" he inquired, gazing at them
complacently, yet with a mixture of bashfulness in his look - a sentiment
not by any means the result of awe of their station, but only of
appreciation of their elegance and youth. Before gentlemen - such as
Moore or Helstone, for instance - William was often a little dogged;
with proud or insolent ladies, too, he was quite unmanageable, sometimes
very resentful; but he was most sensible of, most tractable to,
good-humour and civility. His nature - a stubborn one - was repelled by
inflexibility in other natures; for which reason he had never been able
to like his former master, Moore; and unconscious of that gentleman's
good opinion of himself, and of the service he had secretly rendered him
in recommending him as gardener to Mr. Yorke, and by this means to other
families in the neighbourhood, he continued to harbour a grudge against
his austerity. Latterly he had often worked at Fieldhead. Miss Keeldar's
frank, hospitable manners were perfectly charming to him. Caroline he
had known from her childhood; unconsciously she was his ideal of a lady.
Her gentle mien, step, gestures, her grace of person and attire, moved
some artist-fibres about his peasant heart. He had a pleasure in looking
at her, as he had in examining rare flowers or in seeing pleasant
landscapes. Both the ladies liked William; it was their delight to lend
him books, to give him plants; and they preferred his conversation far
before that of many coarse, hard, pretentious people immeasurably higher
in station.

"Who was speaking, William, when you came out?" asked Shirley.

"A gentleman ye set a deal of store on, Miss Shirley - Mr. Donne."

"You look knowing, William. How did you find out my regard for Mr.
Donne?"

"Ay, Miss Shirley, there's a gleg light i' your een sometimes which
betrays you. You look raight down scornful sometimes when Mr. Donne is
by."

"Do you like him yourself, William?"

"Me? I'm stalled o' t' curates, and so is t' wife. They've  no manners.
They talk to poor folk fair as if they thought they were beneath them.
They're allus magnifying their office. It is a pity but their office
could magnify them; but it does nought o' t' soart. I fair hate pride."

"But you are proud in your own way yourself," interposed Caroline. "You
are what you call house-proud: you like to have everything handsome
about you. Sometimes you look as if you were almost too proud to take
your wages. When you were out of work, you were too proud to get
anything on credit. But for your children, I believe you would rather
have starved than gone to the shops without money; and when I wanted to
give you something, what a difficulty I had in making you take it!"

"It is partly true, Miss Caroline. Ony day I'd rather give than take,
especially from sich as ye. Look at t' difference between us. Ye're a
little, young, slender lass, and I'm a great strong man; I'm rather more
nor twice your age. It is not my part, then, I think, to tak fro'
 ye - to be under obligations  as they say  to ye . And that day ye
came to our house, and called me to t' door, and offered me five
shillings, which I doubt ye could ill spare - for ye've  no fortin', I
know - that day I war fair a rebel, a radical, an insurrectionist; and
 ye made me so. I thought it shameful that, willing and able as I was
to work, I suld be i' such a condition that a young cratur about the age
o' my own eldest lass suld think it needful to come and offer me her bit
o' brass."

"I suppose you were angry with me, William?"

"I almost was, in a way. But I forgave ye varry soon. Ye meant well. Ay,
 I am proud, and so are ye ; but your pride and mine is t' raight
mak - what we call i' Yorkshire clean pride - such as Mr. Malone and Mr.
Donne knows nought about. Theirs is mucky pride. Now, I shall teach my
lasses to be as proud as Miss Shirley there, and my lads to be as proud
as myseln; but I dare ony o' 'em to be like t' curates. I'd lick little
Michael if I seed him show any signs o' that feeling."

"What is the difference, William?"

"Ye know t' difference weel enow, but ye want me to get a gate o'
talking. Mr. Malone and Mr. Donne is almost too proud to do aught for
theirseln; we are almost too proud to let anybody do aught for us. T'
curates can hardly bide to speak a civil word to them they think beneath
them; we can hardly bide to tak an uncivil word fro' them that thinks
themseln aboon us."

"Now, William, be humble enough to tell me truly how you are getting on
in the world. Are you well off?"

"Miss Shirley, I am varry well off. Since I got into t' gardening line,
wi' Mr. Yorke's help, and since Mr. Hall  another o' t' raight sort 
helped my wife to set up a bit of a shop, I've  nought to complain of. My
family has plenty to eat and plenty to wear. My pride makes me find
means to have an odd pound now and then against rainy days; for I think
I'd die afore I'd come to t' parish; and me and mine is content. But t'
neighbours is poor yet. I see a great deal of distress."

"And, consequently, there is still discontent, I suppose?" inquired Miss
Keeldar.

" Consequently - ye say right - consequently . In course, starving folk
cannot be satisfied or settled folk. The country's not in a safe
condition - I'll say so mich!"

"But what can be done? What more can I do, for instance?"

"Do? Ye can do not mich, poor young lass! Ye've  gi'en your brass; ye've 
done well. If ye could transport your tenant, Mr. Moore, to Botany Bay,
ye'd happen do better. Folks hate him."

"William, for shame!" exclaimed Caroline warmly. "If folks do hate
him, it is to their disgrace, not his. Mr. Moore himself hates nobody.
He only wants to do his duty, and maintain his rights. You are wrong to
talk so."

"I talk as I think. He has a cold, unfeeling heart, yond' Moore."

"But," interposed Shirley, 'supposing Moore was driven from the country,
and his mill razed to the ground, would people have more work?"

"They'd have less. I know that, and they know that; and there is many an
honest lad driven desperate by the certainty that whichever way he turns
he cannot better himself; and there is dishonest men plenty to guide
them to the devil, scoundrels that reckons to be the 'people's friends,'
and that knows nought about the people, and is as insincere as Lucifer.
I've  lived aboon forty year in the world, and I believe that 'the
people' will never have any true friends but theirseln and them two or
three good folk i' different stations that is friends to all the world.
Human natur', taking it i' th' lump, is nought but selfishness. It is
but excessive few, it is but just an exception here and there, now and
then, sich as ye two young uns and me, that, being in a different
sphere, can understand t' one t' other, and be friends wi'out
slavishness o' one hand or pride o' t' other. Them that reckons to be
friends to a lower class than their own fro' political motives is never
to be trusted; they always try to make their inferiors tools. For my own
part, I will neither be patronized nor misled for no man's pleasure.
I've  had overtures made to me lately that I saw were treacherous, and I
flung 'em back i' the faces o' them that offered 'em."

"You won't  tell us what overtures?"

"I will not. It would do no good. It would mak no difference. Them they
concerned can look after theirseln."

"Ay, we'se look after werseln," said another voice. Joe Scott had
sauntered forth from the church to get a breath of fresh air, and there
he stood.

"I'll warrant ye , Joe," observed William, smiling.

"And I'll warrant my maister," was the answer. - "Young ladies,"
continued Joe, assuming a lordly air, "ye'd better go into th' house."

"I wonder what for?" inquired Shirley, to whom the overlooker's somewhat
pragmatical manners were familiar, and who was often at war with him;
for Joe, holding supercilious theories about women in general, resented
greatly, in his secret soul, the fact of his master and his master's
mill being, in a manner, under petticoat government, and had felt as
wormwood and gall certain business visits of the heiress to the Hollow's
counting-house.

"Because there is nought agate that fits women to be consarned in."

"Indeed! There is prayer and preaching agate in that church. Are we not
concerned in that?"

"Ye have been present neither at the prayer nor preaching, ma'am, if I
have observed aright. What I alluded to was politics. William Farren
here was touching on that subject, if I'm not mista'en."

"Well, what then? Politics are our habitual study, Joe. Do you know I
see a newspaper every day, and two of a Sunday?"

"I should think you'll read the marriages, probably, miss, and the
murders, and the accidents, and sich like?"

"I read the leading articles, Joe, and the foreign intelligence, and I
look over the market prices. In short, I read just what gentlemen read."

Joe looked as if he thought this talk was like the chattering of a pie.
He replied to it by a disdainful silence.

"Joe," continued Miss Keeldar, "I never yet could ascertain properly
whether you are a Whig or a Tory. Pray, which party has the honour of
your alliance?"

"It is rayther difficult to explain where you are sure not to be
understood," was Joe's haughty response; "but as to being a Tory, I'd as
soon be an old woman, or a young one, which is a more flimsier article
still. It is the Tories that carries on the war and ruins trade; and if
I be of any party - though political parties is all nonsense - I'm of
that which is most favourable to peace, and, by consequence, to the
mercantile interests of this here land."

"So am I, Joe," replied Shirley, who had rather a pleasure in teasing
the overlooker, by persisting in talking on subjects with which he
opined she, as a woman, had no right to meddle - "partly, at least. I
have rather a leaning to the agricultural interest, too; as good reason
is, seeing that I don't  desire England to be under the feet of France,
and that if a share of my income comes from Hollow's Mill, a larger
share comes from the landed estate around it. It would not do to take
any measures injurious to the farmers, Joe, I think?"

"The dews at this hour is unwholesome for females," observed Joe.

"If you make that remark out of interest in me, I have merely to assure
you that I am impervious to cold. I should not mind taking my turn to
watch the mill one of these summer nights, armed with your musket, Joe."

Joe Scott's chin was always rather prominent. He poked it out, at this
speech, some inches farther than usual.

"But - to go back to my sheep," she proceeded - "clothier and mill-owner
as I am, besides farmer, I cannot get out of my head a certain idea that
we manufacturers and persons of business are sometimes a little - a very
little - selfish and short-sighted in our views, and rather too 
regardless of human suffering, rather heartless in our pursuit of gain.
Don't  you agree with me, Joe?"

"I cannot argue where I cannot be comprehended," was again the answer.

"Man of mystery! Your master will argue with me sometimes, Joe. He is
not so stiff as you are."

"Maybe not. We've  all our own ways."

"Joe, do you seriously think all the wisdom in the world is lodged in
male skulls?"

"I think that women are a kittle and a froward generation; and I've  a
great respect for the doctrines delivered in the second chapter of St.
Paul's first Epistle to Timothy."

"What doctrines, Joe?"

"'Let the woman learn in silence, with all subjection. I suffer not a
woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve.'"

"What has that to do with the business?" interjected Shirley. "That
smacks of rights of primogeniture. I'll bring it up to Mr. Yorke the
first time he inveighs against those rights."

"And," continued Joe Scott, "Adam was not deceived, but the woman being
deceived was in the transgression."

"More shame to Adam to sin with his eyes open!" cried Miss Keeldar. "To
confess the honest truth, Joe, I never was easy in my mind concerning
that chapter. It puzzles me."

"It is very plain, miss. He that runs may read."

"He may read it in his own fashion," remarked Caroline, now joining in
the dialogue for the first time. "You allow the right of private
judgment, I suppose, Joe?"

"My certy, that I do! I allow and claim it for every line of the holy
Book."

"Women may exercise it as well as men?"

"Nay. Women is to take their husbands' opinion, both in politics and
religion. It's wholesomest for them."

"Oh! oh!" exclaimed both Shirley and Caroline.

"To be sure; no doubt on't ," persisted the stubborn overlooker.

"Consider yourself groaned down, and cried shame over, for such a stupid
observation," said Miss Keeldar. "You might as well say men are to take
the opinions of their priests without examination. Of what value would a
religion so adopted be? It would be mere blind, besotted superstition."

"And what is your reading, Miss Helstone, o' these words o' St.
Paul's?"

"Hem! I - I account for them in this way. He wrote that chapter for a
particular congregation of Christians, under peculiar circumstances; and
besides, I dare say, if I could read the original Greek, I should find
that many of the words have been wrongly translated, perhaps
misapprehended altogether. It would be possible, I doubt not, with a
little ingenuity, to give the passage quite a contrary turn - to make it
say, 'Let the woman speak out whenever she sees fit to make an
objection.' 'It is permitted to a woman to teach and to exercise
authority as much as may be. Man, meantime, cannot do better than hold
his peace;' and so on."

"That willn't  wash, miss."

"I dare say it will. My notions are dyed in faster colours than yours,
Joe. Mr. Scott, you are a thoroughly dogmatical person, and always
were. I like William better than you."

"Joe is well enough in his own house," said Shirley. "I have seen him as
quiet as a lamb at home. There is not a better nor a kinder husband in
Briarfield. He does not dogmatize to his wife."

"My wife is a hard-working, plain woman; time and trouble has ta'en all
the conceit out of her. But that is not the case with you, young misses.
And then you reckon to have so much knowledge; and i' my thoughts it's
only superficial sort o' vanities you're acquainted with. I can
tell - happen a year sin' - one day Miss Caroline coming into our
counting-house when I war packing up summat behind t' great desk, and
she didn't  see me, and she brought a slate wi' a sum on it to t'
maister. It war only a bit of a sum in practice, that our Harry would
have settled i' two minutes. She couldn't  do it. Mr. Moore had to show
her how. And when he did show her, she couldn't  understand him."

"Nonsense, Joe!"

"Nay, it's no nonsense. And Miss Shirley there reckons to hearken to t'
maister when he's talking ower trade, so attentive like, as if she
followed him word for word, and all war as clear as a lady's
looking-glass to her een; and all t' while she's peeping and peeping out
o' t' window to see if t' mare stands quiet; and then looking at a bit
of a splash on her riding-skirt; and then glancing glegly round at wer
counting-house cobwebs and dust, and thinking what mucky folk we are,
and what a grand ride she'll have just i' now ower Nunnely Common. She
hears no more o' Mr. Moore's talk nor if he spake Hebrew."

"Joe, you are a real slanderer. I would give you your answer, only the
people are coming out of church. We must leave you. Man of prejudice,
good-bye. - William, good-bye. - Children, come up to Fieldhead to-morrow,
and you shall choose what you like best out of Mrs. Gill's store-room."




CHAPTER XIX.

A SUMMER NIGHT.


The hour was now that of dusk. A clear air favoured the kindling of the
stars.

"There will be just light enough to show me the way home," said Miss
Keeldar, as she prepared to take leave of Caroline at the rectory garden
door.

"You must not go alone, Shirley; Fanny shall accompany you."

"That she shall not. Of what need I be afraid in my own parish? I would
walk from Fieldhead to the church any fine midsummer night, three hours
later than this, for the mere pleasure of seeing the stars and the
chance of meeting a fairy."

"But just wait till the crowd is cleared away."

"Agreed. There are the five Misses Armitage streaming by. Here comes
Mrs. Sykes's phaeton, Mr. Wynne's close carriage, Mrs. Birtwhistle's
car. I don't  wish to go through the ceremony of bidding them all
good-bye, so we will step into the garden and take shelter amongst the
laburnums for an instant."

The rectors, their curates, and their churchwardens now issued from the
church porch. There was a great confabulation, shaking of hands,
congratulation on speeches, recommendation to be careful of the night
air, etc. By degrees the throng dispersed, the carriages drove off. Miss
Keeldar was just emerging from her flowery refuge when Mr. Helstone
entered the garden and met her.

"Oh, I want you!" he said. "I was afraid you were already
gone. - Caroline, come here."

Caroline came, expecting, as Shirley did, a lecture on not having been
visible at church. Other subjects, however, occupied the rector's mind.

"I shall not sleep at home to-night," he continued. "I have just met
with an old friend, and promised to accompany him. I shall return
probably about noon to-morrow. Thomas, the clerk, is engaged, and I
cannot get him to sleep in the house, as I usually do when I am absent
for a night. Now - - "

"Now," interrupted Shirley, "you want me as a gentleman - the first
gentleman in Briarfield, in short - to supply your place, be master of
the rectory and guardian of your niece and maids while you are away?"

"Exactly, captain. I thought the post would suit you. Will you favour
Caroline so far as to be her guest for one night? Will you stay here
instead of going back to Fieldhead?"

"And what will Mrs. Pryor do? she expects me home."

"I will send her word. Come, make up your mind to stay. It grows late;
the dew falls heavily. You and Caroline will enjoy each other's society,
I doubt not."

"I promise you, then, to stay with Caroline," replied Shirley. "As you
say, we shall enjoy each other's society. We will not be separated
to-night. Now, rejoin your old friend, and fear nothing for us."

"If there should chance to be any disturbance in the night, captain; if
you should hear the picking of a lock, the cutting out of a pane of
glass, a stealthy tread of steps about the house  and I need not fear to
tell you , who bear a well-tempered, mettlesome heart under your girl's
ribbon sash, that such little incidents are very possible in the present
time , what would you do?"

"Don't  know; faint, perhaps - fall down, and have to be picked up again.
But, doctor, if you assign me the post of honour, you must give me arms.
What weapons are there in your stronghold?"

"You could not wield a sword?"

"No; I could manage the carving-knife better."

"You will find a good one in the dining-room sideboard - a lady's knife,
light to handle, and as sharp-pointed as a poniard."

"It will suit Caroline. But you must give me a brace of pistols. I know
you have pistols."

"I have two pairs. One pair I can place at your disposal. You will find
them suspended over the mantelpiece of my study in cloth cases."

"Loaded?"

"Yes, but not on the cock. Cock them before you go to bed. It is paying
you a great compliment, captain, to lend you these. Were you one of the
awkward squad you should not have them."

"I will take care. You need delay no longer, Mr. Helstone. You may go
now. - He is gracious to me to lend me his pistols," she remarked, as the
rector passed out at the garden gate. "But come, Lina," she continued,
"let us go in and have some supper. I was too much vexed at tea with the
vicinage of Mr. Sam Wynne to be able to eat, and now I am really
hungry."

Entering the house, they repaired to the darkened dining-room, through
the open windows of which apartment stole the evening air, bearing the
perfume of flowers from the garden, the very distant sound of
far-retreating steps from the road, and a soft, vague murmur whose
origin Caroline explained by the remark, uttered as she stood listening
at the casement, "Shirley, I hear the beck in the Hollow."

Then she rang the bell, asked for a candle and some bread and milk - Miss
Keeldar's usual supper and her own. Fanny, when she brought in the tray,
would have closed the windows and the shutters, but was requested to
desist for the present. The twilight was too calm, its breath too balmy
to be yet excluded. They took their meal in silence. Caroline rose once
to remove to the window-sill a glass of flowers which stood on the
sideboard, the exhalation from the blossoms being somewhat too powerful
for the sultry room. In returning she half opened a drawer, and took
from it something that glittered clear and keen in her hand.

"You assigned this to me, then, Shirley, did you? It is bright,
keen-edged, finely tapered; it is dangerous-looking. I never yet felt
the impulse which could move me to direct this against a
fellow-creature. It is difficult to fancy that circumstances could nerve
my arm to strike home with this long knife."

"I should hate to do it," replied Shirley, "but I think I could do it,
if goaded by certain exigencies which I can imagine." And Miss Keeldar
quietly sipped her glass of new milk, looking somewhat thoughtful and a
little pale; though, indeed, when did she not look pale? She was never
florid.

The milk sipped and the bread eaten, Fanny was again summoned. She and
Eliza were recommended to go to bed, which they were quite willing to
do, being weary of the day's exertions, of much cutting of currant-buns,
and filling of urns and teapots, and running backwards and forwards
with trays. Ere long the maids' chamber door was heard to close.
Caroline took a candle and went quietly all over the house, seeing that
every window was fast and every door barred. She did not even evade the
haunted back kitchen nor the vault-like cellars. These visited, she
returned.

"There is neither spirit nor flesh in the house at present," she said,
"which should not be there. It is now near eleven o'clock, fully
bedtime; yet I would rather sit up a little longer, if you do not
object, Shirley. Here," she continued, "I have brought the brace of
pistols from my uncle's study. You may examine them at your leisure."

She placed them on the table before her friend.

"Why would you rather sit up longer?" asked Miss Keeldar, taking up the
firearms, examining them, and again laying them down.

"Because I have a strange, excited feeling in my heart."

"So have I."

"Is this state of sleeplessness and restlessness caused by something
electrical in the air, I wonder?"

"No; the sky is clear, the stars numberless. It is a fine night."

"But very still. I hear the water fret over its stony bed in Hollow's
Copse as distinctly as if it ran below the churchyard wall."

"I am glad it is so still a night. A moaning wind or rushing rain would
vex me to fever just now."

"Why, Shirley?"

"Because it would baffle my efforts to listen."

"Do you listen towards the Hollow?"

"Yes; it is the only quarter whence we can hear a sound just now."

"The only one, Shirley."

They both sat near the window, and both leaned their arms on the sill,
and both inclined their heads towards the open lattice. They saw each
other's young faces by the starlight and that dim June twilight which
does not wholly fade from the west till dawn begins to break in the
east.

"Mr. Helstone thinks we have no idea which way he is gone," murmured
Miss Keeldar, "nor on what errand, nor with what expectations, nor how
prepared. But I guess much; do not you?"

"I guess something."

"All those gentlemen - your cousin Moore included - think that you and I
are now asleep in our beds, unconscious."

"Caring nothing about them - hoping and fearing nothing for them," added
Caroline.

Both kept silent for full half an hour. The night was silent too; only
the church clock measured its course by quarters. Some words were
interchanged about the chill of the air. They wrapped their scarves
closer round them, resumed their bonnets, which they had removed, and
again watched.

Towards midnight the teasing, monotonous bark of the house-dog disturbed
the quietude of their vigil. Caroline rose, and made her way noiselessly
through the dark passages to the kitchen, intending to appease him with
a piece of bread. She succeeded. On returning to the dining-room she
found it all dark, Miss Keeldar having extinguished the candle. The
outline of her shape was visible near the still open window, leaning
out. Miss Helstone asked no questions; she stole to her side. The dog
recommenced barking furiously. Suddenly he stopped, and seemed to
listen. The occupants of the dining-room listened too, and not merely
now to the flow of the mill-stream. There was a nearer, though a
muffled, sound on the road below the churchyard - a measured, beating,
approaching sound - a dull tramp of marching feet.

It drew near. Those who listened by degrees comprehended its extent. It
was not the tread of two, nor of a dozen, nor of a score of men; it was
the tread of hundreds. They could see nothing; the high shrubs of the
garden formed a leafy screen between them and the road. To hear,
however, was not enough, and this they felt as the troop trod forwards,
and seemed actually passing the rectory. They felt it more when a human
voice - though that voice spoke but one word - broke the hush of the
night.

"Halt!"

A halt followed. The march was arrested. Then came a low conference, of
which no word was distinguishable from the dining-room.

"We must hear this," said Shirley.

She turned, took her pistols from the table, silently passed out through
the middle window of the dining-room, which was, in fact, a glass door,
stole down the walk to the garden wall, and stood listening under the
lilacs. Caroline would not have quitted the house had she been alone,
but where Shirley went she would go. She glanced at the weapon on the
sideboard, but left it behind her, and presently stood at her friend's
side. They dared not look over the wall, for fear of being seen; they
were obliged to crouch behind it. They heard these words, - 

"It looks a rambling old building. Who lives in it besides the damned
parson?"

"Only three women - his niece and two servants."

"Do you know where they sleep?"

"The lasses behind; the niece in a front room."

"And Helstone?"

"Yonder is his chamber. He was burning a light, but I see none now."

"Where would you get in?"

"If I were ordered to do his job - and he desarves it - I'd try yond' long
window; it opens to the dining-room. I could grope my way upstairs, and
I know his chamber."

"How would you manage about the women folk?"

"Let 'em alone except they shrieked, and then I'd soon quieten 'em. I
could wish to find the old chap asleep. If he waked, he'd be dangerous."

"Has he arms?"

"Firearms, allus - and allus loadened."

"Then you're a fool to stop us here. A shot would give the alarm. Moore
would be on us before we could turn round. We should miss our main
object."

"You might go on, I tell you. I'd engage Helstone alone."

A pause. One of the party dropped some weapon, which rang on the stone
causeway. At this sound the rectory dog barked again
furiously - fiercely.

"That spoils all!" said the voice. "He'll awake. A noise like that might
rouse the dead. You did not say there was a dog. Damn you! Forward!"

Forward they went - tramp, tramp - with mustering, manifold, slow-filing
tread. They were gone.

Shirley stood erect, looked over the wall, along the road.

"Not a soul remains," she said.

She stood and mused. "Thank God!" was the next observation.

Caroline repeated the ejaculation - not in so steady a tone. She was
trembling much. Her heart was beating fast and thick; her face was cold,
her forehead damp.

"Thank God for us!" she reiterated. "But what will happen elsewhere?
They have passed us by that they may make sure of others."

"They have done well," returned Shirley, with composure. "The others
will defend themselves. They can do it. They are prepared for them. With
us it is otherwise. My finger was on the trigger of this pistol. I was
quite ready to give that man, if he had entered, such a greeting as he
little calculated on; but behind him followed three hundred. I had
neither three hundred hands nor three hundred weapons. I could not have
effectually protected either you, myself, or the two poor women asleep
under that roof. Therefore I again earnestly thank God for insult and
peril escaped."

After a second pause she continued: "What is it my duty and wisdom to do
next? Not to stay here inactive, I am glad to say, but, of course, to
walk over to the Hollow."

"To the Hollow, Shirley?"

"To the Hollow. Will you go with me?"

"Where those men are gone?"

"They have taken the highway; we should not encounter them. The road
over the fields is as safe, silent, and solitary as a path through the
air would be. Will you go?"

"Yes," was the answer, given mechanically, not because the speaker
wished or was prepared to go, or, indeed, was otherwise than scared at
the prospect of going, but because she felt she could not abandon
Shirley.

"Then we must fasten up these windows, and leave all as secure as we can
behind us. Do you know what we are going for, Cary?"

"Yes - no - because you wish it."

"Is that all? And are you so obedient to a mere caprice of mine? What a
docile wife you would make to a stern husband! The moon's face is not
whiter than yours at this moment, and the aspen at the gate does not
tremble more than your busy fingers; and so, tractable and
terror-struck, and dismayed and devoted, you would follow me into the
thick of real danger! Cary, let me give your fidelity a motive. We are
going for Moore's sake - to see if we can be of use to him, to make an
effort to warn him of what is coming."

"To be sure! I am a blind, weak fool, and you are acute and sensible,
Shirley. I will go with you; I will gladly go with you!"

"I do not doubt it. You would die blindly and meekly for me, but you
would intelligently and gladly die for Moore. But, in truth, there is no
question of death to-night; we run no risk at all."

Caroline rapidly closed shutter and lattice. "Do not fear that I shall
not have breath to run as fast as you can possibly run, Shirley. Take my
hand. Let us go straight across the fields."

"But you cannot climb walls?"

"To-night I can."

"You are afraid of hedges, and the beck which we shall be forced to
cross?"

"I can cross it."

They started; they ran. Many a wall checked but did not baffle them.
Shirley was surefooted and agile; she could spring like a deer when she
chose. Caroline, more timid and less dexterous, fell once or twice, and
bruised herself; but she rose again directly, saying she was not hurt. A
quickset hedge bounded the last field; they lost time in seeking a gap
in it. The aperture, when found, was narrow, but they worked their way
through. The long hair, the tender skin, the silks and the muslins
suffered; but what was chiefly regretted was the impediment this
difficulty had caused to speed. On the other side they met the beck,
flowing deep in a rough bed. At this point a narrow plank formed the
only bridge across it. Shirley had trodden the plank successfully and
fearlessly many a time before; Caroline had never yet dared to risk the
transit.

"I will carry you across," said Miss Keeldar. "You are light, and I am
not weak. Let me try."

"If I fall in, you may fish me out," was the answer, as a grateful
squeeze compressed her hand. Caroline, without pausing, trod forward on
the trembling plank as if it were a continuation of the firm turf.
Shirley, who followed, did not cross it more resolutely or safely. In
their present humour, on their present errand, a strong and foaming
channel would have been a barrier to neither. At the moment they were
above the control either of fire or water. All Stilbro' Moor, alight and
aglow with bonfires, would not have stopped them, nor would Calder or
Aire thundering in flood. Yet one sound made them pause. Scarce had
they set foot on the solid opposite bank when a shot split the air from
the north. One second elapsed. Further off burst a like note in the
south. Within the space of three minutes similar signals boomed in the
east and west.

"I thought we were dead at the first explosion," observed Shirley,
drawing a long breath. "I felt myself hit in the temples, and I
concluded your heart was pierced; but the reiterated voice was an
explanation. Those are signals - it is their way - the attack must be
near. We should have had wings. Our feet have not borne us swiftly
enough."

A portion of the copse was now to clear. When they emerged from it the
mill lay just below them. They could look down upon the buildings, the
yard; they could see the road beyond. And the first glance in that
direction told Shirley she was right in her conjecture. They were
already too late to give warning. It had taken more time than they
calculated on to overcome the various obstacles which embarrassed the
short cut across the fields.

The road, which should have been white, was dark with a moving mass. The
rioters were assembled in front of the closed yard gates, and a single
figure stood within, apparently addressing them. The mill itself was
perfectly black and still. There was neither life, light, nor motion
around it.

"Surely he is prepared. Surely that is not Moore meeting them alone?"
whispered Shirley.

"It is. We must go to him. I will go to him."

" That you will not."

"Why did I come, then? I came only for him. I shall join him."

"Fortunately it is out of your power. There is no entrance to the yard."

"There is a small entrance at the back, besides the gates in front. It
opens by a secret method which I know. I will try it."

"Not with my leave."

Miss Keeldar clasped her round the waist with both arms and held her
back. "Not one step shall you stir," she went on authoritatively. "At
this moment Moore would be both shocked and embarrassed if he saw either
you or me. Men never want women near them in time of real danger."

"I would not trouble - I would help him," was the reply.

"How? - by inspiring him with heroism? Pooh! these are not the days of
chivalry. It is not a tilt at a tournament we are going to behold, but a
struggle about money, and food, and life."

"It is natural that I should be at his side."

"As queen of his heart? His mill is his lady-love, Cary! Backed by his
factory and his frames, he has all the encouragement he wants or can
know. It is not for love or beauty, but for ledger and broadcloth, he is
going to break a spear. Don't  be sentimental; Robert is not so."

"I could help him; I will seek him."

"Off then - I let you go - seek Moore. You'll not find him."

She loosened her hold. Caroline sped like levelled shaft from bent bow;
after her rang a jesting, gibing laugh. "Look well there is no mistake!"
was the warning given.

But there was a mistake. Miss Helstone paused, hesitated, gazed. The
figure had suddenly retreated from the gate, and was running back
hastily to the mill.

"Make haste, Lina!" cried Shirley; "meet him before he enters."

Caroline slowly returned. "It is not Robert," she said. "It has neither
his height, form, nor bearing."

"I saw it was not Robert when I let you go. How could you imagine it? It
is a shabby little figure of a private soldier; they had posted him as
sentinel. He is safe in the mill now. I saw the door open and admit him.
My mind grows easier. Robert is prepared. Our warning would have been
superfluous; and now I am thankful we came too late to give it. It has
saved us the trouble of a scene. How fine to have entered the
counting-house toute éperdue , and to have found oneself in presence of
Messrs. Armitage and Ramsden smoking, Malone swaggering, your uncle
sneering, Mr. Sykes sipping a cordial, and Moore himself in his cold
man-of-business vein! I am glad we missed it all."

"I wonder if there are many in the mill, Shirley!"

"Plenty to defend it. The soldiers we have twice seen to-day were going
there, no doubt, and the group we noticed surrounding your cousin in the
fields will be with him."

"What are they doing now, Shirley? What is that noise?"

"Hatchets and crowbars against the yard gates. They are forcing them.
Are you afraid?"

"No; but my heart throbs fast. I have a difficulty in standing. I will
sit down. Do you feel unmoved?"

"Hardly that; but I am glad I came. We shall see what transpires with
our own eyes. We are here on the spot, and none know it. Instead of
amazing the curate, the clothier, and the corn-dealer with a romantic
rush on the stage, we stand alone with the friendly night, its mute
stars, and these whispering trees, whose report our friends will not
come to gather."

"Shirley, Shirley, the gates are down! That crash was like the felling
of great trees. Now they are pouring through. They will break down the
mill doors as they have broken the gate. What can Robert do against so
many? Would to God I were a little nearer him - could hear him
speak - could speak to him! With my will - my longing to serve him - I
could not be a useless burden in his way; I could be turned to some
account."

"They come on!" cried Shirley. "How steadily they march in! There is
discipline in their ranks. I will not say there is courage - hundreds
against tens are no proof of that quality - but"  she dropped her voice 
"there is suffering and desperation enough amongst them. These goads
will urge them forwards."

"Forwards against Robert; and they hate him. Shirley, is there much
danger they will win the day?"

"We shall see. Moore and Helstone are of 'earth's first blood' - no
bunglers - no cravens - - "

A crash - smash - shiver - stopped their whispers. A simultaneously hurled
volley of stones had saluted the broad front of the mill, with all its
windows; and now every pane of every lattice lay in shattered and
pounded fragments. A yell followed this demonstration - a rioters'
yell - a north-of-England, a Yorkshire, a West-Riding, a
West-Riding-clothing-district-of-Yorkshire rioters' yell.

You never heard that sound, perhaps, reader? So much the better for your
ears - perhaps for your heart, since, if it rends the air in hate to
yourself, or to the men or principles you approve, the interests to
which you wish well, wrath wakens to the cry of hate; the lion shakes
his mane, and rises to the howl of the hyena; caste stands up, ireful
against caste; and the indignant, wronged spirit of the middle rank
bears down in zeal and scorn on the famished and furious mass of the
operative class. It is difficult to be tolerant, difficult to be just,
in such moments.

Caroline rose; Shirley put her arm round her: they stood together as
still as the straight stems of two trees. That yell was a long one, and
when it ceased the night was yet full of the swaying and murmuring of a
crowd.

"What next?" was the question of the listeners. Nothing came yet. The
mill remained mute as a mausoleum.

"He cannot be alone!" whispered Caroline.

"I would stake all I have that he is as little alone as he is alarmed,"
responded Shirley.

Shots were discharged by the rioters. Had the defenders waited for this
signal? It seemed so. The hitherto inert and passive mill woke; fire
flashed from its empty window-frames; a volley of musketry pealed sharp
through the Hollow.

"Moore speaks at last!" said Shirley, "and he seems to have the gift of
tongues. That was not a single voice."

"He has been forbearing. No one can accuse him of rashness," alleged
Caroline. "Their discharge preceded his. They broke his gates and his
windows. They fired at his garrison before he repelled them."

What was going on now? It seemed difficult, in the darkness, to
distinguish; but something terrible, a still-renewing tumult, was
obvious - fierce attacks, desperate repulses. The mill-yard, the mill
itself, was full of battle movement. There was scarcely any cessation
now of the discharge of firearms; and there was struggling, rushing,
trampling, and shouting between. The aim of the assailants seemed to be
to enter the mill, that of the defenders to beat them off. They heard
the rebel leader cry, "To the back, lads!" They heard a voice retort,
"Come round; we will meet you."

"To the counting-house!" was the order again.

"Welcome! we shall have you there!" was the response. And accordingly
the fiercest blaze that had yet glowed, the loudest rattle that had yet
been heard, burst from the counting-house front when the mass of rioters
rushed up to it.

The voice that had spoken was Moore's own voice. They could tell by its
tones that his soul was now warm with the conflict; they could guess
that the fighting animal was roused in every one of those men there
struggling together, and was for the time quite paramount above the
rational human being.

Both the girls felt their faces glow and their pulses throb; both knew
they would do no good by rushing down into the melée . They desired
neither to deal nor to receive blows; but they could not have run
away - Caroline no more than Shirley; they could not have fainted; they
could not have taken their eyes from the dim, terrible scene - from the
mass of cloud, of smoke, the musket-lightning - for the world.

"How and when would it end?" was the demand throbbing in their throbbing
pulses. "Would a juncture arise in which they could be useful?" was what
they waited to see; for though Shirley put off their too-late arrival
with a jest, and was ever ready to satirize her own or any other
person's enthusiasm, she would have given a farm of her best land for a
chance of rendering good service.

The chance was not vouchsafed her; the looked-for juncture never came.
It was not likely. Moore had expected this attack for days, perhaps
weeks; he was prepared for it at every point. He had fortified and
garrisoned his mill, which in itself was a strong building. He was a
cool, brave man; he stood to the defence with unflinching firmness.
Those who were with him caught his spirit, and copied his demeanour. The
rioters had never been so met before. At other mills they had attacked
they had found no resistance; an organized, resolute defence was what
they never dreamed of encountering. When their leaders saw the steady
fire kept up from the mill, witnessed the composure and determination of
its owner, heard themselves coolly defied and invited on to death, and
beheld their men falling wounded round them, they felt that nothing was
to be done here. In haste they mustered their forces, drew them away
from the building. A roll was called over, in which the men answered to
figures instead of names. They dispersed wide over the fields, leaving
silence and ruin behind them. The attack, from its commencement to its
termination, had not occupied an hour.

Day was by this time approaching; the west was dim, the east beginning
to gleam. It would have seemed that the girls who had watched this
conflict would now wish to hasten to the victors, on whose side all
their interest had been enlisted; but they only very cautiously
approached the now battered mill, and when suddenly a number of soldiers
and gentlemen appeared at the great door opening into the yard, they
quickly stepped aside into a shed, the deposit of old iron and timber,
whence they could see without being seen.

It was no cheering spectacle. These premises were now a mere blot of
desolation on the fresh front of the summer dawn. All the copse up the
Hollow was shady and dewy, the hill at its head was green; but just
here, in the centre of the sweet glen, Discord, broken loose in the
night from control, had beaten the ground with his stamping hoofs, and
left it waste and pulverized. The mill yawned all ruinous with unglazed
frames; the yard was thickly bestrewn with stones and brickbats; and
close under the mill, with the glittering fragments of the shattered
windows, muskets and other weapons lay here and there. More than one
deep crimson stain was visible on the gravel, a human body lay quiet on
its face near the gates, and five or six wounded men writhed and moaned
in the bloody dust.

Miss Keeldar's countenance changed at this view. It was the after-taste
of the battle, death and pain replacing excitement and exertion. It was
the blackness the bright fire leaves when its blaze is sunk, its warmth
failed, and its glow faded.

"This is what I wished to prevent," she said, in a voice whose cadence
betrayed the altered impulse of her heart.

"But you could not prevent it; you did your best - it was in vain," said
Caroline comfortingly. "Don't  grieve, Shirley."

"I am sorry for those poor fellows," was the answer, while the spark in
her glance dissolved to dew. "Are any within the mill hurt, I wonder? Is
that your uncle?"

"It is, and there is Mr. Malone; and, O Shirley, there is Robert!"

"Well"  resuming her former tone , "don't  squeeze your fingers quite
into my hand. I see. There is nothing wonderful in that. We knew he, at
least, was here, whoever might be absent."

"He is coming here towards us, Shirley!"

"Towards the pump, that is to say, for the purpose of washing his hands
and his forehead, which has got a scratch, I perceive."

"He bleeds, Shirley. Don't  hold me. I must go."

"Not a step."

"He is hurt, Shirley!"

"Fiddlestick!"

"But I must go to him. I wish to go so much. I cannot bear to be
restrained."

"What for?"

"To speak to him, to ask how he is, and what I can do for him."

"To tease and annoy him; to make a spectacle of yourself and him before
those soldiers, Mr. Malone, your uncle, et cetera. Would he like it,
think you? Would you like to remember it a week hence?"

"Am I always to be curbed and kept down?" demanded Caroline, a little
passionately.

"For his sake, yes; and still more for your own. I tell you, if you
showed yourself now you would repent it an hour hence, and so would
Robert."

"You think he would not like it, Shirley?"

"Far less than he would like our stopping him to say good-night, which
you were so sore about."

"But that was all play; there was no danger."

"And this is serious work; he must be unmolested."

"I only wish to go to him because he is my cousin - you understand?"

"I quite understand. But now, watch him. He has bathed his forehead, and
the blood has ceased trickling. His hurt is really a mere graze; I can
see it from hence. He is going to look after the wounded men."

Accordingly Mr. Moore and Mr. Helstone went round the yard, examining
each prostrate form. They then gave directions to have the wounded taken
up and carried into the mill. This duty being performed, Joe Scott was
ordered to saddle his master's horse and Mr. Helstone's pony, and the
two gentlemen rode away full gallop, to seek surgical aid in different
directions.

Caroline was not yet pacified.

"Shirley, Shirley, I should have liked to speak one word to him before
he went," she murmured, while the tears gathered glittering in her eyes.

"Why do you cry, Lina?" asked Miss Keeldar a little sternly. "You ought
to be glad instead of sorry. Robert has escaped any serious harm; he is
victorious; he has been cool and brave in combat; he is now considerate
in triumph. Is this a time - are these causes for weeping?"

"You do not know what I have in my heart," pleaded the other - "what
pain, what distraction - nor whence it arises. I can understand that you
should exult in Robert's greatness and goodness; so do I, in one sense,
but in another I feel so miserable. I am too far removed from him. I
used to be nearer. Let me alone, Shirley. Do let me cry a few minutes;
it relieves me."

Miss Keeldar, feeling her tremble in every limb, ceased to expostulate
with her. She went out of the shed, and left her to weep in peace. It
was the best plan. In a few minutes Caroline rejoined her, much calmer.
She said, with her natural, docile, gentle manner, "Come, Shirley, we
will go home now. I promise not to try to see Robert again till he asks
for me. I never will try to push myself on him. I thank you for
restraining me just now."

"I did it with a good intention," returned Miss Keeldar.

"Now, dear Lina," she continued, "let us turn our faces to the cool
morning breeze, and walk very quietly back to the rectory. We will steal
in as we stole out. None shall know where we have been or what we have
seen to-night; neither taunt nor misconstruction can consequently molest
us. To-morrow we will see Robert, and be of good cheer; but I will say
no more, lest I should begin to cry too. I seem hard towards you, but I
am not so."




CHAPTER XX.

TO-MORROW.


The two girls met no living soul on their way back to the rectory. They
let themselves in noiselessly; they stole upstairs unheard - the breaking
morning gave them what light they needed. Shirley sought her couch
immediately; and though the room was strange - for she had never slept at
the rectory before - and though the recent scene was one unparalleled for
excitement and terror by any it had hitherto been her lot to witness,
yet scarce was her head laid on the pillow ere a deep, refreshing sleep
closed her eyes and calmed her senses.

Perfect health was Shirley's enviable portion. Though warm-hearted and
sympathetic, she was not nervous; powerful emotions could rouse and sway
without exhausting her spirit. The tempest troubled and shook her while
it lasted, but it left her elasticity unbent, and her freshness quite
unblighted. As every day brought her stimulating emotion, so every night
yielded her recreating rest. Caroline now watched her sleeping, and read
the serenity of her mind in the beauty of her happy countenance.

For herself, being of a different temperament, she could not sleep. The
commonplace excitement of the tea-drinking and school-gathering would
alone have sufficed to make her restless all night; the effect of the
terrible drama which had just been enacted before her eyes was not
likely to quit her for days. It was vain even to try to retain a
recumbent posture; she sat up by Shirley's side, counting the slow
minutes, and watching the June sun mount the heavens.

Life wastes fast in such vigils as Caroline had of late but too often
kept - vigils during which the mind, having no pleasant food to nourish
it, no manna of hope, no hived-honey of joyous memories, tries to live
on the meagre diet of wishes, and failing to derive thence either
delight or support, and feeling itself ready to perish with craving
want, turns to philosophy, to resolution, to resignation; calls on all
these gods for aid, calls vainly - is unheard, unhelped, and languishes.

Caroline was a Christian; therefore in trouble she framed many a prayer
after the Christian creed, preferred it with deep earnestness, begged
for patience, strength, relief. This world, however, we all know, is the
scene of trial and probation; and, for any favourable result her
petitions had yet wrought, it seemed to her that they were unheard and
unaccepted. She believed, sometimes, that God had turned His face from
her. At moments she was a Calvinist, and, sinking into the gulf of
religious despair, she saw darkening over her the doom of reprobation.

Most people have had a period or periods in their lives when they have
felt thus forsaken - when, having long hoped against hope, and still seen
the day of fruition deferred, their hearts have truly sickened within
them. This is a terrible hour, but it is often that darkest point which
precedes the rise of day - that turn of the year when the icy January
wind carries over the waste at once the dirge of departing winter and
the prophecy of coming spring. The perishing birds, however, cannot thus
understand the blast before which they shiver; and as little can the
suffering soul recognize, in the climax of its affliction, the dawn of
its deliverance. Yet, let whoever grieves still cling fast to love and
faith in God. God will never deceive, never finally desert him. "Whom He
loveth, He chasteneth." These words are true, and should not be
forgotten.

The household was astir at last; the servants were up; the shutters were
opened below. Caroline, as she quitted the couch, which had been but a
thorny one to her, felt that revival of spirits which the return of day,
of action, gives to all but the wholly despairing or actually dying. She
dressed herself, as usual, carefully, trying so to arrange her hair and
attire that nothing of the forlornness she felt at heart should be
visible externally. She looked as fresh as Shirley when both were
dressed, only that Miss Keeldar's eyes were lively, and Miss Helstone's
languid.

"To-day I shall have much to say to Moore," were Shirley's first words;
and you could see in her face that life was full of interest,
expectation, and occupation for her. "He will have to undergo
cross-examination," she added. "I dare say he thinks he has outwitted me
cleverly. And this is the way men deal with women - still concealing
danger from them - thinking, I suppose, to spare them pain. They
imagined we little knew where they were to-night. We know they little
conjectured where we were. Men, I believe, fancy women's minds something
like those of children. Now, that is a mistake."

This was said as she stood at the glass, training her naturally waved
hair into curls, by twining it round her fingers. She took up the theme
again five minutes after, as Caroline fastened her dress and clasped her
girdle.

"If men could see us as we really are, they would be a little amazed;
but the cleverest, the acutest men are often under an illusion about
women. They do not read them in a true light; they misapprehend them,
both for good and evil. Their good woman is a queer thing, half doll,
half angel; their bad woman almost always a fiend. Then to hear them
fall into ecstasies with each other's creations - worshipping the heroine
of such a poem, novel, drama - thinking it fine, divine! Fine and divine
it may be, but often quite artificial - false as the rose in my best
bonnet there. If I spoke all I think on this point, if I gave my real
opinion of some first-rate female characters in first-rate works, where
should I be? Dead under a cairn of avenging stones in half an hour."

"Shirley, you chatter so, I can't  fasten you. Be still. And, after all,
authors' heroines are almost as good as authoresses' heroes."

"Not at all. Women read men more truly than men read women. I'll prove
that in a magazine paper some day when I've  time; only it will never be
inserted. It will be 'declined with thanks,' and left for me at the
publisher's."

"To be sure. You could not write cleverly enough. You don't  know enough.
You are not learned, Shirley."

"God knows I can't  contradict you, Cary; I'm as ignorant as a stone.
There's one comfort, however: you are not much better."

They descended to breakfast.

"I wonder how Mrs. Pryor and Hortense Moore have passed the night," said
Caroline, as she made the coffee. "Selfish being that I am, I never
thought of either of them till just now. They will have heard all the
tumult, Fieldhead and the cottage are so near; and Hortense is timid in
such matters - so, no doubt, is Mrs. Pryor."

"Take my word for it, Lina, Moore will have contrived to get his sister
out of the way. She went home with Miss Mann. He will have quartered
her there for the night. As to Mrs. Pryor, I own I am uneasy about her;
but in another half-hour we will be with her."

By this time the news of what had happened at the Hollow was spread all
over the neighbourhood. Fanny, who had been to Fieldhead to fetch the
milk, returned in panting haste with tidings that there had been a
battle in the night at Mr. Moore's mill, and that some said twenty men
were killed. Eliza, during Fanny's absence, had been apprised by the
butcher's boy that the mill was burnt to the ground. Both women rushed
into the parlour to announce these terrible facts to the ladies,
terminating their clear and accurate narrative by the assertion that
they were sure master must have been in it all. He and Thomas, the
clerk, they were confident, must have gone last night to join Mr. Moore
and the soldiers. Mr. Malone, too, had not been heard of at his lodgings
since yesterday afternoon; and Joe Scott's wife and family were in the
greatest distress, wondering what had become of their head.

Scarcely was this information imparted when a knock at the kitchen door
announced the Fieldhead errand-boy, arrived in hot haste, bearing a
billet from Mrs. Pryor. It was hurriedly written, and urged Miss Keeldar
to return directly, as the neighbourhood and the house seemed likely to
be all in confusion, and orders would have to be given which the
mistress of the hall alone could regulate. In a postscript it was
entreated that Miss Helstone might not be left alone at the rectory. She
had better, it was suggested, accompany Miss Keeldar.

"There are not two opinions on that head," said Shirley, as she tied on
her own bonnet, and then ran to fetch Caroline's.

"But what will Fanny and Eliza do? And if my uncle returns?"

"Your uncle will not return yet; he has other fish to fry. He will be
galloping backwards and forwards from Briarfield to Stilbro' all day,
rousing the magistrates in the court-house and the officers at the
barracks; and Fanny and Eliza can have in Joe Scott's and the clerk's
wives to bear them company. Besides, of course, there is no real danger
to be apprehended now. Weeks will elapse before the rioters can again
rally, or plan any other attempt; and I am much mistaken if Moore and
Mr. Helstone will not take advantage of last night's outbreak to quell
them altogether. They will frighten the authorities of Stilbro' into
energetic measures. I only hope they will not be too severe - not pursue
the discomfited too relentlessly."

"Robert will not be cruel. We saw that last night," said Caroline.

"But he will be hard," retorted Shirley; "and so will your uncle."

As they hurried along the meadow and plantation path to Fieldhead, they
saw the distant highway already alive with an unwonted flow of
equestrians and pedestrians, tending in the direction of the usually
solitary Hollow. On reaching the hall, they found the backyard gates
open, and the court and kitchen seemed crowded with excited
milk-fetchers - men, women, and children - whom Mrs. Gill, the
housekeeper, appeared vainly persuading to take their milk-cans and
depart.  It is , or was , by-the-bye, the custom in the north of
England for the cottagers on a country squire's estate to receive their
supplies of milk and butter from the dairy of the manor house, on whose
pastures a herd of milch kine was usually fed for the convenience of the
neighbourhood. Miss Keeldar owned such a herd - all deep-dewlapped,
Craven cows, reared on the sweet herbage and clear waters of bonny
Airedale; and very proud she was of their sleek aspect and high
condition.  Seeing now the state of matters, and that it was desirable
to effect a clearance of the premises, Shirley stepped in amongst the
gossiping groups. She bade them good-morning with a certain frank,
tranquil ease - the natural characteristic of her manner when she
addressed numbers, especially if those numbers belonged to the
working-class; she was cooler amongst her equals, and rather proud to
those above her. She then asked them if they had all got their milk
measured out; and understanding that they had, she further observed that
she "wondered what they were waiting for, then."

"We're just talking a bit over this battle there has been at your mill,
mistress," replied a man.

"Talking a bit! Just like you!" said Shirley. "It is a queer thing all
the world is so fond of talking over events. You talk if anybody
dies suddenly; you talk if a fire breaks out; you talk if a
mill-owner fails; you talk if he's murdered. What good does your
talking do?"

There is nothing the lower orders like better than a little downright
good-humoured rating. Flattery they scorn very much; honest abuse they
enjoy. They call it speaking plainly, and take a sincere delight in
being the objects thereof. The homely harshness of Miss Keeldar's
salutation won her the ear of the whole throng in a second.

"We're no war nor some 'at is aboon us, are we?" asked a man, smiling.

"Nor a whit better. You that should be models of industry are just as
gossip-loving as the idle. Fine, rich people that have nothing to do may
be partly excused for trifling their time away; you who have to earn
your bread with the sweat of your brow are quite inexcusable."

"That's queer, mistress. Suld we never have a holiday because we work
hard?"

" Never ," was the prompt answer; "unless," added the "mistress," with a
smile that half belied the severity of her speech - "unless you knew how
to make a better use of it than to get together over rum and tea if you
are women, or over beer and pipes if you are men, and talk scandal at
your neighbours' expense. Come, friends," she added, changing at once
from bluntness to courtesy, "oblige me by taking your cans and going
home. I expect several persons to call to-day, and it will be
inconvenient to have the avenues to the house crowded."

Yorkshire people are as yielding to persuasion as they are stubborn
against compulsion. The yard was clear in five minutes.

"Thank you, and good-bye to you, friends," said Shirley, as she closed
the gates on a quiet court.

Now, let me hear the most refined of cockneys presume to find fault with
Yorkshire manners. Taken as they ought to be, the majority of the lads
and lasses of the West Riding are gentlemen and ladies, every inch of
them. It is only against the weak affectation and futile pomposity of a
would-be aristocrat they turn mutinous.

Entering by the back way, the young ladies passed through the kitchen
 or house , as the inner kitchen is called  to the hall. Mrs. Pryor
came running down the oak staircase to meet them. She was all unnerved;
her naturally sanguine complexion was pale; her usually placid, though
timid, blue eye was wandering, unsettled, alarmed. She did not, however,
break out into any exclamations, or hurried narrative of what had
happened. Her predominant feeling had been in the course of the night,
and was now this morning, a sense of dissatisfaction with herself that
she could not feel firmer, cooler, more equal to the demands of the
occasion.

"You are aware," she began with a trembling voice, and yet the most
conscientious anxiety to avoid exaggeration in what she was about to
say, "that a body of rioters has attacked Mr. Moore's mill to-night. We
heard the firing and confusion very plainly here; we none of us slept.
It was a sad night. The house has been in great bustle all the morning
with people coming and going. The servants have applied to me for orders
and directions, which I really did not feel warranted in giving. Mr.
Moore has, I believe, sent up for refreshments for the soldiers and
others engaged in the defence, for some conveniences also for the
wounded. I could not undertake the responsibility of giving orders or
taking measures. I fear delay may have been injurious in some instances;
but this is not my house. You were absent, my dear Miss Keeldar. What
could I do?"

"Were no refreshments sent?" asked Shirley, while her countenance,
hitherto so clear, propitious, and quiet, even while she was rating the
milk-fetchers, suddenly turned dark and warm.

"I think not, my dear."

"And nothing for the wounded - no linen, no wine, no bedding?"

"I think not. I cannot tell what Mrs. Gill did; but it seemed impossible
to me, at the moment, to venture to dispose of your property by sending
supplies to soldiers. Provisions for a company of soldiers sounds
formidable. How many there are I did not ask; but I could not think of
allowing them to pillage the house, as it were. I intended to do what
was right, yet I did not see the case quite clearly, I own."

"It lies in a nutshell, notwithstanding. These soldiers have risked
their lives in defence of my property: I suppose they have a right to my
gratitude. The wounded are our fellow-creatures: I suppose we should aid
them. - Mrs. Gill!"

She turned, and called in a voice more clear than soft. It rang through
the thick oak of the hall and kitchen doors more effectually than a
bell's summons. Mrs. Gill, who was deep in bread-making, came with hands
and apron in culinary case, not having dared to stop to rub the dough
from the one or to shake the flour from the other. Her mistress had
never called a servant in that voice save once before, and that was when
she had seen from the window Tartar in full tug with two carriers' dogs,
each of them a match for him in size, if not in courage, and their
masters standing by, encouraging their animals, while hers was
unbefriended. Then indeed she had summoned John as if the Day of
Judgment were at hand. Nor had she waited for the said John's coming,
but had walked out into the lane bonnetless, and after informing the
carriers that she held them far less of men than the three brutes
whirling and worrying in the dust before them, had put her hands round
the thick neck of the largest of the curs, and given her whole strength
to the essay of choking it from Tartar's torn and bleeding eye, just
above and below which organ the vengeful fangs were inserted. Five or
six men were presently on the spot to help her, but she never thanked
one of them. "They might have come before if their will had been good,"
she said. She had not a word for anybody during the rest of the day, but
sat near the hall fire till evening watching and tending Tartar, who lay
all gory, stiff, and swelled on a mat at her feet. She wept furtively
over him sometimes, and murmured the softest words of pity and
endearment, in tones whose music the old, scarred, canine warrior
acknowledged by licking her hand or her sandal alternately with his own
red wounds. As to John, his lady turned a cold shoulder on him for a
week afterwards.

Mrs. Gill, remembering this little episode, came "all of a tremble," as
she said herself. In a firm, brief voice Miss Keeldar proceeded to put
questions and give orders. That at such a time Fieldhead should have
evinced the inhospitality of a miser's hovel stung her haughty spirit to
the quick; and the revolt of its pride was seen in the heaving of her
heart, stirred stormily under the lace and silk which veiled it.

"How long is it since that message came from the mill?"

"Not an hour yet, ma'am," answered the housekeeper soothingly.

"Not an hour! You might almost as well have said not a day. They will
have applied elsewhere by this time. Send a man instantly down to tell
them that everything this house contains is at Mr. Moore's, Mr.
Helstone's, and the soldiers' service. Do that first."

While the order was being executed, Shirley moved away from her friends,
and stood at the hall-window, silent, unapproachable. When Mrs. Gill
came back, she turned. The purple flush which painful excitement kindles
on a pale cheek glowed on hers; the spark which displeasure lights in a
dark eye fired her glance.

"Let the contents of the larder and the wine-cellar be brought up, put
into the hay-carts, and driven down to the Hollow. If there does not
happen to be much bread or much meat in the house, go to the butcher and
baker, and desire them to send what they have. But I will see for
myself."

She moved off.

"All will be right soon; she will get over it in an hour," whispered
Caroline to Mrs. Pryor. "Go upstairs, dear madam," she added
affectionately, "and try to be as calm and easy as you can. The truth
is, Shirley will blame herself more than you before the day is over."

By dint of a few more gentle assurances and persuasions, Miss Helstone
contrived to soothe the agitated lady. Having accompanied her to her
apartment, and promised to rejoin her there when things were settled,
Caroline left her to see, as she said, "if she could be useful." She
presently found that she could be very useful; for the retinue of
servants at Fieldhead was by no means numerous, and just now their
mistress found plenty of occupation for all the hands at her command,
and for her own also. The delicate good-nature and dexterous activity
which Caroline brought to the aid of the housekeeper and maids - all
somewhat scared by their lady's unwonted mood - did a world of good at
once; it helped the assistants and appeased the directress. A chance
glance and smile from Caroline moved Shirley to an answering smile
directly. The former was carrying a heavy basket up the cellar stairs.

"This is a shame!" cried Shirley, running to her. "It will strain your
arm."

She took it from her, and herself bore it out into the yard. The cloud
of temper was dispelled when she came back; the flash in her eye was
melted; the shade on her forehead vanished. She resumed her usual
cheerful and cordial manner to those about her, tempering her revived
spirits with a little of the softness of shame at her previous unjust
anger.

She was still superintending the lading of the cart, when a gentleman
entered the yard and approached her ere she was aware of his presence.

"I hope I see Miss Keeldar well this morning?" he said, examining with
rather significant scrutiny her still flushed face.

She gave him a look, and then again bent to her employment without
reply. A pleasant enough smile played on her lips, but she hid it. The
gentleman repeated his salutation, stooping, that it might reach her ear
with more facility.

"Well enough, if she be good enough," was the answer; "and so is Mr.
Moore too, I dare say. To speak truth, I am not anxious about him; some
slight mischance would be only his just due. His conduct has been - we
will say strange just now, till we have time to characterize it by a
more exact epithet. Meantime, may I ask what brings him here?"

"Mr. Helstone and I have just received your message that everything at
Fieldhead was at our service. We judged, by the unlimited wording of the
gracious intimation, that you would be giving yourself too much trouble.
I perceive our conjecture was correct. We are not a regiment,
remember - only about half a dozen soldiers and as many civilians. Allow
me to retrench something from these too abundant supplies."

Miss Keeldar blushed, while she laughed at her own over-eager generosity
and most disproportionate calculations. Moore laughed too, very quietly
though; and as quietly he ordered basket after basket to be taken from
the cart, and remanded vessel after vessel to the cellar.

"The rector must hear of this," he said; "he will make a good story of
it. What an excellent army contractor Miss Keeldar would have been!"
Again he laughed, adding, "It is precisely as I conjectured."

"You ought to be thankful," said Shirley, "and not mock me. What could I
do? How could I gauge your appetites or number your band? For aught I
knew, there might have been fifty of you at least to victual. You told
me nothing; and then an application to provision soldiers naturally
suggests large ideas."

"It appears so," remarked Moore, levelling another of his keen, quiet
glances at the discomfited Shirley. - "Now," he continued, addressing the
carter, "I think you may take what remains to the Hollow. Your load will
be somewhat lighter than the one Miss Keeldar destined you to carry."

As the vehicle rumbled out of the yard, Shirley, rallying her spirits,
demanded what had become of the wounded.

"There was not a single man hurt on our side," was the answer.

"You were hurt yourself, on the temples," interposed a quick, low
voice - that of Caroline, who, having withdrawn within the shade of the
door, and behind the large person of Mrs. Gill, had till now escaped
Moore's notice. When she spoke, his eye searched the obscurity of her
retreat.

"Are you much hurt?" she inquired.

"As you might scratch your finger with a needle in sewing."

"Lift your hair and let us see."

He took his hat off, and did as he was bid, disclosing only a narrow
slip of court-plaster. Caroline indicated, by a slight movement of the
head, that she was satisfied, and disappeared within the clear obscure
of the interior.

"How did she know I was hurt?" asked Moore.

"By rumour, no doubt. But it is too good in her to trouble herself about
you. For my part, it was of your victims I was thinking when I inquired
after the wounded. What damage have your opponents sustained?"

"One of the rioters, or victims as you call them, was killed, and six
were hurt."

"What have you done with them?"

"What you will perfectly approve. Medical aid was procured immediately;
and as soon as we can get a couple of covered wagons and some clean
straw, they will be removed to Stilbro'."

"Straw! You must have beds and bedding. I will send my wagon directly,
properly furnished; and Mr. Yorke, I am sure, will send his."

"You guess correctly; he has volunteered already. And Mrs. Yorke - who,
like you, seems disposed to regard the rioters as martyrs, and me, and
especially Mr. Helstone, as murderers - is at this moment, I believe,
most assiduously engaged in fitting it up with feather-beds, pillows,
bolsters, blankets, etc. The victims lack no attentions, I promise
you. Mr. Hall, your favourite parson, has been with them ever since six
o'clock, exhorting them, praying with them, and even waiting on them
like any nurse; and Caroline's good friend, Miss Ainley, that very 
plain old maid, sent in a stock of lint and linen, something in the
proportion of another lady's allowance of beef and wine."

"That will do. Where is your sister?"

"Well cared for. I had her securely domiciled with Miss Mann. This very
morning the two set out for Wormwood Wells  a noted watering-place ,
and will stay there some weeks."

"So Mr. Helstone domiciled me at the rectory! Mighty clever you
gentlemen think you are! I make you heartily welcome to the idea, and
hope its savour, as you chew the cud of reflection upon it, gives you
pleasure. Acute and astute, why are you not also omniscient? How is it
that events transpire, under your very noses, of which you have no
suspicion? It should be so, otherwise the exquisite gratification of
outmanoeuvring you would be unknown. Ah, friend, you may search my
countenance, but you cannot read it."

Moore, indeed, looked as if he could not.

"You think me a dangerous specimen of my sex. Don't  you now?"

"A peculiar one, at least."

"But Caroline - is she peculiar?"

"In her way - yes."

"Her way! What is her way?"

"You know her as well as I do."

"And knowing her, I assert that she is neither eccentric nor difficult
of control. Is she?"

"That depends - - "

"However, there is nothing masculine about her ?"

"Why lay such emphasis on her ? Do you consider her a contrast, in that
respect, to yourself?"

"You do, no doubt; but that does not signify. Caroline is neither
masculine, nor of what they call the spirited order of women."

"I have seen her flash out."

"So have I, but not with manly fire. It was a short, vivid, trembling
glow, that shot up, shone, vanished - - "

"And left her scared at her own daring. You describe others besides
Caroline."

"The point I wish to establish is, that Miss Helstone, though gentle,
tractable, and candid enough, is still perfectly capable of defying even
Mr. Moore's penetration."

"What have you and she been doing?" asked Moore suddenly.

"Have you had any breakfast?"

"What is your mutual mystery?"

"If you are hungry, Mrs. Gill will give you something to eat here. Step
into the oak parlour, and ring the bell. You will be served as if at an
inn; or, if you like better, go back to the Hollow."

"The alternative is not open to me; I must go back. Good-morning. The
first leisure I have I will see you again."




CHAPTER XXI.

MRS. PRYOR.


While Shirley was talking with Moore, Caroline rejoined Mrs. Pryor
upstairs. She found that lady deeply depressed. She would not say that
Miss Keeldar's hastiness had hurt her feelings, but it was evident an
inward wound galled her. To any but a congenial nature she would have
seemed insensible to the quiet, tender attentions by which Miss Helstone
sought to impart solace; but Caroline knew that, unmoved or slightly
moved as she looked, she felt, valued, and was healed by them.

"I am deficient in self-confidence and decision," she said at last. "I
always have been deficient in those qualities. Yet I think Miss Keeldar
should have known my character well enough by this time to be aware that
I always feel an even painful solicitude to do right, to act for the
best. The unusual nature of the demand on my judgment puzzled me,
especially following the alarms of the night. I could not venture to act
promptly for another; but I trust no serious harm will result from my
lapse of firmness."

A gentle knock was here heard at the door. It was half opened.

"Caroline, come here," said a low voice.

Miss Helstone went out. There stood Shirley in the gallery, looking
contrite, ashamed, sorry as any repentant child.

"How is Mrs. Pryor?" she asked.

"Rather out of spirits," said Caroline.

"I have behaved very shamefully, very ungenerously, very ungratefully to
her," said Shirley. "How insolent in me to turn on her thus for what,
after all, was no fault - only an excess of conscientiousness on her
part. But I regret my error most sincerely. Tell her so, and ask if she
will forgive me."

Caroline discharged the errand with heartfelt pleasure. Mrs. Pryor rose,
came to the door. She did not like scenes; she dreaded them as all
timid people do. She said falteringly, "Come in, my dear."

Shirley did come in with some impetuosity. She threw her arms round her
governess, and while she kissed her heartily she said, "You know you
 must forgive me, Mrs. Pryor. I could not get on at all if there was a
misunderstanding between you and me."

"I have nothing to forgive," was the reply. "We will pass it over now,
if you please. The final result of the incident is that it proves more
plainly than ever how unequal I am to certain crises."

And that was the painful feeling which would remain on Mrs. Pryor's
mind. No effort of Shirley's or Caroline's could efface it thence. She
could forgive her offending pupil, not her innocent self.

Miss Keeldar, doomed to be in constant request during the morning, was
presently summoned downstairs again. The rector called first. A lively
welcome and livelier reprimand were at his service. He expected both,
and, being in high spirits, took them in equally good part.

In the course of his brief visit he quite forgot to ask after his niece;
the riot, the rioters, the mill, the magistrates, the heiress, absorbed
all his thoughts to the exclusion of family ties. He alluded to the part
himself and curate had taken in the defence of the Hollow.

"The vials of pharisaical wrath will be emptied on our heads for our
share in this business," he said; "but I defy every calumniator. I was
there only to support the law, to play my part as a man and a Briton;
which characters I deem quite compatible with those of the priest and
Levite, in their highest sense. Your tenant Moore," he went on, "has won
my approbation. A cooler commander I would not wish to see, nor a more
determined. Besides, the man has shown sound judgment and good
sense - first, in being thoroughly prepared for the event which has taken
place; and subsequently, when his well-concerted plans had secured him
success, in knowing how to use without abusing his victory. Some of the
magistrates are now well frightened, and, like all cowards, show a
tendency to be cruel. Moore restrains them with admirable prudence. He
has hitherto been very unpopular in the neighbourhood; but, mark my
words, the tide of opinion will now take a turn in his favour. People
will find out that they have not appreciated him, and will hasten to
remedy their error; and he, when he perceives the public disposed to
acknowledge his merits, will show a more gracious mien than that with
which he has hitherto favoured us."

Mr. Helstone was about to add to this speech some half-jesting,
half-serious warnings to Miss Keeldar on the subject of her rumoured
partiality for her talented tenant, when a ring at the door, announcing
another caller, checked his raillery; and as that other caller appeared
in the form of a white-haired elderly gentleman, with a rather truculent
countenance and disdainful eye - in short, our old acquaintance, and the
rector's old enemy, Mr. Yorke - the priest and Levite seized his hat, and
with the briefest of adieus to Miss Keeldar and the sternest of nods to
her guest took an abrupt leave.

Mr. Yorke was in no mild mood, and in no measured terms did he express
his opinion on the transaction of the night. Moore, the magistrates, the
soldiers, the mob leaders, each and all came in for a share of his
invectives; but he reserved his strongest epithets - and real racy
Yorkshire Doric adjectives they were - for the benefit of the fighting
parsons, the 'sanguinary, demoniac" rector and curate. According to him,
the cup of ecclesiastical guilt was now full indeed.

"The church," he said, "was in a bonny pickle now. It was time it came
down when parsons took to swaggering amang soldiers, blazing away wi'
bullet and gunpowder, taking the lives of far honester men than
themselves."

"What would Moore have done if nobody had helped him?" asked Shirley.

"Drunk as he'd brewed, eaten as he'd baked."

"Which means you would have left him by himself to face that mob. Good!
He has plenty of courage, but the greatest amount of gallantry that ever
garrisoned one human breast could scarce avail against two hundred."

"He had the soldiers, those poor slaves who hire out their own blood and
spill other folk's for money."

"You abuse soldiers almost as much as you abuse clergymen. All who wear
red coats are national refuse in your eyes, and all who wear black are
national swindlers. Mr. Moore, according to you, did wrong to get
military aid, and he did still worse to accept of any other aid. Your
way of talking amounts to this: he should have abandoned his mill and
his life to the rage of a set of misguided madmen, and Mr. Helstone and
every other gentleman in the parish should have looked on, and seen the
building razed and its owner slaughtered, and never stirred a finger to
save either."

"If Moore had behaved to his men from the beginning as a master ought to
behave, they never would have entertained their present feelings towards
him."

"Easy for you to talk," exclaimed Miss Keeldar, who was beginning to wax
warm in her tenant's cause - "you, whose family have lived at Briarmains
for six generations, to whose person the people have been accustomed for
fifty years, who know all their ways, prejudices, and preferences - easy,
indeed, for you to act so as to avoid offending them. But Mr. Moore
came a stranger into the district; he came here poor and friendless,
with nothing but his own energies to back him, nothing but his honour,
his talent, and his industry to make his way for him. A monstrous crime
indeed that, under such circumstances, he could not popularize his
naturally grave, quiet manners all at once; could not be jocular, and
free, and cordial with a strange peasantry, as you are with your
fellow-townsmen! An unpardonable transgression that when he introduced
improvements he did not go about the business in quite the most politic
way, did not graduate his changes as delicately as a rich capitalist
might have done! For errors of this sort is he to be the victim of mob
outrage? Is he to be denied even the privilege of defending himself? Are
those who have the hearts of men in their breasts  and Mr. Helstone, say
what you will of him, has such a heart  to be reviled like malefactors
because they stand by him, because they venture to espouse the cause of
one against two hundred?"

"Come, come now, be cool," said Mr. Yorke, smiling at the earnestness
with which Shirley multiplied her rapid questions.

"Cool! Must I listen coolly to downright nonsense - to dangerous
nonsense? No. I like you very well, Mr. Yorke, as you know, but I
thoroughly dislike some of your principles. All that cant - excuse me,
but I repeat the word - all that cant about soldiers and parsons is
most offensive in my ears. All ridiculous, irrational crying up of one
class, whether the same be aristocrat or democrat - all howling down of
another class, whether clerical or military - all exacting injustice to
individuals, whether monarch or mendicant - is really sickening to me;
all arraying of ranks against ranks, all party hatreds, all tyrannies
disguised as liberties, I reject and wash my hands of. You think you
are a philanthropist; you think you are an advocate of liberty; but I
will tell you this - Mr. Hall, the parson of Nunnely, is a better friend
both of man and freedom than Hiram Yorke, the reformer of Briarfield."

From a man Mr. Yorke would not have borne this language very patiently,
nor would he have endured it from some women; but he accounted Shirley
both honest and pretty, and her plain-spoken ire amused him. Besides, he
took a secret pleasure in hearing her defend her tenant, for we have
already intimated he had Robert Moore's interest very much at heart.
Moreover, if he wished to avenge himself for her severity, he knew the
means lay in his power: a word, he believed, would suffice to tame and
silence her, to cover her frank forehead with the rosy shadow of shame,
and veil the glow of her eye under down-drooped lid and lash.

"What more hast thou to say?" he inquired, as she paused, rather, it
appeared, to take breath than because her subject or her zeal was
exhausted.

"Say, Mr. Yorke!" was the answer, the speaker meantime walking fast from
wall to wall of the oak parlour - 'say? I have a great deal to say, if I
could get it out in lucid order, which I never can do. I have to say
that your views, and those of most extreme politicians, are such as none
but men in an irresponsible position can advocate; that they are
purely opposition views, meant only to be talked about, and never
intended to be acted on. Make you Prime Minister of England to-morrow,
and you would have to abandon them. You abuse Moore for defending his
mill. Had you been in Moore's place you could not with honour or sense
have acted otherwise than he acted. You abuse Mr. Helstone for
everything he does. Mr. Helstone has his faults; he sometimes does
wrong, but oftener right. Were you ordained vicar of Briarfield, you
would find it no easy task to sustain all the active schemes for the
benefit of the parish planned and persevered in by your predecessor. I
wonder people cannot judge more fairly of each other and themselves.
When I hear Messrs. Malone and Donne chatter about the authority of the
church, the dignity and claims of the priesthood, the deference due to
them as clergymen; when I hear the outbreaks of their small spite
against Dissenters; when I witness their silly, narrow jealousies and
assumptions; when their palaver about forms, and traditions, and
superstitions is sounding in my ear; when I behold their insolent
carriage to the poor, their often base servility to the rich - I think
the Establishment is indeed in a poor way, and both she and her sons
appear in the utmost need of reformation. Turning away distressed from
minster tower and village spire - ay, as distressed as a churchwarden who
feels the exigence of white-wash and has not wherewithal to purchase
lime - I recall your senseless sarcasms on the 'fat bishops,' the
'pampered parsons,' 'old mother church,' etc. I remember your strictures
on all who differ from you, your sweeping condemnation of classes and
individuals, without the slightest allowance made for circumstances or
temptations; and then, Mr. Yorke, doubt clutches my inmost heart as to
whether men exist clement, reasonable, and just enough to be entrusted
with the task of reform. I don't  believe you are of the number."

"You have an ill opinion of me, Miss Shirley. You never told me so much
of your mind before."

"I never had an opening. But I have sat on Jessy's stool by your chair
in the back-parlour at Briarmains, for evenings together, listening
excitedly to your talk, half admiring what you said, and half rebelling
against it. I think you a fine old Yorkshireman, sir. I am proud to have
been born in the same county and parish as yourself. Truthful, upright,
independent you are, as a rock based below seas; but also you are harsh,
rude, narrow, and merciless."

"Not to the poor, lass, nor to the meek of the earth; only to the proud
and high-minded."

"And what right have you, sir, to make such distinctions? A prouder, a
higher-minded man than yourself does not exist. You find it easy to
speak comfortably to your inferiors; you are too haughty, too ambitious,
too jealous to be civil to those above you. But you are all alike.
Helstone also is proud and prejudiced. Moore, though juster and more
considerate than either you or the rector, is still haughty, stern, and,
in a public sense, selfish. It is well there are such men as Mr. Hall to
be found occasionally - men of large and kind hearts, who can love their
whole race, who can forgive others for being richer, more prosperous, or
more powerful than they are. Such men may have less originality, less
force of character than you, but they are better friends to mankind."

"And when is it to be?" said Mr. Yorke, now rising.

"When is what to be?"

"The wedding."

"Whose wedding?"

"Only that of Robert Gérard Moore, Esq., of Hollow's Cottage, with Miss
Keeldar, daughter and heiress of the late Charles Cave Keeldar of
Fieldhead Hall."

Shirley gazed at the questioner with rising colour. But the light in her
eye was not faltering; it shone steadily - yes, it burned deeply.

"That is your revenge," she said slowly; then added, "Would it be a bad
match, unworthy of the late Charles Cave Keeldar's representative?"

"My lass, Moore is a gentleman; his blood is pure and ancient as mine or
thine."

"And we two set store by ancient blood? We have family pride, though one
of us at least is a republican?"

Yorke bowed as he stood before her. His lips were mute, but his eye
confessed the impeachment. Yes, he had family pride; you saw it in his
whole bearing.

"Moore is a gentleman," echoed Shirley, lifting her head with glad
grace. She checked herself. Words seemed crowding to her tongue. She
would not give them utterance; but her look spoke much at the moment.
What, Yorke tried to read, but could not. The language was there,
visible, but untranslatable - a poem, a fervid lyric, in an unknown
tongue. It was not a plain story, however, no simple gush of feeling, no
ordinary love-confession - that was obvious. It was something other,
deeper, more intricate than he guessed at. He felt his revenge had not
struck home. He felt that Shirley triumphed. She held him at fault,
baffled, puzzled. She enjoyed the moment, not he .

"And if Moore is a gentleman, you can be only a lady; therefore - - "

"Therefore there would be no inequality in our union."

"None."

"Thank you for your approbation. Will you give me away when I relinquish
the name of Keeldar for that of Moore?"

Mr. Yorke, instead of replying, gazed at her much puzzled. He could not
divine what her look signified - whether she spoke in earnest or in jest.
There were purpose and feeling, banter and scoff, playing, mingled, on
her mobile lineaments.

"I don't  understand thee," he said, turning away.

She laughed. "Take courage, sir; you are not singular in your ignorance.
But I suppose if Moore understands me that will do, will it not?"

"Moore may settle his own matters henceforward for me; I'll neither
meddle nor make with them further."

A new thought crossed her. Her countenance changed magically. With a
sudden darkening of the eye and austere fixing of the features she
demanded, "Have you been asked to interfere? Are you questioning me as
another's proxy?"

"The Lord save us! Whoever weds thee must look about him! Keep all your
questions for Robert; I'll answer no more on 'em. Good-day, lassie!"

          

The day being fine, or at least fair - for soft clouds curtained the sun,
and a dim but not chill or waterish haze slept blue on the
hills - Caroline, while Shirley was engaged with her callers, had
persuaded Mrs. Pryor to assume her bonnet and summer shawl, and to take
a walk with her up towards the narrow end of the Hollow.

Here the opposing sides of the glen, approaching each other and becoming
clothed with brushwood and stunted oaks, formed a wooded ravine, at the
bottom of which ran the mill-stream, in broken, unquiet course,
struggling with many stones, chafing against rugged banks, fretting with
gnarled tree-roots, foaming, gurgling, battling as it went. Here, when
you had wandered half a mile from the mill, you found a sense of deep
solitude - found it in the shade of unmolested trees, received it in the
singing of many birds, for which that shade made a home. This was no
trodden way. The freshness of the wood flowers attested that foot of man
seldom pressed them; the abounding wild roses looked as if they budded,
bloomed, and faded under the watch of solitude, as if in a sultan's
harem. Here you saw the sweet azure of blue-bells, and recognized in
pearl-white blossoms, spangling the grass, a humble type of some starlit
spot in space.

Mrs. Pryor liked a quiet walk. She ever shunned high-roads, and sought
byways and lonely lanes. One companion she preferred to total solitude,
for in solitude she was nervous; a vague fear of annoying encounters
broke the enjoyment of quite lonely rambles. But she feared nothing with
Caroline. When once she got away from human habitations, and entered
the still demesne of nature accompanied by this one youthful friend, a
propitious change seemed to steal over her mind and beam in her
countenance. When with Caroline - and Caroline only - her heart, you would
have said, shook off a burden, her brow put aside a veil, her spirits
too escaped from a restraint. With her she was cheerful; with her, at
times, she was tender; to her she would impart her knowledge, reveal
glimpses of her experience, give her opportunities for guessing what
life she had lived, what cultivation her mind had received, of what
calibre was her intelligence, how and where her feelings were
vulnerable.

To-day, for instance, as they walked along, Mrs. Pryor talked to her
companion about the various birds singing in the trees, discriminated
their species, and said something about their habits and peculiarities.
English natural history seemed familiar to her. All the wild flowers
round their path were recognized by her; tiny plants springing near
stones and peeping out of chinks in old walls - plants such as Caroline
had scarcely noticed before - received a name and an intimation of their
properties. It appeared that she had minutely studied the botany of
English fields and woods. Having reached the head of the ravine, they
sat down together on a ledge of gray and mossy rock jutting from the
base of a steep green hill which towered above them. She looked round
her, and spoke of the neighbourhood as she had once before seen it long
ago. She alluded to its changes, and compared its aspect with that of
other parts of England, revealing in quiet, unconscious touches of
description a sense of the picturesque, an appreciation of the beautiful
or commonplace, a power of comparing the wild with the cultured, the
grand with the tame, that gave to her discourse a graphic charm as
pleasant as it was unpretending.

The sort of reverent pleasure with which Caroline listened - so sincere,
so quiet, yet so evident - stirred the elder lady's faculties to gentle
animation. Rarely, probably, had she, with her chill, repellent outside,
her diffident mien, and incommunicative habits, known what it was to
excite in one whom she herself could love feelings of earnest affection
and admiring esteem. Delightful, doubtless, was the consciousness that a
young girl towards whom it seemed, judging by the moved expression of
her eyes and features, her heart turned with almost a fond impulse,
looked up to her as an instructor, and clung to her as a friend. With a
somewhat more marked accent of interest than she often permitted herself
to use, she said, as she bent towards her youthful companion, and put
aside from her forehead a pale brown curl which had strayed from the
confining comb, "I do hope this sweet air blowing from the hill will do
you good, my dear Caroline. I wish I could see something more of colour
in these cheeks; but perhaps you were never florid?"

"I had red cheeks once," returned Miss Helstone, smiling. "I remember a
year - two years ago - when I used to look in the glass, I saw a different
face there to what I see now - rounder and rosier. But when we are
young," added the girl of eighteen, "our minds are careless and our
lives easy."

"Do you," continued Mrs. Pryor, mastering by an effort that tyrant
timidity which made it difficult for her, even under present
circumstances, to attempt the scrutiny of another's heart - "do you, at
your age, fret yourself with cares for the future? Believe me, you had
better not. Let the morrow take thought for the things of itself."

"True, dear madam. It is not over the future I pine. The evil of the day
is sometimes oppressive - too oppressive - and I long to escape it."

"That is - the evil of the day - that is - your uncle perhaps is not - you
find it difficult to understand - he does not appreciate - - "

Mrs. Pryor could not complete her broken sentences; she could not manage
to put the question whether Mr. Helstone was too harsh with his niece.
But Caroline comprehended.

"Oh, that is nothing," she replied. "My uncle and I get on very well. We
never quarrel - I don't  call him harsh - he never scolds me. Sometimes I
wish somebody in the world loved me, but I cannot say that I
particularly wish him to have more affection for me than he has. As a
child, I should perhaps have felt the want of attention, only the
servants were very kind to me; but when people are long indifferent to
us, we grow indifferent to their indifference. It is my uncle's way not
to care for women and girls, unless they be ladies that he meets in
company. He could not alter, and I have no wish that he should alter, as
far as I am concerned. I believe it would merely annoy and frighten me
were he to be affectionate towards me now. But you know, Mrs. Pryor, it
is scarcely living to measure time as I do at the rectory. The hours
pass, and I get them over somehow, but I do not live . I endure
existence, but I rarely enjoy it. Since Miss Keeldar and you came I have
been - I was going to say happier, but that would be untrue." She paused.

"How untrue? You are fond of Miss Keeldar, are you not, my dear?"

"Very fond of Shirley. I both like and admire her. But I am painfully
circumstanced. For a reason I cannot explain I want to go away from this
place, and to forget it."

"You told me before you wished to be a governess; but, my dear, if you
remember, I did not encourage the idea. I have been a governess myself
great part of my life. In Miss Keeldar's acquaintance I esteem myself
most fortunate. Her talents and her really sweet disposition have
rendered my office easy to me; but when I was young, before I married,
my trials were severe, poignant. I should not like a - - I should not
like you to endure similar ones. It was my lot to enter a family of
considerable pretensions to good birth and mental superiority, and the
members of which also believed that 'on them was perceptible' an unusual
endowment of the 'Christian graces;' that all their hearts were
regenerate, and their spirits in a peculiar state of discipline. I was
early given to understand that 'as I was not their equal,' so I could
not expect 'to have their sympathy.' It was in no sort concealed from me
that I was held a 'burden and a restraint in society.' The gentlemen, I
found, regarded me as a 'tabooed woman,' to whom 'they were interdicted
from granting the usual privileges of the sex,' and yet 'who annoyed
them by frequently crossing their path.' The ladies too made it plain
that they thought me 'a bore.' The servants, it was signified, 'detested
me;' why , I could never clearly comprehend. My pupils, I was told,
'however much they might love me, and how deep soever the interest I
might take in them, could not be my friends.' It was intimated that I
must 'live alone, and never transgress the invisible but rigid line
which established the difference between me and my employers.' My life
in this house was sedentary, solitary, constrained, joyless, toilsome.
The dreadful crushing of the animal spirits, the ever-prevailing sense
of friendlessness and homelessness consequent on this state of things
began ere long to produce mortal effects on my constitution. I sickened.
The lady of the house told me coolly I was the victim of 'wounded
vanity.' She hinted that if I did not make an effort to quell my
'ungodly discontent,' to cease 'murmuring against God's appointment,'
and to cultivate the profound humility befitting my station, my mind
would very likely 'go to pieces' on the rock that wrecked most of my
sisterhood - morbid self-esteem - and that I should die an inmate of a
lunatic asylum.

"I said nothing to Mrs. Hardman - it would have been useless; but to her
eldest daughter I one day dropped a few observations, which were
answered thus. There were hardships, she allowed, in the position of a
governess. 'Doubtless they had their trials; but,' she averred, with a
manner it makes me smile now to recall - 'but it must be so. She '  Miss
H.  'had neither view, hope, nor wish to see these things remedied;
for in the inherent constitution of English habits, feelings, and
prejudices there was no possibility that they should be. Governesses,'
she observed, 'must ever be kept in a sort of isolation. It is the only
means of maintaining that distance which the reserve of English manners
and the decorum of English families exact.'

"I remember I sighed as Miss Hardman quitted my bedside. She caught the
sound, and turning, said severely, 'I fear, Miss Grey, you have
inherited in fullest measure the worst sin of our fallen nature - the sin
of pride. You are proud, and therefore you are ungrateful too. Mamma
pays you a handsome salary, and if you had average sense you would
thankfully put up with much that is fatiguing to do and irksome to bear,
since it is so well made worth your while.'

"Miss Hardman, my love, was a very strong-minded young lady, of most
distinguished talents. The aristocracy are decidedly a very superior
class, you know, both physically, and morally, and mentally; as a high
Tory I acknowledge that. I could not describe the dignity of her voice
and mien as she addressed me thus; still, I fear she was selfish, my
dear. I would never wish to speak ill of my superiors in rank, but I
think she was a little selfish."

"I remember," continued Mrs. Pryor, after a pause, "another of Miss H.'s
observations, which she would utter with quite a grand air. 'WE,' she
would say - 'WE need the imprudences, extravagances, mistakes, and crimes
of a certain number of fathers to sow the seed from which WE reap the
harvest of governesses. The daughters of trades-people, however well
educated, must necessarily be underbred, and as such unfit to be
inmates of OUR dwellings, or guardians of OUR children's minds and
persons. WE shall ever prefer to place those about OUR offspring who
have been born and bred with somewhat of the same refinement as
OURSELVES.'"

"Miss Hardman must have thought herself something better than her
fellow-creatures, ma'am, since she held that their calamities, and even
crimes, were necessary to minister to her convenience. You say she was
religious. Her religion must have been that of the Pharisee who thanked
God that he was not as other men are, nor even as that publican."

"My dear, we will not discuss the point. I should be the last person to
wish to instil into your mind any feeling of dissatisfaction with your
lot in life, or any sentiment of envy or insubordination towards your
superiors. Implicit submission to authorities, scrupulous deference to
our betters  under which term I, of course, include the higher classes
of society , are, in my opinion, indispensable to the well-being of
every community. All I mean to say, my dear, is that you had better not
attempt to be a governess, as the duties of the position would be too
severe for your constitution. Not one word of disrespect would I breathe
towards either Mrs. or Miss Hardman; only, recalling my own experience,
I cannot but feel that, were you to fall under auspices such as theirs,
you would contend a while courageously with your doom, then you would
pine and grow too weak for your work; you would come home - if you still
had a home - broken down. Those languishing years would follow of which
none but the invalid and her immediate friends feel the heart-sickness
and know the burden. Consumption or decline would close the chapter.
Such is the history of many a life. I would not have it yours. My dear,
we will now walk about a little, if you please."

They both rose, and slowly paced a green natural terrace bordering the
chasm.

"My dear," ere long again began Mrs. Pryor, a sort of timid, embarrassed
abruptness marking her manner as she spoke, "the young, especially those
to whom nature has been favourable, often - frequently - anticipate - look
forward to - to marriage as the end, the goal of their hopes."

And she stopped. Caroline came to her relief with promptitude, showing a
great deal more self-possession and courage than herself on the
formidable topic now broached.

"They do, and naturally," she replied, with a calm emphasis that
startled Mrs. Pryor. "They look forward to marriage with some one they
love as the brightest, the only bright destiny that can await them. Are
they wrong?"

"Oh, my dear!" exclaimed Mrs. Pryor, clasping her hands; and again she
paused. Caroline turned a searching, an eager eye on the face of her
friend: that face was much agitated. "My dear," she murmured, "life is
an illusion."

"But not love! Love is real - the most real, the most lasting, the
sweetest and yet the bitterest thing we know."

"My dear, it is very bitter. It is said to be strong - strong as death!
Most of the cheats of existence are strong. As to their sweetness,
nothing is so transitory; its date is a moment, the twinkling of an eye.
The sting remains for ever. It may perish with the dawn of eternity, but
it tortures through time into its deepest night."

"Yes, it tortures through time," agreed Caroline, "except when it is
mutual love."

"Mutual love! My dear, romances are pernicious. You do not read them, I
hope?"

"Sometimes - whenever I can get them, indeed. But romance-writers might
know nothing of love, judging by the way in which they treat of it."

"Nothing whatever, my dear," assented Mrs. Pryor eagerly, "nor of
marriage; and the false pictures they give of those subjects cannot be
too strongly condemned. They are not like reality. They show you only
the green, tempting surface of the marsh, and give not one faithful or
truthful hint of the slough underneath."

"But it is not always slough," objected Caroline. "There are happy
marriages. Where affection is reciprocal and sincere, and minds are
harmonious, marriage must be happy."

"It is never wholly happy. Two people can never literally be as one.
There is, perhaps, a possibility of content under peculiar
circumstances, such as are seldom combined; but it is as well not to run
the risk - you may make fatal mistakes. Be satisfied, my dear. Let all
the single be satisfied with their freedom."

"You echo my uncle's words!" exclaimed Caroline, in a tone of dismay.
"You speak like Mrs. Yorke in her most gloomy moments, like Miss Mann
when she is most sourly and hypochondriacally disposed. This is
terrible!"

"No, it is only true. O child, you have only lived the pleasant morning
time of life; the hot, weary noon, the sad evening, the sunless night,
are yet to come for you. Mr. Helstone, you say, talks as I talk; and I
wonder how Mrs. Matthewson Helstone would have talked had she been
living. She died! she died!"

"And, alas! my own mother and father - - " exclaimed Caroline, struck by
a sombre recollection.

"What of them?"

"Did I never tell you that they were separated?"

"I have heard it."

"They must, then, have been very miserable."

"You see all facts go to prove what I say."

"In this case there ought to be no such thing as marriage."

"There ought, my dear, were it only to prove that this life is a mere
state of probation, wherein neither rest nor recompense is to be
vouchsafed."

"But your own marriage, Mrs. Pryor?"

Mrs. Pryor shrank and shuddered as if a rude finger had pressed a naked
nerve. Caroline felt she had touched what would not bear the slightest
contact.

"My marriage was unhappy," said the lady, summoning courage at last;
"but yet - - " She hesitated.

"But yet," suggested Caroline, "not immitigably wretched?"

"Not in its results, at least. No," she added, in a softer tone; "God
mingles something of the balm of mercy even in vials of the most
corrosive woe. He can so turn events that from the very same blind, rash
act whence sprang the curse of half our life may flow the blessing of
the remainder. Then I am of a peculiar disposition - I own that - far from
facile, without address, in some points eccentric. I ought never to have
married. Mine is not the nature easily to find a duplicate or likely to
assimilate with a contrast. I was quite aware of my own ineligibility;
and if I had not been so miserable as a governess, I never should have
married; and then - - "

Caroline's eyes asked her to proceed. They entreated her to break the
thick cloud of despair which her previous words had seemed to spread
over life.

"And then, my dear, Mr. - that is, the gentleman I married - was, perhaps,
rather an exceptional than an average character. I hope, at least, the
experience of few has been such as mine was, or that few have felt their
sufferings as I felt mine. They nearly shook my mind; relief was so
hopeless, redress so unattainable. But, my dear, I do not wish to
dishearten; I only wish to warn you, and to prove that the single should
not be too anxious to change their state, as they may change for the
worse."

"Thank you, my dear madam. I quite understand your kind intentions, but
there is no fear of my falling into the error to which you allude. I, at
least, have no thoughts of marriage, and for that reason I want to make
myself a position by some other means."

"My dear, listen to me. On what I am going to say I have carefully
deliberated, having, indeed, revolved the subject in my thoughts ever
since you first mentioned your wish to obtain a situation. You know I at
present reside with Miss Keeldar in the capacity of companion. Should
she marry  and that she will marry ere long many circumstances induce
me to conclude , I shall cease to be necessary to her in that capacity.
I must tell you that I possess a small independency, arising partly from
my own savings, and partly from a legacy left me some years since.
Whenever I leave Fieldhead I shall take a house of my own. I could not
endure to live in solitude. I have no relations whom I care to invite to
close intimacy; for, as you must have observed, and as I have already
avowed, my habits and tastes have their peculiarities. To you, my dear,
I need not say I am attached; with you I am happier than I have ever
been with any living thing"  this was said with marked emphasis . "Your
society I should esteem a very dear privilege - an inestimable privilege,
a comfort, a blessing. You shall come to me, then. Caroline, do you
refuse me? I hope you can love me?"

And with these two abrupt questions she stopped.

"Indeed, I do love you," was the reply. "I should like to live with
you. But you are too kind."

"All I have," went on Mrs. Pryor, "I would leave to you. You should be
provided for. But never again say I am too kind . You pierce my heart,
child!"

"But, my dear madam - this generosity - I have no claim - - "

"Hush! you must not talk about it. There are some things we cannot bear
to hear. Oh! it is late to begin, but I may yet live a few years. I can
never wipe out the past, but perhaps a brief space in the future may
yet be mine."

Mrs. Pryor seemed deeply agitated. Large tears trembled in her eyes and
rolled down her cheeks. Caroline kissed her, in her gentle, caressing
way, saying softly, "I love you dearly. Don't  cry."

But the lady's whole frame seemed shaken. She sat down, bent her head to
her knee, and wept aloud. Nothing could console her till the inward
storm had had its way. At last the agony subsided of itself.

"Poor thing!" she murmured, returning Caroline's kiss, "poor lonely
lamb! But come," she added abruptly - "come; we must go home."

For a short distance Mrs. Pryor walked very fast. By degrees, however,
she calmed down to her wonted manner, fell into her usual characteristic
pace - a peculiar one, like all her movements - and by the time they
reached Fieldhead she had re-entered into herself. The outside was, as
usual, still and shy.




CHAPTER XXII.

TWO LIVES.


Only half of Moore's activity and resolution had been seen in his
defence of the mill; he showed the other half  and a terrible half it
was  in the indefatigable, the relentless assiduity with which he
pursued the leaders of the riot. The mob, the mere followers, he let
alone. Perhaps an innate sense of justice told him that men misled by
false counsel and goaded by privations are not fit objects of vengeance,
and that he who would visit an even violent act on the bent head of
suffering is a tyrant, not a judge. At all events, though he knew many
of the number, having recognized them during the latter part of the
attack when day began to dawn, he let them daily pass him on street and
road without notice or threat.

The leaders he did not know. They were strangers - emissaries from the
large towns. Most of these were not members of the operative class. They
were chiefly "down-draughts," bankrupts, men always in debt and often in
drink, men who had nothing to lose, and much, in the way of character,
cash, and cleanliness, to gain. These persons Moore hunted like any
sleuth-hound, and well he liked the occupation. Its excitement was of a
kind pleasant to his nature. He liked it better than making cloth.

His horse must have hated these times, for it was ridden both hard and
often. He almost lived on the road, and the fresh air was as welcome to
his lungs as the policeman's quest to his mood; he preferred it to the
steam of dye-houses. The magistrates of the district must have dreaded
him. They were slow, timid men; he liked both to frighten and to rouse
them. He liked to force them to betray a certain fear, which made them
alike falter in resolve and recoil in action - the fear, simply, of
assassination. This, indeed, was the dread which had hitherto hampered
every manufacturer and almost every public man in the district. Helstone
alone had ever repelled it. The old Cossack knew well he might be shot.
He knew there was risk; but such death had for his nerves no terrors. It
would have been his chosen, might he have had a choice.

Moore likewise knew his danger. The result was an unquenchable scorn of
the quarter whence such danger was to be apprehended. The consciousness
that he hunted assassins was the spur in his high-mettled temper's
flank. As for fear, he was too proud, too hard-natured  if you will ,
too phlegmatic a man to fear. Many a time he rode belated over the
moors, moonlit or moonless as the case might be, with feelings far more
elate, faculties far better refreshed, than when safety and stagnation
environed him in the counting-house. Four was the number of the leaders
to be accounted for. Two, in the course of a fortnight, were brought to
bay near Stilbro'; the remaining two it was necessary to seek farther
off. Their haunts were supposed to lie near Birmingham.

Meantime the clothier did not neglect his battered mill. Its reparation
was esteemed a light task, carpenters' and glaziers' work alone being
needed. The rioters not having succeeded in effecting an entrance, his
grim metal darlings - the machines - had escaped damage.

Whether during this busy life - whether while stern justice and exacting
business claimed his energies and harassed his thoughts - he now and then
gave one moment, dedicated one effort, to keep alive gentler fires than
those which smoulder in the fane of Nemesis, it was not easy to
discover. He seldom went near Fieldhead; if he did, his visits were
brief. If he called at the rectory, it was only to hold conferences with
the rector in his study. He maintained his rigid course very steadily.
Meantime the history of the year continued troubled. There was no lull
in the tempest of war; her long hurricane still swept the Continent.
There was not the faintest sign of serene weather, no opening amid "the
clouds of battle-dust and smoke," no fall of pure dews genial to the
olive, no cessation of the red rain which nourishes the baleful and
glorious laurel. Meantime, Ruin had her sappers and miners at work under
Moore's feet, and whether he rode or walked, whether he only crossed his
counting-house hearth or galloped over sullen Rushedge, he was aware of
a hollow echo, and felt the ground shake to his tread.

While the summer thus passed with Moore, how did it lapse with Shirley
and Caroline? Let us first visit the heiress. How does she look? Like a
love-lorn maiden, pale and pining for a neglectful swain? Does she sit
the day long bent over some sedentary task? Has she for ever a book in
her hand, or sewing on her knee, and eyes only for that, and words for
nothing, and thoughts unspoken?

By no means. Shirley is all right. If her wistful cast of physiognomy is
not gone, no more is her careless smile. She keeps her dark old
manor-house light and bright with her cheery presence. The gallery and
the low-ceiled chambers that open into it have learned lively echoes
from her voice; the dim entrance-hall, with its one window, has grown
pleasantly accustomed to the frequent rustle of a silk dress, as its
wearer sweeps across from room to room, now carrying flowers to the
barbarous peach-bloom salon, now entering the dining-room to open its
casements and let in the scent of mignonette and sweet-briar, anon
bringing plants from the staircase window to place in the sun at the
open porch door.

She takes her sewing occasionally; but, by some fatality, she is doomed
never to sit steadily at it for above five minutes at a time. Her
thimble is scarcely fitted on, her needle scarce threaded, when a sudden
thought calls her upstairs. Perhaps she goes to seek some
just-then-remembered old ivory-backed needle-book or older china-topped
work-box, quite unneeded, but which seems at the moment indispensable;
perhaps to arrange her hair, or a drawer which she recollects to have
seen that morning in a state of curious confusion; perhaps only to take
a peep from a particular window at a particular view, whence Briarfield
church and rectory are visible, pleasantly bowered in trees. She has
scarcely returned, and again taken up the slip of cambric or square of
half-wrought canvas, when Tartar's bold scrape and strangled whistle are
heard at the porch door, and she must run to open it for him. It is a
hot day; he comes in panting; she must convoy him to the kitchen, and
see with her own eyes that his water-bowl is replenished. Through the
open kitchen door the court is visible, all sunny and gay, and people
with turkeys and their poults, peahens and their chicks, pearl-flecked
Guinea-fowls, and a bright variety of pure white, and purple-necked, and
blue and cinnamon plumed pigeons. Irresistible spectacle to Shirley! She
runs to the pantry for a roll, and she stands on the door step
scattering crumbs. Around her throng her eager, plump, happy feathered
vassals John is about the stables, and John must be talked to, and her
mare looked at. She is still petting and patting it when the cows come
in to be milked. This is important; Shirley must stay and take a review
of them all. There are perhaps some little calves, some little
new-yeaned lambs - it may be twins, whose mothers have rejected them.
Miss Keeldar must be introduced to them by John, must permit herself the
treat of feeding them with her own hand, under the direction of her
careful foreman. Meantime John moots doubtful questions about the
farming of certain "crofts," and "ings," and "holmes," and his mistress
is necessitated to fetch her garden-hat - a gipsy straw - and accompany
him, over stile and along hedgerow, to hear the conclusion of the whole
agricultural matter on the spot, and with the said "crofts," "ings," and
"holms" under her eye. Bright afternoon thus wears into soft evening,
and she comes home to a late tea, and after tea she never sews.

After tea Shirley reads, and she is just about as tenacious of her book
as she is lax of her needle. Her study is the rug, her seat a footstool,
or perhaps only the carpet at Mrs. Pryor's feet: there she always
learned her lessons when a child, and old habits have a strong power
over her. The tawny and lionlike bulk of Tartar is ever stretched beside
her, his negro muzzle laid on his fore paws - straight, strong, and
shapely as the limbs of an Alpine wolf. One hand of the mistress
generally reposes on the loving serf's rude head, because if she takes
it away he groans and is discontented. Shirley's mind is given to her
book. She lifts not her eyes; she neither stirs nor speaks - unless,
indeed, it be to return a brief respectful answer to Mrs. Pryor, who
addresses deprecatory phrases to her now and then.

"My dear, you had better not have that great dog so near you; he is
crushing the border of your dress."

"Oh, it is only muslin. I can put a clean one on to-morrow."

"My dear, I wish you could acquire the habit of sitting to a table when
you read."

"I will try, ma'am, some time; but it is so comfortable to do as one has
always been accustomed to do."

"My dear, let me beg of you to put that book down. You are trying your
eyes by the doubtful firelight."

"No, ma'am, not at all; my eyes are never tired."

At last, however, a pale light falls on the page from the window. She
looks; the moon is up. She closes the volume, rises, and walks through
the room. Her book has perhaps been a good one; it has refreshed,
refilled, rewarmed her heart; it has set her brain astir, furnished her
mind with pictures. The still parlour, the clean hearth, the window
opening on the twilight sky, and showing its 'sweet regent," new throned
and glorious, suffice to make earth an Eden, life a poem, for Shirley. A
still, deep, inborn delight glows in her young veins, unmingled,
untroubled, not to be reached or ravished by human agency, because by no
human agency bestowed - the pure gift of God to His creature, the free
dower of Nature to her child. This joy gives her experience of a
genii-life. Buoyant, by green steps, by glad hills, all verdure and
light, she reaches a station scarcely lower than that whence angels
looked down on the dreamer of Bethel, and her eye seeks, and her soul
possesses, the vision of life as she wishes it. No, not as she wishes
it; she has not time to wish. The swift glory spreads out, sweeping and
kindling, and multiplies its splendours faster than Thought can effect
his combinations, faster than Aspiration can utter her longings. Shirley
says nothing while the trance is upon her - she is quite mute; but if
Mrs. Pryor speaks to her now, she goes out quietly, and continues her
walk upstairs in the dim gallery.

If Shirley were not an indolent, a reckless, an ignorant being, she
would take a pen at such moments, or at least while the recollection of
such moments was yet fresh on her spirit. She would seize, she would fix
the apparition, tell the vision revealed. Had she a little more of the
organ of acquisitiveness in her head, a little more of the love of
property in her nature, she would take a good-sized sheet of paper and
write plainly out, in her own queer but clear and legible hand, the
story that has been narrated, the song that has been sung to her, and
thus possess what she was enabled to create. But indolent she is,
reckless she is, and most ignorant; for she does not know her dreams are
rare, her feelings peculiar. She does not know, has never known, and
will die without knowing, the full value of that spring whose bright
fresh bubbling in her heart keeps it green.

Shirley takes life easily. Is not that fact written in her eye? In her
good-tempered moments is it not as full of lazy softness as in her brief
fits of anger it is fulgent with quick-flashing fire? Her nature is in
her eye. So long as she is calm, indolence, indulgence, humour, and
tenderness possess that large gray sphere; incense her, a red ray
pierces the dew, it quickens instantly to flame.

Ere the month of July was past, Miss Keeldar would probably have started
with Caroline on that northern tour they had planned; but just at that
epoch an invasion befell Fieldhead. A genteel foraging party besieged
Shirley in her castle, and compelled her to surrender at discretion. An
uncle, an aunt, and two cousins from the south - a Mr., Mrs., and two
Misses Sympson, of Sympson Grove, - - shire - came down upon her in
state. The laws of hospitality obliged her to give in, which she did
with a facility which somewhat surprised Caroline, who knew her to be
prompt in action and fertile in expedient where a victory was to be
gained for her will. Miss Helstone even asked her how it was she
submitted so readily. She answered, old feelings had their power; she
had passed two years of her early youth at Sympson Grove.

"How did she like her relatives?"

She had nothing in common with them, she replied. Little Harry Sympson,
indeed, the sole son of the family, was very unlike his sisters, and of
him she had formerly been fond; but he was not coming to Yorkshire - at
least not yet.

The next Sunday the Fieldhead pew in Briarfield Church appeared peopled
with a prim, trim, fidgety, elderly gentleman, who shifted his
spectacles, and changed his position every three minutes; a patient,
placid-looking elderly lady in brown satin; and two pattern young
ladies, in pattern attire, with pattern deportment. Shirley had the air
of a black swan or a white crow in the midst of this party, and very
forlorn was her aspect. Having brought her into respectable society, we
will leave her there a while, and look after Miss Helstone.

Separated from Miss Keeldar for the present, as she could not seek her
in the midst of her fine relatives, scared away from Fieldhead by the
visiting commotion which the new arrivals occasioned in the
neighbourhood, Caroline was limited once more to the gray rectory, the
solitary morning walk in remote by-paths, the long, lonely afternoon
sitting in a quiet parlour which the sun forsook at noon, or in the
garden alcove where it shone bright, yet sad, on the ripening red
currants trained over the trellis, and on the fair monthly roses
entwined between, and through them fell chequered on Caroline sitting in
her white summer dress, still as a garden statue. There she read old
books, taken from her uncle's library. The Greek and Latin were of no
use to her, and its collection of light literature was chiefly contained
on a shelf which had belonged to her aunt Mary - some venerable Lady's
Magazines, that had once performed a sea-voyage with their owner, and
undergone a storm, and whose pages were stained with salt water; some
mad Methodist Magazines, full of miracles and apparitions, of
preternatural warnings, ominous dreams, and frenzied fanaticism; the
equally mad letters of Mrs. Elizabeth Rowe from the Dead to the Living;
a few old English classics. From these faded flowers Caroline had in her
childhood extracted the honey; they were tasteless to her now. By way of
change, and also of doing good, she would sew - make garments for the
poor, according to good Miss Ainley's direction. Sometimes, as she felt
and saw her tears fall slowly on her work, she would wonder how the
excellent woman who had cut it out and arranged it for her managed to be
so equably serene in her solitude.

"I never find Miss Ainley oppressed with despondency or lost in grief,"
she thought; "yet her cottage is a still, dim little place, and she is
without a bright hope or near friend in the world. I remember, though,
she told me once she had tutored her thoughts to tend upwards to heaven.
She allowed there was, and ever had been, little enjoyment in this world
for her, and she looks, I suppose, to the bliss of the world to come. So
do nuns, with their close cell, their iron lamp, their robe strait as a
shroud, their bed narrow as a coffin. She says often she has no fear of
death - no dread of the grave; no more, doubtless, had St. Simeon
Stylites, lifted up terrible on his wild column in the wilderness; no
more has the Hindu votary stretched on his couch of iron spikes. Both
these having violated nature, their natural likings and antipathies are
reversed; they grow altogether morbid. I do fear death as yet, but I
believe it is because I am young. Poor Miss Ainley would cling closer to
life if life had more charms for her. God surely did not create us and
cause us to live with the sole end of wishing always to die. I believe
in my heart we were intended to prize life and enjoy it so long as we
retain it. Existence never was originally meant to be that useless,
blank, pale, slow-trailing thing it often becomes to many, and is
becoming to me among the rest.

"Nobody," she went on - "nobody in particular is to blame, that I can
see, for the state in which things are; and I cannot tell, however much
I puzzle over it, how they are to be altered for the better; but I feel
there is something wrong somewhere. I believe single women should have
more to do - better chances of interesting and profitable occupation than
they possess now. And when I speak thus I have no impression that I
displease God by my words; that I am either impious or impatient,
irreligious or sacrilegious. My consolation is, indeed, that God hears
many a groan, and compassionates much grief which man stops his ears
against, or frowns on with impotent contempt. I say impotent , for I
observe that to such grievances as society cannot readily cure it
usually forbids utterance, on pain of its scorn, this scorn being only a
sort of tinselled cloak to its deformed weakness. People hate to be
reminded of ills they are unable or unwilling to remedy. Such reminder,
in forcing on them a sense of their own incapacity, or a more painful
sense of an obligation to make some unpleasant effort, troubles their
ease and shakes their self-complacency. Old maids, like the houseless
and unemployed poor, should not ask for a place and an occupation in the
world; the demand disturbs the happy and rich - it disturbs parents. Look
at the numerous families of girls in this neighbourhood - the Armitages,
the Birtwhistles, the Sykeses. The brothers of these girls are every one
in business or in professions; they have something to do. Their sisters
have no earthly employment but household work and sewing, no earthly
pleasure but an unprofitable visiting, and no hope, in all their life to
come, of anything better. This stagnant state of things makes them
decline in health. They are never well, and their minds and views shrink
to wondrous narrowness. The great wish, the sole aim of every one of
them is to be married, but the majority will never marry; they will die
as they now live. They scheme, they plot, they dress to ensnare
husbands. The gentlemen turn them into ridicule; they don't  want them;
they hold them very cheap. They say - I have heard them say it with
sneering laughs many a time - the matrimonial market is overstocked.
Fathers say so likewise, and are angry with their daughters when they
observe their manouvres - they order them to stay at home. What do they
expect them to do at home? If you ask, they would answer, sew and cook.
They expect them to do this, and this only, contentedly, regularly,
uncomplainingly, all their lives long, as if they had no germs of
faculties for anything else - a doctrine as reasonable to hold as it
would be that the fathers have no faculties but for eating what their
daughters cook or for wearing what they sew. Could men live so
themselves? Would they not be very weary? And when there came no relief
to their weariness, but only reproaches at its slightest manifestation,
would not their weariness ferment it time to frenzy? Lucretia, spinning
at midnight in the midst of her maidens, and Solomon's virtuous woman
are often quoted as patterns of what 'the sex,' as they say, ought to
be. I don't  know. Lucretia, I dare say, was a most worthy sort of
person, much like my cousin Hortense Moore; but she kept her servants up
very late. I should not have liked to be amongst the number of the
maidens. Hortense would just work me and Sarah in that fashion, if she
could, and neither of us would bear it. The 'virtuous woman,' again, had
her household up in the very middle of the night; she 'got breakfast
over,' as Mrs. Sykes says, before one o'clock a.m.; but she had
something more to do than spin and give out portions. She was a
manufacturer - she made fine linen and sold it; she was an
agriculturist - she bought estates and planted vineyards. That woman
was a manager. She was what the matrons hereabouts call 'a clever
woman.' On the whole, I like her a good deal better than Lucretia; but I
don't  believe either Mr. Armitage or Mr. Sykes could have got the
advantage of her in a bargain. Yet I like her. 'Strength and honour were
her clothing; the heart of her husband safely trusted in her. She opened
her mouth with wisdom; in her tongue was the law of kindness; her
children rose up and called her blessed; her husband also praised her.'
King of Israel! your model of a woman is a worthy model! But are we, in
these days, brought up to be like her? Men of Yorkshire! do your
daughters reach this royal standard? Can they reach it? Can you help
them to reach it? Can you give them a field in which their faculties may
be exercised and grow? Men of England! look at your poor girls, many of
them fading around you, dropping off in consumption or decline; or, what
is worse, degenerating to sour old maids - envious, back-biting,
wretched, because life is a desert to them; or, what is worst of all,
reduced to strive, by scarce modest coquetry and debasing artifice, to
gain that position and consideration by marriage which to celibacy is
denied. Fathers! cannot you alter these things? Perhaps not all at once;
but consider the matter well when it is brought before you, receive it
as a theme worthy of thought; do not dismiss it with an idle jest or an
unmanly insult. You would wish to be proud of your daughters, and not to
blush for them; then seek for them an interest and an occupation which
shall raise them above the flirt, the manouvrer, the mischief-making
tale-bearer. Keep your girls' minds narrow and fettered; they will still
be a plague and a care, sometimes a disgrace to you. Cultivate
them - give them scope and work; they will be your gayest companions in
health, your tenderest nurses in sickness, your most faithful prop in
age."




CHAPTER XXIII.

AN EVENING OUT.


One fine summer day that Caroline had spent entirely alone  her uncle
being at Whinbury , and whose long, bright, noiseless, breezeless,
cloudless hours  how many they seemed since sunrise!  had been to her as
desolate as if they had gone over her head in the shadowless and
trackless wastes of Sahara, instead of in the blooming garden of an
English home, she was sitting in the alcove - her task of work on her
knee, her fingers assiduously plying the needle, her eyes following and
regulating their movements, her brain working restlessly - when Fanny
came to the door, looked round over the lawn and borders, and not seeing
her whom she sought, called out, "Miss Caroline!"

A low voice answered "Fanny!" It issued from the alcove, and thither
Fanny hastened, a note in her hand, which she delivered to fingers that
hardly seemed to have nerve to hold it. Miss Helstone did not ask whence
it came, and she did not look at it; she let it drop amongst the folds
of her work.

"Joe Scott's son, Harry, brought it," said Fanny.

The girl was no enchantress, and knew no magic spell; yet what she said
took almost magical effect on her young mistress. She lifted her head
with the quick motion of revived sensation; she shot, not a languid, but
a lifelike, questioning glance at Fanny.

"Harry Scott! who sent him?"

"He came from the Hollow."

The dropped note was snatched up eagerly, the seal was broken - it was
read in two seconds. An affectionate billet from Hortense, informing her
young cousin that she was returned from Wormwood Wells; that she was
alone to-day, as Robert was gone to Whinbury market; that nothing would
give her greater pleasure than to have Caroline's company to tea, and
the good lady added, she was quite sure such a change would be most
acceptable and beneficial to Caroline, who must be sadly at a loss both
for safe guidance and improving society since the misunderstanding
between Robert and Mr. Helstone had occasioned a separation from her
"meilleure amie, Hortense Gérard Moore." In a postscript she was urged
to put on her bonnet and run down directly.

Caroline did not need the injunction. Glad was she to lay by the brown
holland child's slip she was trimming with braid for the Jew's basket,
to hasten upstairs, cover her curls with her straw bonnet, and throw
round her shoulders the black silk scarf, whose simple drapery suited as
well her shape as its dark hue set off the purity of her dress and the
fairness of her face; glad was she to escape for a few hours the
solitude, the sadness, the nightmare of her life; glad to run down the
green lane sloping to the Hollow, to scent the fragrance of hedge
flowers sweeter than the perfume of moss-rose or lily. True, she knew
Robert was not at the cottage; but it was delight to go where he had
lately been. So long, so totally separated from him, merely to see his
home, to enter the room where he had that morning sat, felt like a
reunion. As such it revived her; and then Illusion was again following
her in Peri mask. The soft agitation of wings caressed her cheek, and
the air, breathing from the blue summer sky, bore a voice which
whispered, "Robert may come home while you are in his house, and then,
at least, you may look in his face - at least you may give him your hand;
perhaps, for a minute, you may sit beside him."

"Silence!" was her austere response; but she loved the comforter and the
consolation.

Miss Moore probably caught from the window the gleam and flutter of
Caroline's white attire through the branchy garden shrubs, for she
advanced from the cottage porch to meet her. Straight, unbending,
phlegmatic as usual, she came on. No haste or ecstasy was ever permitted
to disorder the dignity of her movements; but she smiled, well pleased
to mark the delight of her pupil, to feel her kiss and the gentle,
genial strain of her embrace. She led her tenderly in, half deceived and
wholly flattered. Half deceived! had it not been so she would in all
probability have put her to the wicket, and shut her out. Had she known
clearly to whose account the chief share of this childlike joy was to be
placed, Hortense would most likely have felt both shocked and incensed.
Sisters do not like young ladies to fall in love with their brothers.
It seems, if not presumptuous, silly, weak, a delusion, an absurd
mistake. They do not love these gentlemen - whatever sisterly affection
they may cherish towards them - and that others should, repels them with
a sense of crude romance. The first movement, in short, excited by such
discovery  as with many parents on finding their children to be in love 
is one of mixed impatience and contempt. Reason - if they be rational
people - corrects the false feeling in time; but if they be irrational,
it is never corrected, and the daughter or sister-in-law is disliked to
the end.

"You would expect to find me alone, from what I said in my note,"
observed Miss Moore, as she conducted Caroline towards the parlour; "but
it was written this morning: since dinner, company has come in."

And opening the door she made visible an ample spread of crimson skirts
overflowing the elbow-chair at the fireside, and above them, presiding
with dignity, a cap more awful than a crown. That cap had never come to
the cottage under a bonnet; no, it had been brought in a vast bag, or
rather a middle-sized balloon of black silk, held wide with whalebone.
The screed, or frill of the cap, stood a quarter of a yard broad round
the face of the wearer. The ribbon, flourishing in puffs and bows about
the head, was of the sort called love-ribbon. There was a good deal of
it, I may say, a very great deal. Mrs. Yorke wore the cap - it became
her; she wore the gown also - it suited her no less.

That great lady was come in a friendly way to take tea with Miss Moore.
It was almost as great and as rare a favour as if the queen were to go
uninvited to share pot-luck with one of her subjects. A higher mark of
distinction she could not show - she who in general scorned visiting and
tea-drinking, and held cheap and stigmatized as "gossips" every maid and
matron of the vicinage.

There was no mistake, however; Miss Moore was a favourite with her.
She had evinced the fact more than once - evinced it by stopping to speak
to her in the churchyard on Sundays; by inviting her, almost hospitably,
to come to Briarmains; evinced it to-day by the grand condescension of a
personal visit. Her reasons for the preference, as assigned by herself,
were that Miss Moore was a woman of steady deportment, without the least
levity of conversation or carriage; also that, being a foreigner, she
must feel the want of a friend to countenance her. She might have added
that her plain aspect, homely, precise dress, and phlegmatic,
unattractive manner were to her so many additional recommendations. It
is certain, at least, that ladies remarkable for the opposite qualities
of beauty, lively bearing, and elegant taste in attire were not often
favoured with her approbation. Whatever gentlemen are apt to admire in
women, Mrs. Yorke condemned; and what they overlook or despise, she
patronized.

Caroline advanced to the mighty matron with some sense of diffidence.
She knew little of Mrs. Yorke, and, as a parson's niece, was doubtful
what sort of a reception she might get. She got a very cool one, and was
glad to hide her discomfiture by turning away to take off her bonnet.
Nor, upon sitting down, was she displeased to be immediately accosted by
a little personage in a blue frock and sash, who started up like some
fairy from the side of the great dame's chair, where she had been
sitting on a footstool, screened from view by the folds of the wide red
gown, and running to Miss Helstone, unceremoniously threw her arms round
her neck and demanded a kiss.

"My mother is not civil to you," said the petitioner, as she received
and repaid a smiling salute, "and Rose there takes no notice of you; it
is their way. If, instead of you, a white angel, with a crown of stars,
had come into the room, mother would nod stiffly, and Rose never lift
her head at all; but I will be your friend - I have always liked you."

"Jessie, curb that tongue of yours, and repress your forwardness!" said
Mrs. Yorke.

"But, mother, you are so frozen!" expostulated Jessie. "Miss Helstone
has never done you any harm; why can't  you be kind to her? You sit so
stiff, and look so cold, and speak so dry - what for? That's just the
fashion in which you treat Miss Shirley Keeldar and every other young
lady who comes to our house. And Rose there is such an aut - aut - I have
forgotten the word, but it means a machine in the shape of a human
being. However, between you, you will drive every soul away from
Briarmains; Martin often says so."

"I am an automaton? Good! Let me alone, then," said Rose, speaking from
a corner where she was sitting on the carpet at the foot of a bookcase,
with a volume spread open on her knee. - "Miss Helstone, how do you do?"
she added, directing a brief glance to the person addressed, and then
again casting down her gray, remarkable eyes on the book and returning
to the study of its pages.

Caroline stole a quiet gaze towards her, dwelling on her young, absorbed
countenance, and observing a certain unconscious movement of the mouth
as she read - a movement full of character. Caroline had tact, and she
had fine instinct. She felt that Rose Yorke was a peculiar child - one of
the unique; she knew how to treat her. Approaching quietly, she knelt on
the carpet at her side, and looked over her little shoulder at her book.
It was a romance of Mrs. Radcliffe's - "The Italian."

Caroline read on with her, making no remark. Presently Rose showed her
the attention of asking, ere she turned the leaf, "Are you ready?"

Caroline only nodded.

"Do you like it?" inquired Rose ere long.

"Long since, when I read it as a child, I was wonderfully taken with
it."

"Why?"

"It seemed to open with such promise - such foreboding of a most strange
tale to be unfolded."

"And in reading it you feel as if you were far away from England - really
in Italy - under another sort of sky - that blue sky of the south which
travellers describe."

"You are sensible of that, Rose?"

"It makes me long to travel, Miss Helstone."

"When you are a woman, perhaps, you may be able to gratify your wish."

"I mean to make a way to do so, if one is not made for me. I cannot live
always in Briarfield. The whole world is not very large compared with
creation. I must see the outside of our own round planet, at least."

"How much of its outside?"

"First this hemisphere where we live; then the other. I am resolved that
my life shall be a life. Not a black trance like the toad's, buried in
marble; nor a long, slow death like yours in Briarfield rectory."

"Like mine! what can you mean, child?"

"Might you not as well be tediously dying as for ever shut up in that
glebe-house - a place that, when I pass it, always reminds me of a
windowed grave? I never see any movement about the door. I never hear a
sound from the wall. I believe smoke never issues from the chimneys.
What do you do there?"

"I sew, I read, I learn lessons."

"Are you happy?"

"Should I be happy wandering alone in strange countries as you wish to
do?"

"Much happier, even if you did nothing but wander. Remember, however,
that I shall have an object in view; but if you only went on and on,
like some enchanted lady in a fairy tale, you might be happier than now.
In a day's wandering you would pass many a hill, wood, and watercourse,
each perpetually altering in aspect as the sun shone out or was
overcast; as the weather was wet or fair, dark or bright. Nothing
changes in Briarfield rectory. The plaster of the parlour ceilings, the
paper on the walls, the curtains, carpets, chairs, are still the same."

"Is change necessary to happiness?"

"Yes."

"Is it synonymous with it?"

"I don't  know; but I feel monotony and death to be almost the same."

Here Jessie spoke.

"Isn't  she mad?" she asked.

"But, Rose," pursued Caroline, "I fear a wanderer's life, for me at
least, would end like that tale you are reading - in disappointment,
vanity, and vexation of spirit."

"Does 'The Italian' so end?"

"I thought so when I read it."

"Better to try all things and find all empty than to try nothing and
leave your life a blank. To do this is to commit the sin of him who
buried his talent in a napkin - despicable sluggard!"

"Rose," observed Mrs. Yorke, 'solid satisfaction is only to be realized
by doing one's duty."

"Right, mother! And if my Master has given me ten talents, my duty is to
trade with them, and make them ten talents more. Not in the dust of
household drawers shall the coin be interred. I will not deposit it in
a broken-spouted teapot, and shut it up in a china closet among
tea-things. I will not commit it to your work-table to be smothered in
piles of woollen hose. I will not prison it in the linen press to find
shrouds among the sheets. And least of all, mother"  she got up from the
floor  - "least of all will I hide it in a tureen of cold potatoes, to be
ranged with bread, butter, pastry, and ham on the shelves of the
larder."

She stopped, then went on, "Mother, the Lord who gave each of us our
talents will come home some day, and will demand from all an account.
The teapot, the old stocking-foot, the linen rag, the willow-pattern
tureen will yield up their barren deposit in many a house. Suffer your
daughters, at least, to put their money to the exchangers, that they may
be enabled at the Master's coming to pay Him His own with usury."

"Rose, did you bring your sampler with you, as I told you?"

"Yes, mother."

"Sit down, and do a line of marking."

Rose sat down promptly, and wrought according to orders. After a busy
pause of ten minutes, her mother asked, "Do you think yourself oppressed
now - a victim?"

"No, mother."

"Yet, as far as I understood your tirade, it was a protest against all
womanly and domestic employment."

"You misunderstood it, mother. I should be sorry not to learn to sew.
You do right to teach me, and to make me work."

"Even to the mending of your brothers' stockings and the making of
sheets?"

"Yes."

"Where is the use of ranting and spouting about it, then?"

"Am I to do nothing but that? I will do that, and then I will do more.
Now, mother, I have said my say. I am twelve years old at present, and
not till I am sixteen will I speak again about talents. For four years I
bind myself an industrious apprentice to all you can teach me."

"You see what my daughters are, Miss Helstone," observed Mrs. Yorke;
"how precociously wise in their own conceits! 'I would rather this, I
prefer that' - such is Jessie's cuckoo song; while Rose utters the bolder
cry, 'I will , and I will not !'"

"I render a reason, mother; besides, if my cry is bold, it is only heard
once in a twelvemonth. About each birthday the spirit moves me to
deliver one oracle respecting my own instruction and management. I utter
it and leave it; it is for you, mother, to listen or not."

"I would advise all young ladies," pursued Mrs. Yorke, "to study the
characters of such children as they chance to meet with before they
marry and have any of their own to consider well how they would like
the responsibility of guiding the careless, the labour of persuading the
stubborn, the constant burden and task of training the best."

"But with love it need not be so very difficult," interposed Caroline.
"Mothers love their children most dearly - almost better than they love
themselves."

"Fine talk! very sentimental! There is the rough, practical part of life
yet to come for you, young miss."

"But, Mrs. Yorke, if I take a little baby into my arms - any poor woman's
infant, for instance - I feel that I love that helpless thing quite
peculiarly, though I am not its mother. I could do almost anything for
it willingly, if it were delivered over entirely to my care - if it were
quite dependent on me."

"You feel ! Yes, yes! I dare say, now. You are led a great deal by your
 feelings , and you think yourself a very sensitive personage, no doubt.
Are you aware that, with all these romantic ideas, you have managed to
train your features into an habitually lackadaisical expression, better
suited to a novel-heroine than to a woman who is to make her way in the
real world by dint of common sense?"

"No; I am not at all aware of that, Mrs. Yorke."

"Look in the glass just behind you. Compare the face you see there with
that of any early-rising, hard-working milkmaid."

"My face is a pale one, but it is not sentimental; and most milkmaids,
however red and robust they may be, are more stupid and less practically
fitted to make their way in the world than I am. I think more, and more
correctly, than milkmaids in general do; consequently, where they would
often, for want of reflection, act weakly, I, by dint of reflection,
should act judiciously."

"Oh no! you would be influenced by your feelings; you would be guided by
impulse."

"Of course I should often be influenced by my feelings. They were given
me to that end. Whom my feelings teach me to love I must and shall 
love; and I hope, if ever I have a husband and children, my feelings
will induce me to love them. I hope, in that case, all my impulses will
be strong in compelling me to love."

Caroline had a pleasure in saying this with emphasis; she had a pleasure
in daring to say it in Mrs. Yorke's presence. She did not care what
unjust sarcasm might be hurled at her in reply. She flushed, not with
anger but excitement, when the ungenial matron answered coolly, "Don't 
waste your dramatic effects. That was well said - it was quite fine; but
it is lost on two women - an old wife and an old maid. There should have
been a disengaged gentleman present. - Is Mr. Robert nowhere hid behind
the curtains, do you think, Miss Moore?"

Hortense, who during the chief part of the conversation had been in the
kitchen superintending the preparations for tea, did not yet quite
comprehend the drift of the discourse. She answered, with a puzzled air,
that Robert was at Whinbury. Mrs. Yorke laughed her own peculiar short
laugh.

"Straightforward Miss Moore!" said she patronizingly. "It is like you to
understand my question so literally and answer it so simply. Your mind
comprehends nothing of intrigue. Strange things might go on around you
without your being the wiser; you are not of the class the world calls
sharp-witted."

These equivocal compliments did not seem to please Hortense. She drew
herself up, puckered her black eyebrows, but still looked puzzled.

"I have ever been noted for sagacity and discernment from childhood,"
she returned; for, indeed, on the possession of these qualities she
peculiarly piqued herself.

"You never plotted to win a husband, I'll be bound," pursued Mrs. Yorke;
"and you have not the benefit of previous experience to aid you in
discovering when others plot."

Caroline felt this kind language where the benevolent speaker intended
she should feel it - in her very heart. She could not even parry the
shafts; she was defenceless for the present. To answer would have been
to avow that the cap fitted. Mrs. Yorke, looking at her as she sat with
troubled, downcast eyes, and cheek burning painfully, and figure
expressing in its bent attitude and unconscious tremor all the
humiliation and chagrin she experienced, felt the sufferer was fair
game. The strange woman had a natural antipathy to a shrinking,
sensitive character - a nervous temperament; nor was a pretty, delicate,
and youthful face a passport to her affections. It was seldom she met
with all these obnoxious qualities combined in one individual; still
more seldom she found that individual at her mercy, under circumstances
in which she could crush her well. She happened this afternoon to be
specially bilious and morose - as much disposed to gore as any vicious
"mother of the herd." Lowering her large head she made a new charge.

"Your cousin Hortense is an excellent sister, Miss Helstone. Such ladies
as come to try their life's luck here at Hollow's Cottage may, by a very
little clever female artifice, cajole the mistress of the house, and
have the game all in their own hands. You are fond of your cousin's
society, I dare say, miss?"

"Of which cousin's?"

"Oh, of the lady's, of course ."

"Hortense is, and always has been, most kind to me."

"Every sister with an eligible single brother is considered most kind by
her spinster friends."

"Mrs. Yorke," said Caroline, lifting her eyes slowly, their blue orbs at
the same time clearing from trouble, and shining steady and full, while
the glow of shame left her cheek, and its hue turned pale and
settled - "Mrs. Yorke, may I ask what you mean?"

"To give you a lesson on the cultivation of rectitude, to disgust you
with craft and false sentiment."

"Do I need this lesson?"

"Most young ladies of the present day need it. You are quite a modern
young lady - morbid, delicate, professing to like retirement; which
implies, I suppose, that you find little worthy of your sympathies in
the ordinary world. The ordinary world - every-day honest folks - are
better than you think them, much better than any bookish, romancing chit
of a girl can be who hardly ever puts her nose over her uncle the
parson's garden wall."

"Consequently of whom you know nothing. Excuse me - indeed, it does not
matter whether you excuse me or not - you have attacked me without
provocation; I shall defend myself without apology. Of my relations with
my two cousins you are ignorant. In a fit of ill-humour you have
attempted to poison them by gratuitous insinuations, which are far more
crafty and false than anything with which you can justly charge me. That
I happen to be pale, and sometimes to look diffident, is no business of
yours; that I am fond of books, and indisposed for common gossip, is
still less your business; that I am a 'romancing chit of a girl' is a
mere conjecture on your part. I never romanced to you nor to anybody you
know. That I am the parson's niece is not a crime, though you may be
narrow-minded enough to think it so. You dislike me. You have no just
reason for disliking me; therefore keep the expression of your aversion
to yourself. If at any time in future you evince it annoyingly, I shall
answer even less scrupulously than I have done now."

She ceased, and sat in white and still excitement. She had spoken in the
clearest of tones, neither fast nor loud; but her silver accents
thrilled the ear. The speed of the current in her veins was just then as
swift as it was viewless.

Mrs. Yorke was not irritated at the reproof, worded with a severity so
simple, dictated by a pride so quiet. Turning coolly to Miss Moore, she
said, nodding her cap approvingly, "She has spirit in her, after
all. - Always speak as honestly as you have done just now," she
continued, "and you'll do."

"I repel a recommendation so offensive," was the answer, delivered in
the same pure key, with the same clear look. "I reject counsel poisoned
by insinuation. It is my right to speak as I think proper; nothing binds
me to converse as you dictate. So far from always speaking as I have
done just now, I shall never address any one in a tone so stern or in
language so harsh, unless in answer to unprovoked insult."

"Mother, you have found your match," pronounced little Jessie, whom the
scene appeared greatly to edify. Rose had heard the whole with an
unmoved face. She now said, "No; Miss Helstone is not my mother's match,
for she allows herself to be vexed. My mother would wear her out in a
few weeks. Shirley Keeldar manages better. - Mother, you have never hurt
Miss Keeldar's feelings yet. She wears armour under her silk dress that
you cannot penetrate."

Mrs. Yorke often complained that her children were mutinous. It was
strange that with all her strictness, with all her 'strong-mindedness,"
she could gain no command over them. A look from their father had more
influence with them than a lecture from her.

Miss Moore - to whom the position of witness to an altercation in which
she took no part was highly displeasing, as being an unimportant
secondary post - now rallying her dignity, prepared to utter a discourse
which was to prove both parties in the wrong, and to make it clear to
each disputant that she had reason to be ashamed of herself, and ought
to submit humbly to the superior sense of the individual then addressing
her. Fortunately for her audience, she had not harangued above ten
minutes when Sarah's entrance with the tea-tray called her attention,
first to the fact of that damsel having a gilt comb in her hair and a
red necklace round her throat, and secondly, and subsequently to a
pointed remonstrance, to the duty of making tea. After the meal Rose
restored her to good-humour by bringing her guitar and asking for a
song, and afterwards engaging her in an intelligent and sharp
cross-examination about guitar-playing and music in general.

Jessie, meantime, directed her assiduities to Caroline. Sitting on a
stool at her feet, she talked to her, first about religion and then
about politics. Jessie was accustomed at home to drink in a great deal
of what her father said on these subjects, and afterwards in company to
retail, with more wit and fluency than consistency or discretion, his
opinions, antipathies, and preferences. She rated Caroline soundly for
being a member of the Established Church, and for having an uncle a
clergyman. She informed her that she lived on the country, and ought to
work for her living honestly, instead of passing a useless life, and
eating the bread of idleness in the shape of tithes. Thence Jessie
passed to a review of the ministry at that time in office, and a
consideration of its deserts. She made familiar mention of the names of
Lord Castlereagh and Mr. Perceval. Each of these personages she adorned
with a character that might have separately suited Moloch and Belial.
She denounced the war as wholesale murder, and Lord Wellington as a
"hired butcher."

Her auditress listened with exceeding edification. Jessie had something
of the genius of humour in her nature. It was inexpressibly comic to
hear her repeating her sire's denunciations in his nervous northern
Doric; as hearty a little Jacobin as ever pent a free mutinous spirit in
a muslin frock and sash. Not malignant by nature, her language was not
so bitter as it was racy, and the expressive little face gave a piquancy
to every phrase which held a beholder's interest captive.

Caroline chid her when she abused Lord Wellington; but she listened
delighted to a subsequent tirade against the Prince Regent. Jessie
quickly read, in the sparkle of her hearer's eye and the laughter
hovering round her lips, that at last she had hit on a topic that
pleased. Many a time had she heard the fat "Adonis of fifty" discussed
at her father's breakfast-table, and she now gave Mr. Yorke's comments
on the theme - genuine as uttered by his Yorkshire lips.

But, Jessie, I will write about you no more. This is an autumn evening,
wet and wild. There is only one cloud in the sky, but it curtains it
from pole to pole. The wind cannot rest; it hurries sobbing over hills
of sullen outline, colourless with twilight and mist. Rain has beat all
day on that church tower. It rises dark from the stony enclosure of its
graveyard. The nettles, the long grass, and the tombs all drip with wet.
This evening reminds me too forcibly of another evening some years
ago - a howling, rainy autumn evening too - when certain who had that day
performed a pilgrimage to a grave new-made in a heretic cemetery sat
near a wood fire on the hearth of a foreign dwelling. They were merry
and social, but they each knew that a gap, never to be filled, had been
made in their circle. They knew they had lost something whose absence
could never be quite atoned for so long as they lived; and they knew
that heavy falling rain was soaking into the wet earth which covered
their lost darling, and that the sad, sighing gale was mourning above
her buried head. The fire warmed them; life and friendship yet blessed
them; but Jessie lay cold, coffined, solitary - only the sod screening
her from the storm.

          

Mrs. Yorke folded up her knitting, cut short the music lesson and the
lecture on politics, and concluded her visit to the cottage, at an hour
early enough to ensure her return to Briarmains before the blush of
sunset should quite have faded in heaven, or the path up the fields have
become thoroughly moist with evening dew.

The lady and her daughters being gone, Caroline felt that she also ought
to resume her scarf, kiss her cousin's cheek, and trip away homeward. If
she lingered much later dusk would draw on, and Fanny would be put to
the trouble of coming to fetch her. It was both baking and ironing day
at the rectory, she remembered - Fanny would be busy. Still, she could
not quit her seat at the little parlour window. From no point of view
could the west look so lovely as from that lattice with the garland of
jessamine round it, whose white stars and green leaves seemed now but
gray pencil outlines - graceful in form, but colourless in tint - against
the gold incarnadined of a summer evening - against the fire-tinged blue
of an August sky at eight o'clock p.m.

Caroline looked at the wicket-gate, beside which holly-oaks spired up
tall. She looked at the close hedge of privet and laurel fencing in the
garden; her eyes longed to see something more than the shrubs before
they turned from that limited prospect. They longed to see a human
figure, of a certain mould and height, pass the hedge and enter the
gate. A human figure she at last saw - nay, two. Frederick Murgatroyd
went by, carrying a pail of water; Joe Scott followed, dangling on his
forefinger the keys of the mill. They were going to lock up mill and
stables for the night, and then betake themselves home.

"So must I," thought Caroline, as she half rose and sighed.

"This is all folly - heart-breaking folly," she added. "In the first
place, though I should stay till dark there will be no arrival; because
I feel in my heart, Fate has written it down in to-day's page of her
eternal book, that I am not to have the pleasure I long for. In the
second place, if he stepped in this moment, my presence here would be a
chagrin to him, and the consciousness that it must be so would turn half
my blood to ice. His hand would, perhaps, be loose and chill if I put
mine into it; his eye would be clouded if I sought its beam. I should
look up for that kindling, something I have seen in past days, when my
face, or my language, or my disposition had at some happy moment pleased
him; I should discover only darkness. I had better go home."

She took her bonnet from the table where it lay, and was just fastening
the ribbon, when Hortense, directing her attention to a splendid bouquet
of flowers in a glass on the same table, mentioned that Miss Keeldar had
sent them that morning from Fieldhead; and went on to comment on the
guests that lady was at present entertaining, on the bustling life she
had lately been leading; adding divers conjectures that she did not very
well like it, and much wonderment that a person who was so fond of her
own way as the heiress did not find some means of sooner getting rid of
this cortége of relatives.

"But they say she actually will not let Mr. Sympson and his family go,"
she added. "They wanted much to return to the south last week, to be
ready for the reception of the only son, who is expected home from a
tour. She insists that her cousin Henry shall come and join his friends
here in Yorkshire. I dare say she partly does it to oblige Robert and
myself."

"How to oblige Robert and you?" inquired Caroline.

"Why, my child, you are dull. Don't  you know - you must often have
heard - - "

"Please, ma'am," said Sarah, opening the door, "the preserves that you
told me to boil in treacle - the congfiters, as you call them - is all
burnt to the pan."

"Les confitures! Elles sont brulées? Ah, quelle négligence coupable!
Coquine de cuisiniere, fille insupportable!"

And mademoiselle, hastily taking from a drawer a large linen apron, and
tying it over her black apron, rushed éperdue into the kitchen,
whence, to speak truth, exhaled an odour of calcined sweets rather
strong than savoury.

The mistress and maid had been in full feud the whole day, on the
subject of preserving certain black cherries, hard as marbles, sour as
sloes. Sarah held that sugar was the only orthodox condiment to be used
in that process; mademoiselle maintained - and proved it by the practice
and experience of her mother, grandmother, and great-grandmother - that
treacle, "mélasse," was infinitely preferable. She had committed an
imprudence in leaving Sarah in charge of the preserving-pan, for her
want of sympathy in the nature of its contents had induced a degree of
carelessness in watching their confection, whereof the result was - dark
and cindery ruin. Hubbub followed; high upbraiding, and sobs rather loud
than deep or real.

Caroline, once more turning to the little mirror, was shading her
ringlets from her cheek to smooth them under her cottage bonnet, certain
that it would not only be useless but unpleasant to stay longer, when,
on the sudden opening of the back-door, there fell an abrupt calm in the
kitchen. The tongues were checked, pulled up as with bit and bridle.
"Was it - was it - Robert?" He often - almost always - entered by the
kitchen way on his return from market. No; it was only Joe Scott, who,
having hemmed significantly thrice - every hem being meant as a lofty
rebuke to the squabbling womankind - said, "Now, I thowt I heerd a
crack?"

None answered.

"And," he continued pragmatically, "as t' maister's comed, and as he'll
enter through this hoyle, I con sidered it desirable to step in and let
ye know. A household o' women is nivver fit to be comed on wi'out
warning. Here he is. - Walk forrard, sir. They war playing up queerly,
but I think I've  quietened 'em."

Another person, it was now audible, entered. Joe Scott proceeded with
his rebukes.

"What d'ye mean by being all i' darkness? Sarah, thou quean, canst t'
not light a candle? It war sundown an hour syne. He'll brak his shins
agean some o' yer pots, and tables, and stuff. - Tak tent o' this
baking-bowl, sir; they've  set it i' yer way, fair as if they did it i'
malice."

To Joe's observations succeeded a confused sort of pause, which
Caroline, though she was listening with both her ears, could not
understand. It was very brief. A cry broke it - a sound of surprise,
followed by the sound of a kiss; ejaculations, but half articulate,
succeeded.

"Mon Dieu! mon Dieu! Est-ce que je m'y attendais?" were the words
chiefly to be distinguished.

"Et tu te portes toujours bien, bonne sour?" inquired another
voice - Robert's, certainly.

Caroline was puzzled. Obeying an impulse the wisdom of which she had not
time to question, she escaped from the little parlour, by way of leaving
the coast clear, and running upstairs took up a position at the head of
the banisters, whence she could make further observations ere presenting
herself. It was considerably past sunset now; dusk filled the passage,
yet not such deep dusk but that she could presently see Robert and
Hortense traverse it.

"Caroline! Caroline!" called Hortense, a moment afterwards, "venez voir
mon frere!"

"Strange," commented Miss Helstone, "passing strange! What does this
unwonted excitement about such an every-day occurrence as a return from
market portend? She has not lost her senses, has she? Surely the burnt
treacle has not crazed her?"

She descended in a subdued flutter. Yet more was she fluttered when
Hortense seized her hand at the parlour door, and leading her to Robert,
who stood in bodily presence, tall and dark against the one window,
presented her with a mixture of agitation and formality, as though they
had been utter strangers, and this was their first mutual introduction.

Increasing puzzle! He bowed rather awkwardly, and turning from her with
a stranger's embarrassment, he met the doubtful light from the window.
It fell on his face, and the enigma of the dream  a dream it seemed 
was at its height. She saw a visage like and unlike - Robert, and no
Robert.

"What is the matter?" said Caroline. "Is my sight wrong? Is it my
cousin?"

"Certainly it is your cousin," asserted Hortense.

Then who was this now coming through the passage - now entering the room?
Caroline, looking round, met a new Robert - the real Robert, as she felt
at once.

"Well," said he, smiling at her questioning, astonished face, "which is
which?"

"Ah, this is you !" was the answer.

He laughed. "I believe it is me . And do you know who he is? You
never saw him before, but you have heard of him."

She had gathered her senses now.

"It can be only one person - your brother, since it is so like you; my
other cousin, Louis."

"Clever little Odipus! you would have baffled the Sphinx! But now, see
us together. - Change places; change again, to confuse her, Louis. - Which
is the old love now, Lina?"

"As if it were possible to make a mistake when you speak! You should
have told Hortense to ask. But you are not so much alike. It is only
your height, your figure, and complexion that are so similar."

"And I am Robert, am I not?" asked the newcomer, making a first effort
to overcome what seemed his natural shyness.

Caroline shook her head gently. A soft, expressive ray from her eye
beamed on the real Robert. It said much.

She was not permitted to quit her cousins soon. Robert himself was
peremptory in obliging her to remain. Glad, simple, and affable in her
demeanour  glad for this night, at least , in light, bright spirits for
the time, she was too pleasant an addition to the cottage circle to be
willingly parted with by any of them. Louis seemed naturally rather a
grave, still, retiring man; but the Caroline of this evening, which was
not  as you know, reader  the Caroline of every day, thawed his reserve,
and cheered his gravity soon. He sat near her and talked to her. She
already knew his vocation was that of tuition. She learned now he had
for some years been the tutor of Mr. Sympson's son; that he had been
travelling with him, and had accompanied him to the north. She inquired
if he liked his post, but got a look in reply which did not invite or
license further question. The look woke Caroline's ready sympathy. She
thought it a very sad expression to pass over so sensible a face as
Louis's; for he had a sensible face, though not handsome, she
considered, when seen near Robert's. She turned to make the comparison.
Robert was leaning against the wall, a little behind her, turning over
the leaves of a book of engravings, and probably listening, at the same
time, to the dialogue between her and Louis.

"How could I think them alike?" she asked herself. "I see now it is
Hortense Louis resembles, not Robert."

And this was in part true. He had the shorter nose and longer upper lip
of his sister rather than the fine traits of his brother. He had her
mould of mouth and chin - all less decisive, accurate, and clear than
those of the young mill-owner. His air, though deliberate and
reflective, could scarcely be called prompt and acute. You felt, in
sitting near and looking up at him, that a slower and probably a more
benignant nature than that of the elder Moore shed calm on your
impressions.

Robert - perhaps aware that Caroline's glance had wandered towards and
dwelt upon him, though he had neither met nor answered it - put down the
book of engravings, and approaching, took a seat at her side. She
resumed her conversation with Louis, but while she talked to him her
thoughts were elsewhere. Her heart beat on the side from which her face
was half averted. She acknowledged a steady, manly, kindly air in Louis;
but she bent before the secret power of Robert. To be so near
him - though he was silent, though he did not touch so much as her
scarf-fringe or the white hem of her dress - affected her like a spell.
Had she been obliged to speak to him only , it would have quelled, but,
at liberty to address another, it excited her. Her discourse flowed
freely; it was gay, playful, eloquent. The indulgent look and placid
manner of her auditor encouraged her to ease; the sober pleasure
expressed by his smile drew out all that was brilliant in her nature.
She felt that this evening she appeared to advantage, and as Robert was
a spectator, the consciousness contented her. Had he been called away,
collapse would at once have succeeded stimulus.

But her enjoyment was not long to shine full-orbed; a cloud soon crossed
it.

Hortense, who for some time had been on the move ordering supper, and
was now clearing the little table of some books, etc., to make room for
the tray, called Robert's attention to the glass of flowers, the carmine
and snow and gold of whose petals looked radiant indeed by candlelight.

"They came from Fieldhead," she said, "intended as a gift to you, no
doubt. We know who is the favourite there; not I, I'm sure."

It was a wonder to hear Hortense jest - a sign that her spirits were at
high-water mark indeed.

"We are to understand, then, that Robert is the favourite?" observed
Louis.

"Mon cher," replied Hortense, "Robert - c'est tout ce qu'il y a de plus
précieux au monde; a c"té de lui le reste du genre humain n'est que du
rebut. - N'ai-je pas raison, mon enfant?" she added, appealing to
Caroline.

Caroline was obliged to reply, "Yes," and her beacon was quenched. Her
star withdrew as she spoke.

"Et toi, Robert?" inquired Louis.

"When you shall have an opportunity, ask herself," was the quiet answer.
Whether he reddened or paled Caroline did not examine. She discovered
that it was late, and she must go home. Home she would go; not even
Robert could detain her now.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH.


The future sometimes seems to sob a low warning of the events it is
bringing us, like some gathering though yet remote storm, which, in
tones of the wind, in flushings of the firmament, in clouds strangely
torn, announces a blast strong to strew the sea with wrecks; or
commissioned to bring in fog the yellow taint of pestilence covering
white Western isles with the poisoned exhalations of the East, dimming
the lattices of English homes with the breath of Indian plague. At other
times this future bursts suddenly, as if a rock had rent, and in it a
grave had opened, whence issues the body of one that slept. Ere you are
aware you stand face to face with a shrouded and unthought-of
calamity - a new Lazarus.

Caroline Helstone went home from Hollow's Cottage in good health, as she
imagined. On waking the next morning she felt oppressed with unwonted
languor. At breakfast, at each meal of the following day, she missed all
sense of appetite. Palatable food was as ashes and sawdust to her.

"Am I ill?" she asked, and looked at herself in the glass. Her eyes were
bright, their pupils dilated, her cheeks seemed rosier, and fuller than
usual. "I look well; why can I not eat?"

She felt a pulse beat fast in her temples; she felt, too, her brain in
strange activity. Her spirits were raised; hundreds of busy and broken
but brilliant thoughts engaged her mind. A glow rested on them, such as
tinged her complexion.

Now followed a hot, parched, thirsty, restless night. Towards morning
one terrible dream seized her like a tiger; when she woke, she felt and
knew she was ill.

How she had caught the fever  fever it was  she could not tell. Probably
in her late walk home, some sweet, poisoned breeze, redolent of
honey-dew and miasma, had passed into her lungs and veins, and finding
there already a fever of mental excitement, and a languor of long
conflict and habitual sadness, had fanned the spark to flame, and left a
well-lit fire behind it.

It seemed, however, but a gentle fire. After two hot days and worried
nights, there was no violence in the symptoms, and neither her uncle,
nor Fanny, nor the doctor, nor Miss Keeldar, when she called, had any
fear for her. A few days would restore her, every one believed.

The few days passed, and - though it was still thought it could not long
delay - the revival had not begun. Mrs. Pryor, who had visited her
daily - being present in her chamber one morning when she had been ill a
fortnight - watched her very narrowly for some minutes. She took her hand
and placed her finger on her wrist; then, quietly leaving the chamber,
she went to Mr. Helstone's study. With him she remained closeted a long
time - half the morning. On returning to her sick young friend, she laid
aside shawl and bonnet. She stood awhile at the bedside, one hand placed
in the other, gently rocking herself to and fro, in an attitude and with
a movement habitual to her. At last she said, "I have sent Fanny to
Fieldhead to fetch a few things for me, such as I shall want during a
short stay here. It is my wish to remain with you till you are better.
Your uncle kindly permits my attendance. Will it to yourself be
acceptable, Caroline?"

"I am sorry you should take such needless trouble. I do not feel very
ill, but I cannot refuse resolutely. It will be such comfort to know you
are in the house, to see you sometimes in the room; but don't  confine
yourself on my account, dear Mrs. Pryor. Fanny nurses me very well."

Mrs. Pryor, bending over the pale little sufferer, was now smoothing the
hair under her cap, and gently raising her pillow. As she performed
these offices, Caroline, smiling, lifted her face to kiss her.

"Are you free from pain? Are you tolerably at ease?" was inquired in a
low, earnest voice, as the self-elected nurse yielded to the caress.

"I think I am almost happy."

"You wish to drink? Your lips are parched."

She held a glass filled with some cooling beverage to her mouth.

"Have you eaten anything to-day, Caroline?"

"I cannot eat."

"But soon your appetite will return; it must return - that is, I pray
God it may."

In laying her again on the couch, she encircled her in her arms; and
while so doing, by a movement which seemed scarcely voluntary, she drew
her to her heart, and held her close gathered an instant.

"I shall hardly wish to get well, that I may keep you always," said
Caroline.

Mrs. Pryor did not smile at this speech. Over her features ran a tremor,
which for some minutes she was absorbed in repressing.

"You are more used to Fanny than to me," she remarked ere long. "I
should think my attendance must seem strange, officious?"

"No; quite natural, and very soothing. You must have been accustomed to
wait on sick people, ma'am. You move about the room so softly, and you
speak so quietly, and touch me so gently."

"I am dexterous in nothing, my dear. You will often find me awkward, but
never negligent."

Negligent, indeed, she was not. From that hour Fanny and Eliza became
ciphers in the sick-room. Mrs. Pryor made it her domain; she performed
all its duties; she lived in it day and night. The patient
remonstrated - faintly, however, from the first, and not at all ere long.
Loneliness and gloom were now banished from her bedside; protection and
solace sat there instead. She and her nurse coalesced in wondrous union.
Caroline was usually pained to require or receive much attendance. Mrs.
Pryor, under ordinary circumstances, had neither the habit nor the art
of performing little offices of service; but all now passed with such
ease, so naturally, that the patient was as willing to be cherished as
the nurse was bent on cherishing; no sign of weariness in the latter
ever reminded the former that she ought to be anxious. There was, in
fact, no very hard duty to perform; but a hireling might have found it
hard.

With all this care it seemed strange the sick girl did not get well; yet
such was the case. She wasted like any snow-wreath in thaw; she faded
like any flower in drought. Miss Keeldar, on whose thoughts danger or
death seldom intruded, had at first entertained no fears at all for her
friend; but seeing her change and sink from time to time when she paid
her visits, alarm clutched her heart. She went to Mr. Helstone and
expressed herself with so much energy that that gentleman was at last
obliged, however unwillingly, to admit the idea that his niece was ill
of something more than a migraine; and when Mrs. Pryor came and quietly
demanded a physician, he said she might send for two if she liked. One
came, but that one was an oracle. He delivered a dark saying of which
the future was to solve the mystery, wrote some prescriptions, gave some
directions - the whole with an air of crushing authority - pocketed his
fee, and went. Probably he knew well enough he could do no good, but
didn't  like to say so.

Still, no rumour of serious illness got wind in the neighbourhood. At
Hollow's Cottage it was thought that Caroline had only a severe cold,
she having written a note to Hortense to that effect; and mademoiselle
contented herself with sending two pots of currant jam, a recipe for a
tisane, and a note of advice.

Mrs. Yorke being told that a physician had been summoned, sneered at the
hypochondriac fancies of the rich and idle, who, she said, having
nothing but themselves to think about, must needs send for a doctor if
only so much as their little finger ached.

The "rich and idle," represented in the person of Caroline, were
meantime falling fast into a condition of prostration, whose quickly
consummated debility puzzled all who witnessed it except one; for that
one alone reflected how liable is the undermined structure to sink in
sudden ruin.

Sick people often have fancies inscrutable to ordinary attendants, and
Caroline had one which even her tender nurse could not at first explain.
On a certain day in the week, at a certain hour, she would - whether
worse or better - entreat to be taken up and dressed, and suffered to sit
in her chair near the window. This station she would retain till noon
was past. Whatever degree of exhaustion or debility her wan aspect
betrayed, she still softly put off all persuasion to seek repose until
the church clock had duly tolled midday. The twelve strokes sounded, she
grew docile, and would meekly lie down. Returned to the couch, she
usually buried her face deep in the pillow, and drew the coverlets close
round her, as if to shut out the world and sun, of which she was tired.
More than once, as she thus lay, a slight convulsion shook the sick-bed,
and a faint sob broke the silence round it. These things were not
unnoted by Mrs. Pryor.

One Tuesday morning, as usual, she had asked leave to rise, and now she
sat wrapped in her white dressing-gown, leaning forward in the
easy-chair, gazing steadily and patiently from the lattice. Mrs. Pryor
was seated a little behind, knitting as it seemed, but, in truth,
watching her. A change crossed her pale, mournful brow, animating its
languor; a light shot into her faded eyes, reviving their lustre; she
half rose and looked earnestly out. Mrs. Pryor, drawing softly near,
glanced over her shoulder. From this window was visible the churchyard,
beyond it the road; and there, riding sharply by, appeared a horseman.
The figure was not yet too remote for recognition. Mrs. Pryor had long
sight; she knew Mr. Moore. Just as an intercepting rising ground
concealed him from view, the clock struck twelve.

"May I lie down again?" asked Caroline.

Her nurse assisted her to bed. Having laid her down and drawn the
curtain, she stood listening near. The little couch trembled, the
suppressed sob stirred the air. A contraction as of anguish altered Mrs.
Pryor's features; she wrung her hands; half a groan escaped her lips.
She now remembered that Tuesday was Whinbury market day. Mr. Moore must
always pass the rectory on his way thither, just ere noon of that day.

Caroline wore continually round her neck a slender braid of silk,
attached to which was some trinket. Mrs. Pryor had seen the bit of gold
glisten, but had not yet obtained a fair view of it. Her patient never
parted with it. When dressed it was hidden in her bosom; as she lay in
bed she always held it in her hand. That Tuesday afternoon the transient
doze - more like lethargy than sleep - which sometimes abridged the long
days, had stolen over her. The weather was hot. While turning in febrile
restlessness, she had pushed the coverlets a little aside. Mrs. Pryor
bent to replace them. The small, wasted hand, lying nerveless on the
sick girl's breast, clasped as usual her jealously-guarded treasure.
Those fingers whose attenuation it gave pain to see were now relaxed in
sleep. Mrs. Pryor gently disengaged the braid, drawing out a tiny
locket - a slight thing it was, such as it suited her small purse to
purchase. Under its crystal face appeared a curl of black hair, too
short and crisp to have been severed from a female head.

Some agitated movement occasioned a twitch of the silken chain. The
sleeper started and woke. Her thoughts were usually now somewhat
scattered on waking, her look generally wandering. Half rising, as if
in terror, she exclaimed, "Don't  take it from me, Robert! Don't ! It is
my last comfort; let me keep it. I never tell any one whose hair it is;
I never show it."

Mrs. Pryor had already disappeared behind the curtain. Reclining far
back in a deep arm-chair by the bedside, she was withdrawn from view.
Caroline looked abroad into the chamber; she thought it empty. As her
stray ideas returned slowly, each folding its weak wings on the mind's
sad shore, like birds exhausted, beholding void, and perceiving silence
round her, she believed herself alone. Collected she was not yet;
perhaps healthy self-possession and self-control were to be hers no
more; perhaps that world the strong and prosperous live in had already
rolled from beneath her feet for ever. So, at least, it often seemed to
herself. In health she had never been accustomed to think aloud, but now
words escaped her lips unawares.

"Oh, I should see him once more before all is over! Heaven might 
favour me thus far!" she cried. "God grant me a little comfort before I
die!" was her humble petition.

"But he will not know I am ill till I am gone, and he will come when
they have laid me out, and I am senseless, cold, and stiff.

"What can my departed soul feel then? Can it see or know what happens to
the clay? Can spirits, through any medium, communicate with living
flesh? Can the dead at all revisit those they leave? Can they come in
the elements? Will wind, water, fire, lend me a path to Moore?

"Is it for nothing the wind sounds almost articulately sometimes - sings
as I have lately heard it sing at night - or passes the casement sobbing,
as if for sorrow to come? Does nothing, then, haunt it, nothing inspire
it?

"Why, it suggested to me words one night; it poured a strain which I
could have written down, only I was appalled, and dared not rise to seek
pencil and paper by the dim watch-light.

"What is that electricity they speak of, whose changes make us well or
ill, whose lack or excess blasts, whose even balance revives? What are
all those influences that are about us in the atmosphere, that keep
playing over our nerves like fingers on stringed instruments, and call
forth now a sweet note, and now a wail - now an exultant swell, and anon
the saddest cadence?

" Where is the other world? In what will another life consist? Why do
I ask? Have I not cause to think that the hour is hasting but too fast
when the veil must be rent for me? Do I not know the Grand Mystery is
likely to burst prematurely on me? Great Spirit, in whose goodness I
confide, whom, as my Father, I have petitioned night and morning from
early infancy, help the weak creation of Thy hands! Sustain me through
the ordeal I dread and must undergo! Give me strength! Give me patience!
Give me - oh, give me FAITH!"

She fell back on her pillow. Mrs. Pryor found means to steal quietly
from the room. She re-entered it soon after, apparently as composed as
if she had really not overheard this strange soliloquy.

The next day several callers came. It had become known that Miss
Helstone was worse. Mr. Hall and his sister Margaret arrived. Both,
after they had been in the sickroom, quitted it in tears; they had found
the patient more altered than they expected. Hortense Moore came.
Caroline seemed stimulated by her presence. She assured her, smiling,
she was not dangerously ill; she talked to her in a low voice, but
cheerfully. During her stay, excitement kept up the flush of her
complexion; she looked better.

"How is Mr. Robert?" asked Mrs. Pryor, as Hortense was preparing to take
leave.

"He was very well when he left."

"Left! Is he gone from home?"

It was then explained that some police intelligence about the rioters of
whom he was in pursuit had, that morning, called him away to Birmingham,
and probably a fortnight might elapse ere he returned.

"He is not aware that Miss Helstone is very ill?"

"Oh no! He thought, like me, that she had only a bad cold."

After this visit, Mrs. Pryor took care not to approach Caroline's couch
for above an hour. She heard her weep, and dared not look on her tears.

As evening closed in, she brought her some tea. Caroline, opening her
eyes from a moment's slumber, viewed her nurse with an unrecognizing
glance.

"I smelt the honeysuckles in the glen this summer morning," she said,
"as I stood at the counting-house window."

Strange words like these from pallid lips pierce a loving listener's
heart more poignantly than steel. They sound romantic, perhaps, in
books; in real life they are harrowing.

"My darling, do you know me?" said Mrs. Pryor.

"I went in to call Robert to breakfast. I have been with him in the
garden. He asked me to go. A heavy dew has refreshed the flowers. The
peaches are ripening."

"My darling! my darling!" again and again repeated the nurse.

"I thought it was daylight - long after sunrise. It looks dark. Is the
moon now set?"

That moon, lately risen, was gazing full and mild upon her. Floating in
deep blue space, it watched her unclouded.

"Then it is not morning? I am not at the cottage? Who is this? I see a
shape at my bedside."

"It is myself - it is your friend - your nurse - your - - Lean your head on
my shoulder. Collect yourself." In a lower tone - "O God, take pity! Give
 her life, and me strength! Send me courage! Teach me words!"

Some minutes passed in silence. The patient lay mute and passive in the
trembling arms, on the throbbing bosom of the nurse.

"I am better now," whispered Caroline at last, "much better. I feel
where I am. This is Mrs. Pryor near me. I was dreaming. I talk when I
wake up from dreams; people often do in illness. How fast your heart
beats, ma'am! Do not be afraid."

"It is not fear, child - only a little anxiety, which will pass. I have
brought you some tea, Cary. Your uncle made it himself. You know he says
he can make a better cup of tea than any housewife can. Taste it. He is
concerned to hear that you eat so little; he would be glad if you had a
better appetite."

"I am thirsty. Let me drink."

She drank eagerly.

"What o'clock is it, ma'am?" she asked.

"Past nine."

"Not later? Oh! I have yet a long night before me. But the tea has made
me strong. I will sit up."

Mrs. Pryor raised her, and arranged her pillows.

"Thank Heaven! I am not always equally miserable, and ill, and hopeless.
The afternoon has been bad since Hortense went; perhaps the evening may
be better. It is a fine night, I think? The moon shines clear."

"Very fine - a perfect summer night. The old church-tower gleams white
almost as silver."

"And does the churchyard look peaceful?"

"Yes, and the garden also. Dew glistens on the foliage."

"Can you see many long weeds and nettles amongst the graves? or do they
look turfy and flowery?"

"I see closed daisy-heads gleaming like pearls on some mounds. Thomas
has mown down the dock-leaves and rank grass, and cleared all away."

"I always like that to be done; it soothes one's mind to see the place
in order. And, I dare say, within the church just now that moonlight
shines as softly as in my room. It will fall through the east window
full on the Helstone monument. When I close my eyes I seem to see poor
papa's epitaph in black letters on the white marble. There is plenty of
room for other inscriptions underneath."

"William Farren came to look after your flowers this morning. He was
afraid, now you cannot tend them yourself, they would be neglected. He
has taken two of your favourite plants home to nurse for you."

"If I were to make a will, I would leave William all my plants; Shirley
my trinkets - except one, which must not be taken off my neck; and you,
ma'am, my books." After a pause - "Mrs. Pryor, I feel a longing wish for
something."

"For what, Caroline?"

"You know I always delight to hear you sing. Sing me a hymn just now.
Sing that hymn which begins, - 

 'Our God, our help in ages past,
 Our hope for years to come,
 Our shelter from the stormy blast,
 Our refuge, haven, home!'"

Mrs. Pryor at once complied.

No wonder Caroline liked to hear her sing. Her voice, even in speaking,
was sweet and silver clear; in song it was almost divine. Neither flute
nor dulcimer has tones so pure. But the tone was secondary, compared to
the expression which trembled through - a tender vibration from a feeling
heart.

The servants in the kitchen, hearing the strain, stole to the stair-foot
to listen. Even old Helstone, as he walked in the garden, pondering over
the unaccountable and feeble nature of women, stood still amongst his
borders to catch the mournful melody more distinctly. Why it reminded
him of his forgotten dead wife, he could not tell; nor why it made him
more concerned than he had hitherto been for Caroline's fading girlhood.
He was glad to recollect that he had promised to pay Wynne, the
magistrate, a visit that evening. Low spirits and gloomy thoughts were
very much his aversion. When they attacked him he usually found means to
make them march in double-quick time. The hymn followed him faintly as
he crossed the fields. He hastened his customary sharp pace, that he
might get beyond its reach.

 "Thy word commands our flesh to dust, - 
 'Return, ye sons of men;'
 All nations rose from earth at first,
 And turn to earth again.

 "A thousand ages in Thy sight
 Are like an evening gone - 
 Short as the watch that ends the night
 Before the rising sun.

 "Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
 Bears all its sons away;
 They fly, forgotten, as a dream
 Dies at the opening day.

 "Like flowery fields, the nations stand,
 Fresh in the morning light;
 The flowers beneath the mower's hand
 Lie withering ere 'tis night.

 "Our God, our help in ages past,
 Our hope for years to come,
 Be Thou our guard while troubles last - 
 O Father, be our home!"

"Now sing a song - a Scottish song," suggested Caroline, when the hymn
was over - "'Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon.'"

Again Mrs. Pryor obeyed, or essayed to obey. At the close of the first
stanza she stopped. She could get no further. Her full heart flowed
over.

"You are weeping at the pathos of the air. Come here, and I will comfort
you," said Caroline, in a pitying accent. Mrs. Pryor came. She sat down
on the edge of her patient's bed, and allowed the wasted arms to
encircle her.

"You often soothe me; let me soothe you," murmured the young girl,
kissing her cheek. "I hope," she added, "it is not for me you weep?"

No answer followed.

"Do you think I shall not get better? I do not feel very ill - only
weak."

"But your mind, Caroline - your mind is crushed. Your heart is almost
broken; you have been so neglected, so repulsed, left so desolate."

"I believe grief is, and always has been, my worst ailment. I sometimes
think if an abundant gush of happiness came on me I could revive yet."

"Do you wish to live?"

"I have no object in life."

"You love me, Caroline?"

"Very much - very truly - inexpressibly sometimes. Just now I feel as if I
could almost grow to your heart."

"I will return directly, dear," remarked Mrs. Pryor, as she laid
Caroline down.

Quitting her, she glided to the door, softly turned the key in the lock,
ascertained that it was fast, and came back. She bent over her. She
threw back the curtain to admit the moonlight more freely. She gazed
intently on her face.

"Then, if you love me," said she, speaking quickly, with an altered
voice; "if you feel as if, to use your own words, you could 'grow to my
heart,' it will be neither shock nor pain for you to know that that 
heart is the source whence yours was filled; that from my veins issued
the tide which flows in yours ; that you are mine - my daughter - my
own child."

"Mrs. Pryor - - "

"My own child!"

"That is - that means - you have adopted me?"

"It means that, if I have given you nothing else, I at least gave you
life; that I bore you, nursed you; that I am your true mother. No other
woman can claim the title; it is mine ."

"But Mrs. James Helstone - but my father's wife, whom I do not remember
ever to have seen, she is my mother?"

"She is your mother. James Helstone was my husband. I say you are
 mine . I have proved it. I thought perhaps you were all his, which
would have been a cruel dispensation for me. I find it is not so. God
permitted me to be the parent of my child's mind. It belongs to me; it
is my property - my right . These features are James's own. He had a
fine face when he was young, and not altered by error. Papa, my darling,
gave you your blue eyes and soft brown hair; he gave you the oval of
your face and the regularity of your lineaments - the outside he 
conferred; but the heart and the brain are mine . The germs are from
 me , and they are improved, they are developed to excellence. I esteem
and approve my child as highly as I do most fondly love her."

"Is what I hear true? Is it no dream?"

"I wish it were as true that the substance and colour of health were
restored to your cheek."

"My own mother! is she one I can be so fond of as I can of you? People
generally did not like her - so I have been given to understand."

"They told you that? Well, your mother now tells you that, not having
the gift to please people generally, for their approbation she does not
care. Her thoughts are centred in her child. Does that child welcome or
reject her?"

"But if you are my mother, the world is all changed to me. Surely I
can live. I should like to recover - - "

"You must recover. You drew life and strength from my breast when you
were a tiny, fair infant, over whose blue eyes I used to weep, fearing I
beheld in your very beauty the sign of qualities that had entered my
heart like iron, and pierced through my soul like a sword. Daughter! we
have been long parted; I return now to cherish you again."

She held her to her bosom; she cradled her in her arms; she rocked her
softly, as if lulling a young child to sleep.

"My mother - my own mother!"

The offspring nestled to the parent; that parent, feeling the endearment
and hearing the appeal, gathered her closer still. She covered her with
noiseless kisses; she murmured love over her, like a cushat fostering
its young.

There was silence in the room for a long while.

          

"Does my uncle know?"

"Your uncle knows. I told him when I first came to stay with you here."

"Did you recognize me when we first met at Fieldhead?"

"How could it be otherwise? Mr. and Miss Helstone being announced, I was
prepared to see my child."

"It was that, then, which moved you. I saw you disturbed."

"You saw nothing, Caroline; I can cover my feelings. You can never tell
what an age of strange sensation I lived, during the two minutes that
elapsed between the report of your name and your entrance. You can never
tell how your look, mien, carriage, shook me."

"Why? Were you disappointed?"

"What will she be like? I had asked myself; and when I saw what you were
like, I could have dropped."

"Mamma, why?"

"I trembled in your presence. I said, I will never own her; she shall
never know me."

"But I said and did nothing remarkable. I felt a little diffident at the
thought of an introduction to strangers - that was all."

"I soon saw you were diffident. That was the first thing which reassured
me. Had you been rustic, clownish, awkward, I should have been content."

"You puzzle me."

"I had reason to dread a fair outside, to mistrust a popular bearing, to
shudder before distinction, grace, and courtesy. Beauty and affability
had come in my way when I was recluse, desolate, young, and ignorant - a
toil-worn governess perishing of uncheered labour, breaking down before
her time. These, Caroline, when they smiled on me, I mistook for angels.
I followed them home; and when into their hands I had given without
reserve my whole chance of future happiness, it was my lot to witness a
transfiguration on the domestic hearth - to see the white mask lifted,
the bright disguise put away, and opposite me sat down - - O God, I
 have suffered!"

She sank on the pillow.

"I have suffered! None saw - none knew. There was no sympathy, no
redemption, no redress!"

"Take comfort, mother. It is over now."

"It is over, and not fruitlessly. I tried to keep the word of His
patience. He kept me in the days of my anguish. I was afraid with
terror - I was troubled. Through great tribulation He brought me through
to a salvation revealed in this last time. My fear had torment; He has
cast it out. He has given me in its stead perfect love. But,
Caroline - - "

Thus she invoked her daughter after a pause.

"Mother!"

"I charge you, when you next look on your father's monument, to respect
the name chiselled there. To you he did only good. On you he conferred
his whole treasure of beauties, nor added to them one dark defect. All
 you derived from him is excellent. You owe him gratitude. Leave,
between him and me, the settlement of our mutual account. Meddle not.
God is the arbiter. This world's laws never came near us - never! They
were powerless as a rotten bulrush to protect me - impotent as idiot
babblings to restrain him! As you said, it is all over now; the grave
lies between us. There he sleeps, in that church. To his dust I say this
night, what I have never said before, 'James, slumber peacefully! See!
your terrible debt is cancelled! Look! I wipe out the long, black
account with my own hand! James, your child atones. This living likeness
of you - this thing with your perfect features - this one good gift you
gave me has nestled affectionately to my heart, and tenderly called me
"mother." Husband, rest forgiven!'"

"Dearest mother, that is right! Can papa's spirit hear us? Is he
comforted to know that we still love him?"

"I said nothing of love. I spoke of forgiveness. Mind the truth, child;
I said nothing of love! On the threshold of eternity, should he be there
to see me enter, will I maintain that."

"O mother, you must have suffered!"

"O child, the human heart can suffer! It can hold more tears than the
ocean holds waters. We never know how deep, how wide it is, till misery
begins to unbind her clouds, and fill it with rushing blackness."

"Mother, forget."

"Forget!" she said, with the strangest spectre of a laugh. "The north
pole will rush to the south, and the headlands of Europe be locked into
the bays of Australia ere I forget."

"Hush, mother! Rest! Be at peace!"

And the child lulled the parent, as the parent had erst lulled the
child. At last Mrs. Pryor wept. She then grew calmer. She resumed those
tender cares agitation had for a moment suspended. Replacing her
daughter on the couch, she smoothed the pillow and spread the sheet. The
soft hair whose locks were loosened she rearranged, the damp brow she
refreshed with a cool, fragrant essence.

"Mamma, let them bring a candle, that I may see you; and tell my uncle
to come into this room by-and-by. I want to hear him say that I am your
daughter. And, mamma, take your supper here. Don't  leave me for one
minute to-night."

"O Caroline, it is well you are gentle! You will say to me, Go, and I
shall go; Come, and I shall come; Do this, and I shall do it. You
inherit a certain manner as well as certain features. It will always be
'mamma' prefacing a mandate - softly spoken, though, from you, thank God!
Well," she added, under her breath, "he spoke softly too, once, like a
flute breathing tenderness; and then, when the world was not by to
listen, discords that split the nerves and curdled the blood - sounds to
inspire insanity."

"It seems so natural, mamma, to ask you for this and that. I shall want
nobody but you to be near me, or to do anything for me. But do not let
me be troublesome. Check me if I encroach."

"You must not depend on me to check you; you must keep guard over
yourself. I have little moral courage; the want of it is my bane. It is
that which has made me an unnatural parent - which has kept me apart from
my child during the ten years which have elapsed since my husband's
death left me at liberty to claim her. It was that which first unnerved
my arms and permitted the infant I might have retained a while longer to
be snatched prematurely from their embrace."

"How, mamma?"

"I let you go as a babe, because you were pretty, and I feared your
loveliness, deeming it the stamp of perversity. They sent me your
portrait, taken at eight years old; that portrait confirmed my fears.
Had it shown me a sunburnt little rustic - a heavy, blunt-featured,
commonplace child - I should have hastened to claim you; but there, under
the silver paper, I saw blooming the delicacy of an aristocratic
flower - 'little lady' was written on every trait. I had too recently
crawled from under the yoke of the fine gentleman - escaped galled,
crushed, paralyzed, dying - to dare to encounter his still finer and most
fairy-like representative. My sweet little lady overwhelmed me with
dismay; her air of native elegance froze my very marrow. In my
experience I had not met with truth, modesty, good principle as the
concomitants of beauty. A form so straight and fine, I argued, must
conceal a mind warped and cruel. I had little faith in the power of
education to rectify such a mind; or rather, I entirely misdoubted my
own ability to influence it. Caroline, I dared not undertake to rear
you. I resolved to leave you in your uncle's hands. Matthewson Helstone
I knew, if an austere, was an upright man. He and all the world thought
hardly of me for my strange, unmotherly resolve, and I deserved to be
misjudged."

"Mamma, why did you call yourself Mrs. Pryor?"

"It was a name in my mother's family. I adopted it that I might live
unmolested. My married name recalled too vividly my married life; I
could not bear it. Besides, threats were uttered of forcing me to return
to bondage. It could not be. Rather a bier for a bed, the grave for a
home. My new name sheltered me. I resumed under its screen my old
occupation of teaching. At first it scarcely procured me the means of
sustaining life; but how savoury was hunger when I fasted in peace! How
safe seemed the darkness and chill of an unkindled hearth when no lurid
reflection from terror crimsoned its desolation! How serene was
solitude, when I feared not the irruption of violence and vice!"

"But, mamma, you have been in this neighbourhood before. How did it
happen that when you reappeared here with Miss Keeldar you were not
recognized?"

"I only paid a short visit, as a bride, twenty years ago, and then I was
very different to what I am now - slender, almost as slender as my
daughter is at this day. My complexion, my very features are changed; my
hair, my style of dress - everything is altered. You cannot fancy me a
slim young person, attired in scanty drapery of white muslin, with bare
arms, bracelets and necklace of beads, and hair disposed in round
Grecian curls above my forehead?"

"You must, indeed, have been different. Mamma, I heard the front door
open. If it is my uncle coming in, just ask him to step upstairs, and
let me hear his assurance that I am truly awake and collected, and not
dreaming or delirious."

The rector, of his own accord, was mounting the stairs, and Mrs. Pryor
summoned him to his niece's apartment.

"She's not worse, I hope?" he inquired hastily.

"I think her better. She is disposed to converse; she seems stronger."

"Good!" said he, brushing quickly into the room. - "Ha, Cary! how do? Did
you drink my cup of tea? I made it for you just as I like it myself."

"I drank it every drop, uncle. It did me good; it has made me quite
alive. I have a wish for company, so I begged Mrs. Pryor to call you
in."

The respected ecclesiastic looked pleased, and yet embarrassed. He was
willing enough to bestow his company on his sick niece for ten minutes,
since it was her whim to wish it; but what means to employ for her
entertainment he knew not. He hemmed - he fidgeted.

"You'll be up in a trice," he observed, by way of saying something. "The
little weakness will soon pass off; and then you must drink port wine - a
pipe, if you can - and eat game and oysters. I'll get them for you, if
they are to be had anywhere. Bless me! we'll make you as strong as
Samson before we're done with you."

"Who is that lady, uncle, standing beside you at the bed-foot?"

"Good God!" he ejaculated. "She's not wandering, is she, ma'am?"

Mrs. Pryor smiled.

"I am wandering in a pleasant world," said Caroline, in a soft, happy
voice, "and I want you to tell me whether it is real or visionary. What
lady is that? Give her a name, uncle."

"We must have Dr. Rile again, ma'am; or better still, MacTurk. He's less
of a humbug. Thomas must saddle the pony and go for him."

"No; I don't  want a doctor. Mamma shall be my only physician. Now, do
you understand, uncle?"

Mr. Helstone pushed up his spectacles from his nose to his forehead,
handled his snuff-box, and administered to himself a portion of the
contents. Thus fortified, he answered briefly, "I see daylight. You've 
told her then, ma'am?"

"And is it true ?" demanded Caroline, rising on her pillow. "Is she
 really my mother?"

"You won't  cry, or make any scene, or turn hysterical, if I answer Yes?"

"Cry! I'd cry if you said No . It would be terrible to be disappointed
now. But give her a name. How do you call her?"

"I call this stout lady in a quaint black dress, who looks young enough
to wear much smarter raiment, if she would - I call her Agnes Helstone.
She married my brother James, and is his widow."

"And my mother?"

"What a little sceptic it is! Look at her small face, Mrs. Pryor,
scarcely larger than the palm of my hand, alive with acuteness and
eagerness." To Caroline - "She had the trouble of bringing you into the
world at any rate. Mind you show your duty to her by quickly getting
well, and repairing the waste of these cheeks. - Heigh-ho! she used to be
plump. What she has done with it all I can't , for the life of me,
divine."

"If wishing to get well will help me, I shall not be long sick. This
morning I had no reason and no strength to wish it."

Fanny here tapped at the door, and said that supper was ready.

"Uncle, if you please, you may send me a little bit of supper - anything
you like, from your own plate. That is wiser than going into hysterics,
is it not?"

"It is spoken like a sage, Cary. See if I don't  cater for you
judiciously. When women are sensible, and, above all, intelligible, I
can get on with them. It is only the vague, superfine sensations, and
extremely wire-drawn notions, that put me about. Let a woman ask me to
give her an edible or a wearable - be the same a roc's egg or the
breastplate of Aaron, a share of St. John's locusts and honey or the
leathern girdle about his loins - I can, at least, understand the demand;
but when they pine for they know not what - sympathy, sentiment, some of
these indefinite abstractions - I can't  do it; I don't  know it; I haven't 
got it. - Madam, accept my arm."

Mrs. Pryor signified that she should stay with her daughter that
evening. Helstone, accordingly, left them together. He soon returned,
bringing a plate in his own consecrated hand.

"This is chicken," he said, "but we'll have partridge to-morrow. - Lift
her up, and put a shawl over her. On my word, I understand
nursing. - Now, here is the very same little silver fork you used when
you first came to the rectory. That strikes me as being what you may
call a happy thought - a delicate attention. Take it, Cary, and munch
away cleverly."

Caroline did her best. Her uncle frowned to see that her powers were so
limited. He prophesied, however, great things for the future; and as she
praised the morsel he had brought, and smiled gratefully in his face, he
stooped over her pillow, kissed her, and said, with a broken, rugged
accent, "Good-night, bairnie! God bless thee!"

Caroline enjoyed such peaceful rest that night, circled by her mother's
arms, and pillowed on her breast, that she forgot to wish for any other
stay; and though more than one feverish dream came to her in slumber,
yet, when she woke up panting, so happy and contented a feeling returned
with returning consciousness that her agitation was soothed almost as
soon as felt.

As to the mother, she spent the night like Jacob at Peniel. Till break
of day she wrestled with God in earnest prayer.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE WEST WIND BLOWS.


Not always do those who dare such divine conflict prevail. Night after
night the sweat of agony may burst dark on the forehead; the supplicant
may cry for mercy with that soundless voice the soul utters when its
appeal is to the Invisible. "Spare my beloved," it may implore. "Heal my
life's life. Rend not from me what long affection entwines with my whole
nature. God of heaven, bend, hear, be clement!" And after this cry and
strife the sun may rise and see him worsted. That opening morn, which
used to salute him with the whisper of zephyrs, the carol of skylarks,
may breathe, as its first accents, from the dear lips which colour and
heat have quitted, "Oh! I have had a suffering night. This morning I am
worse. I have tried to rise. I cannot. Dreams I am unused to have
troubled me."

Then the watcher approaches the patient's pillow, and sees a new and
strange moulding of the familiar features, feels at once that the
insufferable moment draws nigh, knows that it is God's will his idol
shall be broken, and bends his head, and subdues his soul to the
sentence he cannot avert and scarce can bear.

Happy Mrs. Pryor! She was still praying, unconscious that the summer sun
hung above the hills, when her child softly woke in her arms. No
piteous, unconscious moaning - sound which so wastes our strength that,
even if we have sworn to be firm, a rush of unconquerable tears sweeps
away the oath - preceded her waking. No space of deaf apathy followed.
The first words spoken were not those of one becoming estranged from
this world, and already permitted to stray at times into realms foreign
to the living. Caroline evidently remembered with clearness what had
happened.

"Mamma, I have slept so well. I only dreamed and woke twice."

Mrs. Pryor rose with a start, that her daughter might not see the joyful
tears called into her eyes by that affectionate word "mamma," and the
welcome assurance that followed it.

For many days the mother dared rejoice only with trembling. That first
revival seemed like the flicker of a dying lamp. If the flame streamed
up bright one moment, the next it sank dim in the socket. Exhaustion
followed close on excitement.

There was always a touching endeavour to appear better, but too often
ability refused to second will; too often the attempt to bear up failed.
The effort to eat, to talk, to look cheerful, was unsuccessful. Many an
hour passed during which Mrs. Pryor feared that the chords of life could
never more be strengthened, though the time of their breaking might be
deferred.

During this space the mother and daughter seemed left almost alone in
the neighbourhood. It was the close of August; the weather was
fine - that is to say, it was very dry and very dusty, for an arid wind
had been blowing from the east this month past; very cloudless, too,
though a pale haze, stationary in the atmosphere, seemed to rob of all
depth of tone the blue of heaven, of all freshness the verdure of earth,
and of all glow the light of day. Almost every family in Briarfield was
absent on an excursion. Miss Keeldar and her friends were at the
seaside; so were Mrs. Yorke's household. Mr. Hall and Louis Moore,
between whom a spontaneous intimacy seemed to have arisen - the result,
probably, of harmony of views and temperament - were gone "up north" on a
pedestrian excursion to the Lakes. Even Hortense, who would fain have
stayed at home and aided Mrs. Pryor in nursing Caroline, had been so
earnestly entreated by Miss Mann to accompany her once more to Wormwood
Wells, in the hope of alleviating sufferings greatly aggravated by the
insalubrious weather, that she felt obliged to comply; indeed, it was
not in her nature to refuse a request that at once appealed to her
goodness of heart, and, by a confession of dependency, flattered her
 amour propre . As for Robert, from Birmingham he had gone on to London,
where he still sojourned.

So long as the breath of Asiatic deserts parched Caroline's lips and
fevered her veins, her physical convalescence could not keep pace with
her returning mental tranquillity; but there came a day when the wind
ceased to sob at the eastern gable of the rectory, and at the oriel
window of the church. A little cloud like a man's hand arose in the
west; gusts from the same quarter drove it on and spread it wide; wet
and tempest prevailed a while. When that was over the sun broke out
genially, heaven regained its azure, and earth its green; the livid
cholera-tint had vanished from the face of nature; the hills rose clear
round the horizon, absolved from that pale malaria-haze.

Caroline's youth could now be of some avail to her, and so could her
mother's nurture. Both, crowned by God's blessing, sent in the pure west
wind blowing soft as fresh through the ever-open chamber lattice,
rekindled her long-languishing energies. At last Mrs. Pryor saw that it
was permitted to hope: a genuine, material convalescence had commenced.
It was not merely Caroline's smile which was brighter, or her spirits
which were cheered, but a certain look had passed from her face and
eye - a look dread and indescribable, but which will easily be recalled
by those who have watched the couch of dangerous disease. Long before
the emaciated outlines of her aspect began to fill, or its departed
colour to return, a more subtle change took place; all grew softer and
warmer. Instead of a marble mask and glassy eye, Mrs. Pryor saw laid on
the pillow a face pale and wasted enough, perhaps more haggard than the
other appearance, but less awful; for it was a sick, living girl, not a
mere white mould or rigid piece of statuary.

Now, too, she was not always petitioning to drink. The words, "I am so 
thirsty," ceased to be her plaint. Sometimes, when she had swallowed a
morsel, she would say it had revived her. All descriptions of food were
no longer equally distasteful; she could be induced, sometimes, to
indicate a preference. With what trembling pleasure and anxious care did
not her nurse prepare what was selected! How she watched her as she
partook of it!

Nourishment brought strength. She could sit up. Then she longed to
breathe the fresh air, to revisit her flowers, to see how the fruit had
ripened. Her uncle, always liberal, had bought a garden-chair for her
express use. He carried her down in his own arms, and placed her in it
himself, and William Farren was there to wheel her round the walks, to
show her what he had done amongst her plants, to take her directions for
further work.

William and she found plenty to talk about. They had a dozen topics in
common - interesting to them, unimportant to the rest of the world. They
took a similar interest in animals, birds, insects, and plants; they
held similar doctrines about humanity to the lower creation, and had a
similar turn for minute observation on points of natural history. The
nest and proceedings of some ground-bees, which had burrowed in the turf
under an old cherry-tree, was one subject of interest; the haunts of
certain hedge-sparrows, and the welfare of certain pearly eggs and
callow fledglings, another.

Had Chambers's Journal existed in those days, it would certainly have
formed Miss Helstone's and Farren's favourite periodical. She would have
subscribed for it, and to him each number would duly have been lent;
both would have put implicit faith and found great savour in its
marvellous anecdotes of animal sagacity.

This is a digression, but it suffices to explain why Caroline would have
no other hand than William's to guide her chair, and why his society and
conversation sufficed to give interest to her garden-airings.

Mrs. Pryor, walking near, wondered how her daughter could be so much at
ease with a "man of the people." She found it impossible to speak to
him otherwise than stiffly. She felt as if a great gulf lay between her
caste and his, and that to cross it or meet him half-way would be to
degrade herself. She gently asked Caroline, "Are you not afraid, my
dear, to converse with that person so unreservedly? He may presume, and
become troublesomely garrulous."

"William presume, mamma? You don't  know him. He never presumes. He is
altogether too proud and sensitive to do so. William has very fine
feelings."

And Mrs. Pryor smiled sceptically at the naive notion of that
rough-handed, rough-headed, fustian-clad clown having "fine feelings."

Farren, for his part, showed Mrs. Pryor only a very sulky brow. He knew
when he was misjudged, and was apt to turn unmanageable with such as
failed to give him his due.

The evening restored Caroline entirely to her mother, and Mrs. Pryor
liked the evening; for then, alone with her daughter, no human shadow
came between her and what she loved. During the day she would have her
stiff demeanour and cool moments, as was her wont. Between her and Mr.
Helstone a very respectful but most rigidly ceremonious intercourse was
kept up. Anything like familiarity would have bred contempt at once in
one or both these personages; but by dint of strict civility and
well-maintained distance they got on very smoothly.

Towards the servants Mrs. Pryor's bearing was not uncourteous, but shy,
freezing, ungenial. Perhaps it was diffidence rather than pride which
made her appear so haughty; but, as was to be expected, Fanny and Eliza
failed to make the distinction, and she was unpopular with them
accordingly. She felt the effect produced; it rendered her at times
dissatisfied with herself for faults she could not help, and with all
else dejected, chill, and taciturn.

This mood changed to Caroline's influence, and to that influence alone.
The dependent fondness of her nursling, the natural affection of her
child, came over her suavely. Her frost fell away, her rigidity unbent;
she grew smiling and pliant. Not that Caroline made any wordy profession
of love - that would ill have suited Mrs. Pryor; she would have read
therein the proof of insincerity - but she hung on her with easy
dependence; she confided in her with fearless reliance. These things
contented the mother's heart.

She liked to hear her daughter say, "Mamma, do this;" "Please, mamma,
fetch me that;" "Mamma, read to me;" "Sing a little, mamma."

Nobody else - not one living thing - had ever so claimed her services, so
looked for help at her hand. Other people were always more or less
reserved and stiff with her, as she was reserved and stiff with them;
other people betrayed consciousness of and annoyance at her weak points.
Caroline no more showed such wounding sagacity or reproachful
sensitiveness now than she had done when a suckling of three months old.

Yet Caroline could find fault. Blind to the constitutional defects that
were incurable, she had her eyes wide open to the acquired habits that
were susceptible of remedy. On certain points she would quite artlessly
lecture her parent; and that parent, instead of being hurt, felt a
sensation of pleasure in discovering that the girl dared lecture her,
that she was so much at home with her.

"Mamma, I am determined you shall not wear that old gown any more. Its
fashion is not becoming; it is too strait in the skirt. You shall put on
your black silk every afternoon. In that you look nice; it suits you.
And you shall have a black satin dress for Sundays - a real satin, not a
satinet or any of the shams. And, mamma, when you get the new one, mind
you must wear it."

"My dear, I thought of the black silk serving me as a best dress for
many years yet, and I wished to buy you several things."

"Nonsense, mamma. My uncle gives me cash to get what I want. You know he
is generous enough; and I have set my heart on seeing you in a black
satin. Get it soon, and let it be made by a dressmaker of my
recommending. Let me choose the pattern. You always want to disguise
yourself like a grandmother. You would persuade one that you are old and
ugly. Not at all! On the contrary, when well dressed and cheerful you
are very comely indeed; your smile is so pleasant, your teeth are so
white, your hair is still such a pretty light colour. And then you speak
like a young lady, with such a clear, fine tone, and you sing better
than any young lady I ever heard. Why do you wear such dresses and
bonnets, mamma, such as nobody else ever wears?"

"Does it annoy you, Caroline?"

"Very much; it vexes me even. People say you are miserly; and yet you
are not, for you give liberally to the poor and to religious
societies - though your gifts are conveyed so secretly and quietly that
they are known to few except the receivers. But I will be your
lady's-maid myself. When I get a little stronger I will set to work, and
you must be good, mamma, and do as I bid you."

And Caroline, sitting near her mother, rearranged her muslin
handkerchief and resmoothed her hair.

"My own mamma," then she went on, as if pleasing herself with the
thought of their relationship, "who belongs to me, and to whom I belong!
I am a rich girl now. I have something I can love well, and not be
afraid of loving. Mamma, who gave you this little brooch? Let me unpin
it and look at it."

Mrs. Pryor, who usually shrank from meddling fingers and near approach,
allowed the license complacently.

"Did papa give you this, mamma?"

"My sister gave it me - my only sister, Cary. Would that your Aunt
Caroline had lived to see her niece!"

"Have you nothing of papa's - no trinket, no gift of his?"

"I have one thing."

"That you prize?"

"That I prize."

"Valuable and pretty?"

"Invaluable and sweet to me."

"Show it, mamma. Is it here or at Fieldhead?"

"It is talking to me now, leaning on me. Its arms are round me."

"Ah, mamma, you mean your teasing daughter, who will never let you
alone; who, when you go into your room, cannot help running to seek for
you; who follows you upstairs and down, like a dog."

"Whose features still give me such a strange thrill sometimes. I half
fear your fair looks yet, child."

"You don't ; you can't . Mamma, I am sorry papa was not good. I do so wish
he had been. Wickedness spoils and poisons all pleasant things. It kills
love. If you and I thought each other wicked, we could not love each
other, could we?"

"And if we could not trust each other, Cary?"

"How miserable we should be! Mother, before I knew you I had an
apprehension that you were not good - that I could not esteem you. That
dread damped my wish to see you. And now my heart is elate because I
find you perfect - almost; kind, clever, nice. Your sole fault is that
you are old-fashioned, and of that I shall cure you. Mamma, put your
work down; read to me. I like your southern accent; it is so pure, so
soft. It has no rugged burr, no nasal twang, such as almost every one's
voice here in the north has. My uncle and Mr. Hall say that you are a
fine reader, mamma. Mr. Hall said he never heard any lady read with such
propriety of expression or purity of accent."

"I wish I could reciprocate the compliment, Cary; but, really, the first
time I heard your truly excellent friend read and preach I could not
understand his broad northern tongue."

"Could you understand me, mamma? Did I seem to speak roughly?"

"No. I almost wished you had, as I wished you had looked unpolished.
Your father, Caroline, naturally spoke well, quite otherwise than your
worthy uncle - correctly, gently, smoothly. You inherit the gift."

"Poor papa! When he was so agreeable, why was he not good?"

"Why he was as he was - and happily of that you, child, can form no
conception - I cannot tell. It is a deep mystery. The key is in the hands
of his Maker. There I leave it."

"Mamma, you will keep stitching, stitching away. Put down the sewing; I
am an enemy to it. It cumbers your lap, and I want it for my head; it
engages your eyes, and I want them for a book. Here is your
favourite - Cowper."

These importunities were the mother's pleasure. If ever she delayed
compliance, it was only to hear them repeated, and to enjoy her child's
soft, half-playful, half-petulant urgency. And then, when she yielded,
Caroline would say archly, "You will spoil me, mamma. I always thought I
should like to be spoiled, and I find it very sweet." So did Mrs.
Pryor.




CHAPTER XXVI.

OLD COPY-BOOKS.


By the time the Fieldhead party returned to Briarfield Caroline was
nearly well. Miss Keeldar, who had received news by post of her friend's
convalescence, hardly suffered an hour to elapse between her arrival at
home and her first call at the rectory.

A shower of rain was falling gently, yet fast, on the late flowers and
russet autumn shrubs, when the garden wicket was heard to swing open,
and Shirley's well-known form passed the window. On her entrance her
feelings were evinced in her own peculiar fashion. When deeply moved by
serious fears or joys she was not garrulous. The strong emotion was
rarely suffered to influence her tongue, and even her eye refused it
more than a furtive and fitful conquest. She took Caroline in her arms,
gave her one look, one kiss, then said, "You are better."

And a minute after, "I see you are safe now; but take care. God grant
your health may be called on to sustain no more shocks!"

She proceeded to talk fluently about the journey. In the midst of
vivacious discourse her eye still wandered to Caroline. There spoke in
its light a deep solicitude, some trouble, and some amaze.

"She may be better," it said, "but how weak she still is! What peril she
has come through!"

Suddenly her glance reverted to Mrs. Pryor. It pierced her through.

"When will my governess return to me?" she asked.

"May I tell her all?" demanded Caroline of her mother. Leave being
signified by a gesture, Shirley was presently enlightened on what had
happened in her absence.

"Very good," was the cool comment - "very good! But it is no news to me."

"What! did you know?"

"I guessed long since the whole business. I have heard somewhat of Mrs.
Pryor's history - not from herself, but from others. With every detail of
Mr. James Helstone's career and character I was acquainted. An
afternoon's sitting and conversation with Miss Mann had rendered me
familiar therewith; also he is one of Mrs. Yorke's warning examples - one
of the blood-red lights she hangs out to scare young ladies from
matrimony. I believe I should have been sceptical about the truth of the
portrait traced by such fingers - both these ladies take a dark pleasure
in offering to view the dark side of life - but I questioned Mr. Yorke on
the subject, and he said, 'Shirley, my woman, if you want to know aught
about yond' James Helstone, I can only say he was a man-tiger. He was
handsome, dissolute, soft, treacherous, courteous, cruel - - ' Don't  cry,
Cary; we'll say no more about it."

"I am not crying, Shirley; or if I am, it is nothing. Go on; you are no
friend if you withhold from me the truth. I hate that false plan of
disguising, mutilating the truth."

"Fortunately I have said pretty nearly all that I have to say, except
that your uncle himself confirmed Mr. Yorke's words; for he too scorns a
lie, and deals in none of those conventional subterfuges that are
shabbier than lies."

"But papa is dead; they should let him alone now."

"They should; and we will let him alone. Cry away, Cary; it will do
you good. It is wrong to check natural tears. Besides, I choose to
please myself by sharing an idea that at this moment beams in your
mother's eye while she looks at you. Every drop blots out a sin. Weep!
your tears have the virtue which the rivers of Damascus lacked. Like
Jordan, they can cleanse a leprous memory."

"Madam," she continued, addressing Mrs. Pryor, "did you think I could be
daily in the habit of seeing you and your daughter together - marking
your marvellous similarity in many points, observing  pardon me  your
irrepressible emotions in the presence and still more in the absence of
your child - and not form my own conjectures? I formed them, and they are
literally correct. I shall begin to think myself shrewd."

"And you said nothing?" observed Caroline, who soon regained the quiet
control of her feelings.

"Nothing. I had no warrant to breathe a word on the subject. My 
business it was not; I abstained from making it such."

"You guessed so deep a secret, and did not hint that you guessed it?"

"Is that so difficult?"

"It is not like you."

"How do you know?"

"You are not reserved; you are frankly communicative."

"I may be communicative, yet know where to stop. In showing my treasure
I may withhold a gem or two - a curious, unbought graven stone - an amulet
of whose mystic glitter I rarely permit even myself a glimpse.
Good-day."

Caroline thus seemed to get a view of Shirley's character under a novel
aspect. Ere long the prospect was renewed; it opened upon her.

No sooner had she regained sufficient strength to bear a change of
scene - the excitement of a little society - than Miss Keeldar sued daily
for her presence at Fieldhead. Whether Shirley had become wearied of her
honoured relatives is not known. She did not say she was; but she
claimed and retained Caroline with an eagerness which proved that an
addition to that worshipful company was not unwelcome.

The Sympsons were church people. Of course the rector's niece was
received by them with courtesy. Mr. Sympson proved to be a man of
spotless respectability, worrying temper, pious principles, and worldly
views; his lady was a very good woman - patient, kind, well-bred. She had
been brought up on a narrow system of views, starved on a few
prejudices - a mere handful of bitter herbs; a few preferences, soaked
till their natural flavour was extracted, and with no seasoning added in
the cooking; some excellent principles, made up in a stiff raised crust
of bigotry difficult to digest. Far too submissive was she to complain
of this diet or to ask for a crumb beyond it.

The daughters were an example to their sex. They were tall, with a Roman
nose apiece. They had been educated faultlessly. All they did was well
done. History and the most solid books had cultivated their minds.
Principles and opinions they possessed which could not be mended. More
exactly-regulated lives, feelings, manners, habits, it would have been
difficult to find anywhere. They knew by heart a certain
young-ladies'-schoolroom code of laws on language, demeanour, etc.;
themselves never deviated from its curious little pragmatical
provisions, and they regarded with secret whispered horror all
deviations in others. The Abomination of Desolation was no mystery to
them; they had discovered that unutterable Thing in the characteristic
others call Originality. Quick were they to recognize the signs of this
evil; and wherever they saw its trace - whether in look, word, or deed;
whether they read it in the fresh, vigorous style of a book, or listened
to it in interesting, unhackneyed, pure, expressive language - they
shuddered, they recoiled. Danger was above their heads, peril about
their steps. What was this strange thing? Being unintelligible it must
be bad. Let it be denounced and chained up.

Henry Sympson, the only son and youngest child of the family, was a boy
of fifteen. He generally kept with his tutor. When he left him, he
sought his cousin Shirley. This boy differed from his sisters. He was
little, lame, and pale; his large eyes shone somewhat languidly in a wan
orbit. They were, indeed, usually rather dim, but they were capable of
illumination. At times they could not only shine, but blaze. Inward
emotion could likewise give colour to his cheek and decision to his
crippled movements. Henry's mother loved him; she thought his
peculiarities were a mark of election. He was not like other children,
she allowed. She believed him regenerate - a new Samuel - called of God
from his birth. He was to be a clergyman. Mr. and the Misses Sympson,
not understanding the youth, let him much alone. Shirley made him her
pet, and he made Shirley his playmate.

In the midst of this family circle, or rather outside it, moved the
tutor - the satellite.

Yes, Louis Moore was a satellite of the house of Sympson - connected, yet
apart; ever attendant, ever distant. Each member of that correct family
treated him with proper dignity. The father was austerely civil,
sometimes irritable; the mother, being a kind woman, was attentive, but
formal; the daughters saw in him an abstraction, not a man. It seemed,
by their manner, that their brother's tutor did not live for them. They
were learned; so was he - but not for them. They were accomplished; he
had talents too, imperceptible to their senses. The most spirited sketch
from his fingers was a blank to their eyes; the most original
observation from his lips fell unheard on their ears. Nothing could
exceed the propriety of their behaviour.

I should have said nothing could have equalled it; but I remember a fact
which strangely astonished Caroline Helstone. It was - to discover that
her cousin had absolutely no sympathizing friend at Fieldhead; that to
Miss Keeldar he was as much a mere teacher, as little a gentleman, as
little a man, as to the estimable Misses Sympson.

What had befallen the kind-hearted Shirley that she should be so
indifferent to the dreary position of a fellow-creature thus isolated
under her roof? She was not, perhaps, haughty to him, but she never
noticed him - she let him alone. He came and went, spoke or was silent,
and she rarely recognized his existence.

As to Louis Moore himself, he had the air of a man used to this life,
and who had made up his mind to bear it for a time. His faculties seemed
walled up in him, and were unmurmuring in their captivity. He never
laughed; he seldom smiled; he was uncomplaining. He fulfilled the round
of his duties scrupulously. His pupil loved him; he asked nothing more
than civility from the rest of the world. It even appeared that he would
accept nothing more - in that abode at least; for when his cousin
Caroline made gentle overtures of friendship, he did not encourage
them - he rather avoided than sought her. One living thing alone, besides
his pale, crippled scholar, he fondled in the house, and that was the
ruffianly Tartar, who, sullen and impracticable to others, acquired a
singular partiality for him - a partiality so marked that sometimes, when
Moore, summoned to a meal, entered the room and sat down unwelcomed,
Tartar would rise from his lair at Shirley's feet and betake himself to
the taciturn tutor. Once - but once - she noticed the desertion, and
holding out her white hand, and speaking softly, tried to coax him back.
Tartar looked, slavered, and sighed, as his manner was, but yet
disregarded the invitation, and coolly settled himself on his haunches
at Louis Moore's side. That gentleman drew the dog's big, black-muzzled
head on to his knee, patted him, and smiled one little smile to himself.

An acute observer might have remarked, in the course of the same
evening, that after Tartar had resumed his allegiance to Shirley, and
was once more couched near her footstool, the audacious tutor by one
word and gesture fascinated him again. He pricked up his ears at the
word; he started erect at the gesture, and came, with head lovingly
depressed, to receive the expected caress. As it was given, the
significant smile again rippled across Moore's quiet face.

          

"Shirley," said Caroline one day, as they two were sitting alone in the
summer-house, "did you know that my cousin Louis was tutor in your
uncle's family before the Sympsons came down here?"

Shirley's reply was not so prompt as her responses usually were, but at
last she answered, "Yes - of course; I knew it well."

"I thought you must have been aware of the circumstance."

"Well! what then?"

"It puzzles me to guess how it chanced that you never mentioned it to
me."

"Why should it puzzle you?"

"It seems odd. I cannot account for it. You talk a great deal - you talk
freely. How was that circumstance never touched on?"

"Because it never was," and Shirley laughed.

"You are a singular being!" observed her friend. "I thought I knew you
quite well; I begin to find myself mistaken. You were silent as the
grave about Mrs. Pryor, and now again here is another secret. But why
you made it a secret is the mystery to me."

"I never made it a secret; I had no reason for so doing. If you had
asked me who Henry's tutor was, I would have told you. Besides, I
thought you knew."

"I am puzzled about more things than one in this matter. You don't  like
poor Louis. Why? Are you impatient at what you perhaps consider his
 servile position? Do you wish that Robert's brother were more highly
placed?"

"Robert's brother, indeed!" was the exclamation, uttered in a tone like
the accents of scorn; and with a movement of proud impatience Shirley
snatched a rose from a branch peeping through the open lattice.

"Yes," repeated Caroline, with mild firmness, "Robert's brother. He is 
thus closely related to Gérard Moore of the Hollow, though nature has
not given him features so handsome or an air so noble as his kinsman;
but his blood is as good, and he is as much a gentleman were he free."

"Wise, humble, pious Caroline!" exclaimed Shirley ironically. "Men and
angels, hear her! We should not despise plain features, nor a laborious
yet honest occupation, should we? Look at the subject of your panegyric.
He is there in the garden," she continued, pointing through an aperture
in the clustering creepers; and by that aperture Louis Moore was
visible, coming slowly down the walk.

"He is not ugly, Shirley," pleaded Caroline; "he is not ignoble. He is
sad; silence seals his mind. But I believe him to be intelligent; and be
certain, if he had not something very commendable in his disposition,
Mr. Hall would never seek his society as he does."

Shirley laughed; she laughed again, each time with a slightly sarcastic
sound. "Well, well," was her comment. "On the plea of the man being
Cyril Hall's friend and Robert Moore's brother, we'll just tolerate his
existence; won't  we, Cary? You believe him to be intelligent, do you?
Not quite an idiot - eh? Something commendable in his disposition! - id
est , not an absolute ruffian. Good! Your representations have weight
with me; and to prove that they have, should he come this way I will
speak to him."

He approached the summer-house. Unconscious that it was tenanted, he sat
down on the step. Tartar, now his customary companion, had followed him,
and he couched across his feet.

"Old boy!" said Louis, pulling his tawny ear, or rather the mutilated
remains of that organ, torn and chewed in a hundred battles, "the autumn
sun shines as pleasantly on us as on the fairest and richest. This
garden is none of ours, but we enjoy its greenness and perfume, don't 
we?"

He sat silent, still caressing Tartar, who slobbered with exceeding
affection. A faint twittering commenced among the trees round. Something
fluttered down as light as leaves. They were little birds, which,
lighting on the sward at shy distance, hopped as if expectant.

"The small brown elves actually remember that I fed them the other day,"
again soliloquized Louis. "They want some more biscuit. To-day I forgot
to save a fragment. Eager little sprites, I have not a crumb for you."

He put his hand in his pocket and drew it out empty.

"A want easily supplied," whispered the listening Miss Keeldar.

She took from her reticule a morsel of sweet-cake; for that repository
was never destitute of something available to throw to the chickens,
young ducks, or sparrows. She crumbled it, and bending over his
shoulder, put the crumbs into his hand.

"There," said she - "there is a providence for the improvident."

"This September afternoon is pleasant," observed Louis Moore, as, not at
all discomposed, he calmly cast the crumbs on to the grass.

"Even for you?"

"As pleasant for me as for any monarch."

"You take a sort of harsh, solitary triumph in drawing pleasure out of
the elements and the inanimate and lower animate creation."

"Solitary, but not harsh. With animals I feel I am Adam's son, the heir
of him to whom dominion was given over 'every living thing that moveth
upon the earth.' Your dog likes and follows me. When I go into that
yard, the pigeons from your dovecot flutter at my feet. Your mare in the
stable knows me as well as it knows you, and obeys me better."

"And my roses smell sweet to you, and my trees give you shade."

"And," continued Louis, "no caprice can withdraw these pleasures from
me; they are mine ."

He walked off. Tartar followed him, as if in duty and affection bound,
and Shirley remained standing on the summer-house step. Caroline saw her
face as she looked after the rude tutor. It was pale, as if her pride
bled inwardly.

"You see," remarked Caroline apologetically, "his feelings are so often
hurt it makes him morose."

"You see," retorted Shirley, with ire, "he is a topic on which you and I
shall quarrel if we discuss it often; so drop it henceforward and for
ever."

"I suppose he has more than once behaved in this way," thought Caroline
to herself, "and that renders Shirley so distant to him. Yet I wonder
she cannot make allowance for character and circumstances. I wonder the
general modesty, manliness, sincerity of his nature do not plead with
her in his behalf. She is not often so inconsiderate, so irritable."

          

The verbal testimony of two friends of Caroline's to her cousin's
character augmented her favourable opinion of him. William Farren, whose
cottage he had visited in company with Mr. Hall, pronounced him a "real
gentleman;" there was not such another in Briarfield.
He - William - "could do aught for that man. And then to see how t' bairns
liked him, and how t' wife took to him first minute she saw him. He
never went into a house but t' childer wor about him directly. Them
little things wor like as if they'd a keener sense nor grown-up folks i'
finding our folk's natures."

Mr. Hall, in answer to a question of Miss Helstone's as to what he
thought of Louis Moore, replied promptly that he was the best fellow he
had met with since he left Cambridge.

"But he is so grave," objected Caroline.

"Grave! the finest company in the world! Full of odd, quiet,
out-of-the-way humour. Never enjoyed an excursion so much in my life as
the one I took with him to the Lakes. His understanding and tastes are
so superior, it does a man good to be within their influence; and as to
his temper and nature, I call them fine."

"At Fieldhead he looks gloomy, and, I believe, has the character of
being misanthropical."

"Oh! I fancy he is rather out of place there - in a false position. The
Sympsons are most estimable people, but not the folks to comprehend him.
They think a great deal about form and ceremony, which are quite out of
Louis's way."

"I don't  think Miss Keeldar likes him."

"She doesn't  know him - she doesn't  know him; otherwise she has sense
enough to do justice to his merits."

"Well, I suppose she doesn't  know him," mused Caroline to herself, and
by this hypothesis she endeavoured to account for what seemed else
unaccountable. But such simple solution of the difficulty was not left
her long. She was obliged to refuse Miss Keeldar even this negative
excuse for her prejudice.

One day she chanced to be in the schoolroom with Henry Sympson, whose
amiable and affectionate disposition had quickly recommended him to her
regard. The boy was busied about some mechanical contrivance; his
lameness made him fond of sedentary occupation. He began to ransack his
tutor's desk for a piece of wax or twine necessary to his work. Moore
happened to be absent. Mr. Hall, indeed, had called for him to take a
long walk. Henry could not immediately find the object of his search. He
rummaged compartment after compartment; and at last, opening an inner
drawer, he came upon - not a ball of cord or a lump of beeswax, but a
little bundle of small marble-coloured cahiers, tied with tape. Henry
looked at them. "What rubbish Mr. Moore stores up in his desk!" he
said. "I hope he won't  keep my old exercises so carefully."

"What is it?"

"Old copy-books."

He threw the bundle to Caroline. The packet looked so neat externally
her curiosity was excited to see its contents.

"If they are only copy-books, I suppose I may open them?"

"Oh yes, quite freely. Mr. Moore's desk is half mine - for he lets me
keep all sorts of things in it - and I give you leave."

On scrutiny they proved to be French compositions, written in a hand
peculiar but compact, and exquisitely clean and clear. The writing was
recognizable. She scarcely needed the further evidence of the name
signed at the close of each theme to tell her whose they were. Yet that
name astonished her - "Shirley Keeldar, Sympson Grove, - - shire"  a
southern county , and a date four years back.

She tied up the packet, and held it in her hand, meditating over it. She
half felt as if, in opening it, she had violated a confidence.

"They are Shirley's, you see," said Henry carelessly.

"Did you give them to Mr. Moore? She wrote them with Mrs. Pryor, I
suppose?"

"She wrote them in my schoolroom at Sympson Grove, when she lived with
us there. Mr. Moore taught her French; it is his native language."

"I know. Was she a good pupil, Henry?"

"She was a wild, laughing thing, but pleasant to have in the room. She
made lesson-time charming. She learned fast - you could hardly tell when
or how. French was nothing to her. She spoke it quick, quick - as quick
as Mr. Moore himself."

"Was she obedient? Did she give trouble?"

"She gave plenty of trouble, in a way. She was giddy, but I liked her.
I'm desperately fond of Shirley."

" Desperately fond - you small simpleton! You don't  know what you say."

"I am desperately fond of her. She is the light of my eyes. I said so
to Mr. Moore last night."

"He would reprove you for speaking with exaggeration."

"He didn't . He never reproves and reproves, as girls' governesses do. He
was reading, and he only smiled into his book, and said that if Miss
Keeldar was no more than that, she was less than he took her to be; for
I was but a dim-eyed, short-sighted little chap. I'm afraid I am a poor
unfortunate, Miss Caroline Helstone. I am a cripple, you know."

"Never mind, Henry, you are a very nice little fellow; and if God has
not given you health and strength, He has given you a good disposition
and an excellent heart and brain."

"I shall be despised. I sometimes think both Shirley and you despise
me."

"Listen, Henry. Generally, I don't  like schoolboys. I have a great
horror of them. They seem to me little ruffians, who take an unnatural
delight in killing and tormenting birds, and insects, and kittens, and
whatever is weaker than themselves. But you are so different I am quite
fond of you. You have almost as much sense as a man  far more, God wot,"
she muttered to herself, "than many men ; you are fond of reading, and
you can talk sensibly about what you read."

"I am fond of reading. I know I have sense, and I know I have
feeling."

Miss Keeldar here entered.

"Henry," she said, "I have brought your lunch here. I shall prepare it
for you myself."

She placed on the table a glass of new milk, a plate of something which
looked not unlike leather, and a utensil which resembled a
toasting-fork.

"What are you two about," she continued, "ransacking Mr. Moore's desk?"

"Looking at your old copy-books," returned Caroline.

"My old copy-books?"

"French exercise-books. Look here! They must be held precious; they are
kept carefully."

She showed the bundle. Shirley snatched it up. "Did not know one was in
existence," she said. "I thought the whole lot had long since lit the
kitchen fire, or curled the maid's hair at Sympson Grove. - What made you
keep them, Henry?"

"It is not my doing. I should not have thought of it. It never entered
my head to suppose copy-books of value. Mr. Moore put them by in the
inner drawer of his desk. Perhaps he forgot them."

"C'est cela. He forgot them, no doubt," echoed Shirley. "They are
extremely well written," she observed complacently.

"What a giddy girl you were, Shirley, in those days! I remember you so
well. A slim, light creature whom, though you were so tall, I could lift
off the floor. I see you with your long, countless curls on your
shoulders, and your streaming sash. You used to make Mr. Moore
lively - that is, at first. I believe you grieved him after a while."

Shirley turned the closely-written pages and said nothing. Presently she
observed, "That was written one winter afternoon. It was a description
of a snow scene."

"I remember," said Henry. "Mr. Moore, when he read it, cried, 'Voila le
Français gagné!' He said it was well done. Afterwards you made him draw,
in sepia, the landscape you described."

"You have not forgotten, then, Hal?"

"Not at all. We were all scolded that day for not coming down to tea
when called. I can remember my tutor sitting at his easel, and you
standing behind him, holding the candle, and watching him draw the snowy
cliff, the pine, the deer couched under it, and the half-moon hung
above."

"Where are his drawings, Harry? Caroline should see them."

"In his portfolio. But it is padlocked; he has the key."

"Ask him for it when he comes in."

"You should ask him, Shirley. You are shy of him now. You are grown a
proud lady to him; I notice that."

"Shirley, you are a real enigma," whispered Caroline in her ear. "What
queer discoveries I make day by day now! - I who thought I had your
confidence. Inexplicable creature! even this boy reproves you."

"I have forgotten 'auld lang syne,' you see, Harry," said Miss Keeldar,
answering young Sympson, and not heeding Caroline.

"Which you never should have done. You don't  deserve to be a man's
morning star if you have so short a memory."

"A man's morning star, indeed! and by 'a man' is meant your worshipful
self, I suppose? Come, drink your new milk while it is warm."

The young cripple rose and limped towards the fire; he had left his
crutch near the mantelpiece.

"My poor lame darling!" murmured Shirley, in her softest voice, aiding
him.

"Whether do you like me or Mr. Sam Wynne best, Shirley?" inquired the
boy, as she settled him in an arm-chair.

"O Harry, Sam Wynne is my aversion; you are my pet."

"Me or Mr. Malone?"

"You again, a thousand times."

"Yet they are great whiskered fellows, six feet high each."

"Whereas, as long as you live, Harry, you will never be anything more
than a little pale lameter."

"Yes, I know."

"You need not be sorrowful. Have I not often told you who was almost as
little, as pale, as suffering as you, and yet potent as a giant and
brave as a lion?"

"Admiral Horatio?"

"Admiral Horatio, Viscount Nelson, and Duke of Bronte; great at heart as
a Titan; gallant and heroic as all the world and age of chivalry; leader
of the might of England; commander of her strength on the deep; hurler
of her thunder over the flood."

"A great man. But I am not warlike, Shirley; and yet my mind is so
restless I burn day and night - for what I can hardly tell - to be - to
do - to suffer, I think."

"Harry, it is your mind, which is stronger and older than your frame,
that troubles you. It is a captive; it lies in physical bondage. But it
will work its own redemption yet. Study carefully not only books but the
world. You love nature; love her without fear. Be patient - wait the
course of time. You will not be a soldier or a sailor, Henry; but if you
live you will be - listen to my prophecy - you will be an author, perhaps
a poet."

"An author! It is a flash - a flash of light to me! I will - I will !
I'll write a book that I may dedicate it to you."

"You will write it that you may give your soul its natural release.
Bless me! what am I saying? more than I understand, I believe, or can
make good. Here, Hal - here is your toasted oatcake; eat and live!"

"Willingly!" here cried a voice outside the open window. "I know that
fragrance of meal bread. Miss Keeldar, may I come in and partake?"

"Mr. Hall" - it was Mr. Hall, and with him was Louis Moore, returned from
their walk - "there is a proper luncheon laid out in the dining-room and
there are proper people seated round it. You may join that society and
share that fare if you please; but if your ill-regulated tastes lead you
to prefer ill-regulated proceedings, step in here, and do as we do."

"I approve the perfume, and therefore shall suffer myself to be led by
the nose," returned Mr. Hall, who presently entered, accompanied by
Louis Moore. That gentleman's eye fell on his desk, pillaged.

"Burglars!" said he. - "Henry, you merit the ferule."

"Give it to Shirley and Caroline; they did it," was alleged, with more
attention to effect than truth.

"Traitor and false witness!" cried both the girls. "We never laid hands
on a thing, except in the spirit of laudable inquiry!"

"Exactly so," said Moore, with his rare smile. "And what have you
ferreted out, in your 'spirit of laudable inquiry'?"

He perceived the inner drawer open.

"This is empty," said he. "Who has taken - - "

"Here, here!" Caroline hastened to say, and she restored the little
packet to its place. He shut it up; he locked it in with a small key
attached to his watch-guard; he restored the other papers to order,
closed the repository, and sat down without further remark.

"I thought you would have scolded much more, sir," said Henry. "The
girls deserve reprimand."

"I leave them to their own consciences."

"It accuses them of crimes intended as well as perpetrated, sir. If I
had not been here, they would have treated your portfolio as they have
done your desk; but I told them it was padlocked."

"And will you have lunch with us?" here interposed Shirley, addressing
Moore, and desirous, as it seemed, to turn the conversation.

"Certainly, if I may."

"You will be restricted to new milk and Yorkshire oatcake."

"Va - pour le lait frais!" said Louis. "But for your oatcake!" and he
made a grimace.

"He cannot eat it," said Henry. "He thinks it is like bran, raised with
sour yeast."

"Come, then; by special dispensation we will allow him a few cracknels,
but nothing less homely."

The hostess rang the bell and gave her frugal orders, which were
presently executed. She herself measured out the milk, and distributed
the bread round the cosy circle now enclosing the bright little
schoolroom fire. She then took the post of toaster-general; and kneeling
on the rug, fork in hand, fulfilled her office with dexterity. Mr. Hall,
who relished any homely innovation on ordinary usages, and to whom the
husky oatcake was from custom suave as manna, seemed in his best
spirits. He talked and laughed gleefully - now with Caroline, whom he had
fixed by his side, now with Shirley, and again with Louis Moore. And
Louis met him in congenial spirit. He did not laugh much, but he uttered
in the quietest tone the wittiest things. Gravely spoken sentences,
marked by unexpected turns and a quite fresh flavour and poignancy, fell
easily from his lips. He proved himself to be - what Mr. Hall had said he
was - excellent company. Caroline marvelled at his humour, but still more
at his entire self-possession. Nobody there present seemed to impose on
him a sensation of unpleasant restraint. Nobody seemed a bore - a
check - a chill to him; and yet there was the cool and lofty Miss Keeldar
kneeling before the fire, almost at his feet.

But Shirley was cool and lofty no longer, at least not at this moment.
She appeared unconscious of the humility of her present position; or if
conscious, it was only to taste a charm in its lowliness. It did not
revolt her pride that the group to whom she voluntarily officiated as
handmaid should include her cousin's tutor. It did not scare her that
while she handed the bread and milk to the rest, she had to offer it to
him also; and Moore took his portion from her hand as calmly as if he
had been her equal.

"You are overheated now," he said, when she had retained the fork for
some time; "let me relieve you."

And he took it from her with a sort of quiet authority, to which she
submitted passively, neither resisting him nor thanking him.

"I should like to see your pictures, Louis," said Caroline, when the
sumptuous luncheon was discussed. - "Would not you, Mr. Hall?"

"To please you, I should; but, for my own part, I have cut him as an
artist. I had enough of him in that capacity in Cumberland and
Westmoreland. Many a wetting we got amongst the mountains because he
would persist in sitting on a camp-stool, catching effects of
rain-clouds, gathering mists, fitful sunbeams, and what not."

"Here is the portfolio," said Henry, bringing it in one hand and leaning
on his crutch with the other.

Louis took it, but he still sat as if he wanted another to speak. It
seemed as if he would not open it unless the proud Shirley deigned to
show herself interested in the exhibition.

"He makes us wait to whet our curiosity," she said.

"You understand opening it," observed Louis, giving her the key. "You
spoiled the lock for me once; try now."

He held it. She opened it, and, monopolizing the contents, had the first
view of every sketch herself. She enjoyed the treat - if treat it
were - in silence, without a single comment. Moore stood behind her chair
and looked over her shoulder, and when she had done and the others were
still gazing, he left his post and paced through the room.

A carriage was heard in the lane - the gate-bell rang. Shirley started.

"There are callers," she said, "and I shall be summoned to the room. A
pretty figure - as they say - I am to receive company. I and Henry have
been in the garden gathering fruit half the morning. Oh for rest under
my own vine and my own fig-tree! Happy is the slave-wife of the Indian
chief, in that she has no drawing-room duty to perform, but can sit at
ease weaving mats, and stringing beads, and peacefully flattening her
pickaninny's head in an unmolested corner of her wigwam. I'll emigrate
to the western woods."

Louis Moore laughed.

"To marry a White Cloud or a Big Buffalo, and after wedlock to devote
yourself to the tender task of digging your lord's maize-field while he
smokes his pipe or drinks fire-water."

Shirley seemed about to reply, but here the schoolroom door unclosed,
admitting Mr. Sympson. That personage stood aghast when he saw the group
around the fire.

"I thought you alone, Miss Keeldar," he said. "I find quite a party."

And evidently from his shocked, scandalized air, had he not recognized
in one of the party a clergyman, he would have delivered an extempore
philippic on the extraordinary habits of his niece: respect for the
cloth arrested him.

"I merely wished to announce," he proceeded coldly, "that the family
from De Walden Hall, Mr., Mrs., the Misses, and Mr. Sam Wynne, are in
the drawing-room." And he bowed and withdrew.

"The family from De Walden Hall! Couldn't  be a worse set," murmured
Shirley.

She sat still, looking a little contumacious, and very much indisposed
to stir. She was flushed with the fire. Her dark hair had been more than
once dishevelled by the morning wind that day. Her attire was a light,
neatly fitting, but amply flowing dress of muslin; the shawl she had
worn in the garden was still draped in a careless fold round her.
Indolent, wilful, picturesque, and singularly pretty was her
aspect - prettier than usual, as if some soft inward emotion, stirred who
knows how, had given new bloom and expression to her features.

"Shirley, Shirley, you ought to go," whispered Caroline.

"I wonder why?"

She lifted her eyes, and saw in the glass over the fireplace both Mr.
Hall and Louis Moore gazing at her gravely.

"If," she said, with a yielding smile - "if a majority of the present
company maintain that the De Walden Hall people have claims on my
civility, I will subdue my inclinations to my duty. Let those who think
I ought to go hold up their hands."

Again consulting the mirror, it reflected an unanimous vote against her.

"You must go," said Mr. Hall, "and behave courteously too. You owe many
duties to society. It is not permitted you to please only yourself."

Louis Moore assented with a low "Hear, hear!"

Caroline, approaching her, smoothed her wavy curls, gave to her attire a
less artistic and more domestic grace, and Shirley was put out of the
room, protesting still, by a pouting lip, against her dismissal.

"There is a curious charm about her," observed Mr. Hall, when she was
gone. "And now," he added, "I must away; for Sweeting is off to see his
mother, and there are two funerals."

"Henry, get your books; it is lesson-time," said Moore, sitting down to
his desk.

"A curious charm!" repeated the pupil, when he and his master were left
alone. "True. Is she not a kind of white witch?" he asked.

"Of whom are you speaking, sir?"

"Of my cousin Shirley."

"No irrelevant questions; study in silence."

Mr. Moore looked and spoke sternly - sourly. Henry knew this mood. It was
a rare one with his tutor; but when it came he had an awe of it. He
obeyed.




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE FIRST BLUESTOCKING.


Miss Keeldar and her uncle had characters that would not harmonize, that
never had harmonized. He was irritable, and she was spirited. He was
despotic, and she liked freedom. He was worldly, and she, perhaps,
romantic.

Not without purpose had he come down to Yorkshire. His mission was
clear, and he intended to discharge it conscientiously. He anxiously
desired to have his niece married, to make for her a suitable match,
give her in charge to a proper husband, and wash his hands of her for
ever.

The misfortune was, from infancy upwards, Shirley and he had disagreed
on the meaning of the words 'suitable" and "proper." She never yet had
accepted his definition; and it was doubtful whether, in the most
important step of her life, she would consent to accept it.

The trial soon came.

Mr. Wynne proposed in form for his son, Samuel Fawthrop Wynne.

"Decidedly suitable! most proper!" pronounced Mr. Sympson. "A fine
unencumbered estate, real substance, good connections. It must be
done! "

He sent for his niece to the oak parlour; he shut himself up there with
her alone; he communicated the offer; he gave his opinion; he claimed
her consent.

It was withheld.

"No; I shall not marry Samuel Fawthrop Wynne."

"I ask why. I must have a reason. In all respects he is more than worthy
of you."

She stood on the hearth. She was pale as the white marble slab and
cornice behind her; her eyes flashed large, dilated, unsmiling.

"And I ask in what sense that young man is worthy of me ?"

"He has twice your money, twice your common sense, equal connections,
equal respectability."

"Had he my money counted fivescore times I would take no vow to love
him."

"Please to state your objections."

"He has run a course of despicable, commonplace profligacy. Accept that
as the first reason why I spurn him."

"Miss Keeldar, you shock me!"

"That conduct alone sinks him in a gulf of immeasurable inferiority. His
intellect reaches no standard I can esteem: there is a second
stumbling-block. His views are narrow, his feelings are blunt, his
tastes are coarse, his manners vulgar."

"The man is a respectable, wealthy man! To refuse him is presumption on
your part."

"I refuse point-blank! Cease to annoy me with the subject; I forbid it!"

"Is it your intention ever to marry; or do you prefer celibacy?"

"I deny your right to claim an answer to that question."

"May I ask if you expect some man of title - some peer of the realm - to
demand your hand?"

"I doubt if the peer breathes on whom I would confer it."

"Were there insanity in the family, I should believe you mad. Your
eccentricity and conceit touch the verge of frenzy."

"Perhaps, ere I have finished, you will see me over-leap it."

"I anticipate no less. Frantic and impracticable girl! Take warning! I
dare you to sully our name by a mésalliance !"

" Our name! Am I called Sympson?"

"God be thanked that you are not! But be on your guard; I will not be
trifled with!"

"What, in the name of common law and common sense, would you or could
you do if my pleasure led me to a choice you disapproved?"

"Take care! take care!" warning her with voice and hand that trembled
alike.

"Why? What shadow of power have you over me? Why should I fear you?"

"Take care, madam!"

"Scrupulous care I will take, Mr. Sympson. Before I marry I am resolved
to esteem - to admire - to love ."

"Preposterous stuff! indecorous, unwomanly!"

"To love with my whole heart. I know I speak in an unknown tongue; but I
feel indifferent whether I am comprehended or not."

"And if this love of yours should fall on a beggar?"

"On a beggar it will never fall. Mendicancy is not estimable."

"On a low clerk, a play-actor, a play-writer, or - or - - "

"Take courage, Mr. Sympson! Or what?"

"Any literary scrub, or shabby, whining artist."

"For the scrubby, shabby, whining I have no taste; for literature and
the arts I have. And there I wonder how your Fawthrop Wynne would suit
me. He cannot write a note without orthographical errors; he reads only
a sporting paper; he was the booby of Stilbro' grammar school!"

"Unladylike language! Great God! to what will she come?" He lifted hands
and eyes.

"Never to the altar of Hymen with Sam Wynne."

"To what will she come? Why are not the laws more stringent, that I
might compel her to hear reason?"

"Console yourself, uncle. Were Britain a serfdom and you the Czar, you
could not compel me to this step. I will write to Mr. Wynne. Give
yourself no further trouble on the subject."

          

Fortune is proverbially called changeful, yet her caprice often takes
the form of repeating again and again a similar stroke of luck in the
same quarter. It appeared that Miss Keeldar - or her fortune - had by this
time made a sensation in the district, and produced an impression in
quarters by her unthought of. No less than three offers followed Mr.
Wynne's, all more or less eligible. All were in succession pressed on
her by her uncle, and all in succession she refused. Yet amongst them
was more than one gentleman of unexceptionable character as well as
ample wealth. Many besides her uncle asked what she meant, and whom she
expected to entrap, that she was so insolently fastidious.

At last the gossips thought they had found the key to her conduct, and
her uncle was sure of it; and what is more, the discovery showed his
niece to him in quite a new light, and he changed his whole deportment
to her accordingly.

Fieldhead had of late been fast growing too hot to hold them both. The
suave aunt could not reconcile them; the daughters froze at the view of
their quarrels. Gertrude and Isabella whispered by the hour together in
their dressing-room, and became chilled with decorous dread if they
chanced to be left alone with their audacious cousin. But, as I have
said, a change supervened. Mr. Sympson was appeased and his family
tranquillized.

The village of Nunnely has been alluded to - its old church, its forest,
its monastic ruins. It had also its hall, called the priory - an older, a
larger, a more lordly abode than any Briarfield or Whinbury owned; and
what is more, it had its man of title - its baronet, which neither
Briarfield nor Whinbury could boast. This possession - its proudest and
most prized - had for years been nominal only. The present baronet, a
young man hitherto resident in a distant province, was unknown on his
Yorkshire estate.

During Miss Keeldar's stay at the fashionable watering-place of
Cliffbridge, she and her friends had met with and been introduced to Sir
Philip Nunnely. They encountered him again and again on the sands, the
cliffs, in the various walks, sometimes at the public balls of the
place. He seemed solitary. His manner was very unpretending - too simple
to be termed affable; rather timid than proud. He did not condescend 
to their society; he seemed glad of it.

With any unaffected individual Shirley could easily and quickly cement
an acquaintance. She walked and talked with Sir Philip; she, her aunt,
and cousins sometimes took a sail in his yacht. She liked him because
she found him kind and modest, and was charmed to feel she had the power
to amuse him.

One slight drawback there was - where is the friendship without it? - Sir
Philip had a literary turn. He wrote poetry - sonnets, stanzas, ballads.
Perhaps Miss Keeldar thought him a little too fond of reading and
reciting these compositions; perhaps she wished the rhyme had possessed
more accuracy, the measure more music, the tropes more freshness, the
inspiration more fire. At any rate, she always winced when he recurred
to the subject of his poems, and usually did her best to divert the
conversation into another channel.

He would beguile her to take moonlight walks with him on the bridge, for
the sole purpose, as it seemed, of pouring into her ear the longest of
his ballads. He would lead her away to sequestered rustic seats, whence
the rush of the surf to the sands was heard soft and soothing; and when
he had her all to himself, and the sea lay before them, and the scented
shade of gardens spread round, and the tall shelter of cliffs rose
behind them, he would pull out his last batch of sonnets, and read them
in a voice tremulous with emotion. He did not seem to know that though
they might be rhyme they were not poetry. It appeared, by Shirley's
downcast eye and disturbed face, that she knew it, and felt heartily
mortified by the single foible of this good and amiable gentleman.

Often she tried, as gently as might be, to wean him from this fanatic
worship of the Muses. It was his monomania; on all ordinary subjects he
was sensible enough, and fain was she to engage him in ordinary topics.
He questioned her sometimes about his place at Nunnely; she was but too
happy to answer his interrogatories at length. She never wearied of
describing the antique priory, the wild silvan park, the hoary church
and hamlet; nor did she fail to counsel him to come down and gather his
tenantry about him in his ancestral halls.

Somewhat to her surprise, Sir Philip followed her advice to the letter,
and actually, towards the close of September, arrived at the priory.

He soon made a call at Fieldhead, and his first visit was not his last.
He said - when he had achieved the round of the neighbourhood - that under
no roof had he found such pleasant shelter as beneath the massive oak
beams of the gray manor-house of Briarfield; a cramped, modest dwelling
enough compared with his own, but he liked it.

Presently it did not suffice to sit with Shirley in her panelled
parlour, where others came and went, and where he could rarely find a
quiet moment to show her the latest production of his fertile muse; he
must have her out amongst the pleasant pastures, and lead her by the
still waters. Tete-a-tete ramblings she shunned, so he made parties
for her to his own grounds, his glorious forest; to remoter
scenes - woods severed by the Wharfe, vales watered by the Aire.

Such assiduity covered Miss Keeldar with distinction. Her uncle's
prophetic soul anticipated a splendid future. He already scented the
time afar off when, with nonchalant air, and left foot nursed on his
right knee, he should be able to make dashingly-familiar allusion to his
"nephew the baronet." Now his niece dawned upon him no longer "a mad
girl," but a "most sensible woman." He termed her, in confidential
dialogues with Mrs. Sympson, "a truly superior person; peculiar, but
very clever." He treated her with exceeding deference; rose reverently
to open and shut doors for her; reddened his face and gave himself
headaches with stooping to pick up gloves, handkerchiefs, and other
loose property, whereof Shirley usually held but insecure tenure. He
would cut mysterious jokes about the superiority of woman's wit over
man's wisdom; commence obscure apologies for the blundering mistake he
had committed respecting the generalship, the tactics, of "a personage
not a hundred miles from Fieldhead." In short, he seemed elate as any
"midden-cock on pattens."

His niece viewed his manouvres and received his innuendoes with phlegm;
apparently she did not above half comprehend to what aim they tended.
When plainly charged with being the preferred of the baronet, she said
she believed he did like her, and for her part she liked him. She had
never thought a man of rank - the only son of a proud, fond mother, the
only brother of doting sisters - could have so much goodness, and, on the
whole, so much sense.

Time proved, indeed, that Sir Philip liked her. Perhaps he had found in
her that "curious charm" noticed by Mr. Hall. He sought her presence
more and more, and at last with a frequency that attested it had become
to him an indispensable stimulus. About this time strange feelings
hovered round Fieldhead; restless hopes and haggard anxieties haunted
some of its rooms. There was an unquiet wandering of some of the inmates
among the still fields round the mansion; there was a sense of
expectancy that kept the nerves strained.

One thing seemed clear: Sir Philip was not a man to be despised. He was
amiable; if not highly intellectual, he was intelligent. Miss Keeldar
could not affirm of him, what she had so bitterly affirmed of Sam Wynne,
that his feelings were blunt, his tastes coarse, and his manners vulgar.
There was sensibility in his nature; there was a very real, if not a
very discriminating, love of the arts; there was the English gentleman
in all his deportment. As to his lineage and wealth, both were, of
course, far beyond her claims.

His appearance had at first elicited some laughing though not
ill-natured remarks from the merry Shirley. It was boyish. His features
were plain and slight, his hair sandy, his stature insignificant. But
she soon checked her sarcasm on this point; she would even fire up if
any one else made uncomplimentary allusion thereto. He had "a pleasing
countenance," she affirmed; "and there was that in his heart which was
better than three Roman noses, than the locks of Absalom or the
proportions of Saul." A spare and rare shaft she still reserved for his
unfortunate poetic propensity; but even here she would tolerate no irony
save her own.

In short, matters had reached a point which seemed fully to warrant an
observation made about this time by Mr. Yorke to the tutor, Louis.

"Yond' brother Robert of yours seems to me to be either a fool or a
madman. Two months ago I could have sworn he had the game all in his own
hands; and there he runs the country, and quarters himself up in London
for weeks together, and by the time he comes back he'll find himself
checkmated. Louis, 'there is a tide in the affairs of men, which, taken
at the flood, leads on to fortune, but, once let slip, never returns
again.' I'd write to Robert, if I were you, and remind him of that."

"Robert had views on Miss Keeldar?" inquired Louis, as if the idea was
new to him.

"Views I suggested to him myself, and views he might have realized, for
she liked him."

"As a neighbour?"

"As more than that. I have seen her change countenance and colour at the
mere mention of his name. Write to the lad, I say, and tell him to come
home. He is a finer gentleman than this bit of a baronet, after all."

"Does it not strike you, Mr. Yorke, that for a mere penniless adventurer
to aspire to a rich woman's hand is presumptuous - contemptible?"

"Oh, if you are for high notions and double-refined sentiment, I've 
naught to say. I'm a plain, practical man myself, and if Robert is
willing to give up that royal prize to a lad-rival - a puling slip of
aristocracy - I am quite agreeable. At his age, in his place, with
 his inducements, I would have acted differently. Neither baronet, nor
duke, nor prince should have snatched my sweetheart from me without a
struggle. But you tutors are such solemn chaps; it is almost like
speaking to a parson to consult with you."

          

Flattered and fawned upon as Shirley was just now, it appeared she was
not absolutely spoiled - that her better nature did not quite leave her.
Universal report had indeed ceased to couple her name with that of
Moore, and this silence seemed sanctioned by her own apparent oblivion
of the absentee; but that she had not quite forgotten him - that she
still regarded him, if not with love, yet with interest - seemed proved
by the increased attention which at this juncture of affairs a sudden
attack of illness induced her to show that tutor-brother of Robert's, to
whom she habitually bore herself with strange alternations of cool
reserve and docile respect - now sweeping past him in all the dignity of
the moneyed heiress and prospective Lady Nunnely, and anon accosting him
as abashed school-girls are wont to accost their stern professors;
bridling her neck of ivory and curling her lip of carmine, if he
encountered her glance, one minute, and the next submitting to the grave
rebuke of his eye with as much contrition as if he had the power to
inflict penalties in case of contumacy.

Louis Moore had perhaps caught the fever, which for a few days laid him
low, in one of the poor cottages of the district, which he, his lame
pupil, and Mr. Hall were in the habit of visiting together. At any rate
he sickened, and after opposing to the malady a taciturn resistance for
a day or two, was obliged to keep his chamber.

He lay tossing on his thorny bed one evening, Henry, who would not quit
him, watching faithfully beside him, when a tap - too light to be that of
Mrs. Gill or the housemaid - summoned young Sympson to the door.

"How is Mr. Moore to-night?" asked a low voice from the dark gallery.

"Come in and see him yourself."

"Is he asleep?"

"I wish he could sleep. Come and speak to him, Shirley."

"He would not like it."

But the speaker stepped in, and Henry, seeing her hesitate on the
threshold, took her hand and drew her to the couch.

The shaded light showed Miss Keeldar's form but imperfectly; yet it
revealed her in elegant attire. There was a party assembled below,
including Sir Philip Nunnely; the ladies were now in the drawing-room,
and their hostess had stolen from them to visit Henry's tutor. Her pure
white dress, her fair arms and neck, the trembling chainlet of gold
circling her throat and quivering on her breast, glistened strangely
amid the obscurity of the sickroom. Her mien was chastened and pensive.
She spoke gently.

"Mr. Moore, how are you to-night?"

"I have not been very ill, and am now better."

"I heard that you complained of thirst. I have brought you some grapes;
can you taste one?"

"No; but I thank you for remembering me."

"Just one."

From the rich cluster that filled a small basket held in her hand she
severed a berry and offered it to his lips. He shook his head, and
turned aside his flushed face.

"But what, then, can I bring you instead? You have no wish for fruit;
yet I see that your lips are parched. What beverage do you prefer?"

"Mrs. Gill supplies me with toast-and-water. I like it best."

Silence fell for some minutes.

"Do you suffer? - have you pain?"

"Very little."

"What made you ill?"

Silence.

"I wonder what caused this fever? To what do you attribute it?"

"Miasma, perhaps - malaria. This is autumn, a season fertile in fevers."

"I hear you often visit the sick in Briarfield, and Nunnely too, with
Mr. Hall. You should be on your guard; temerity is not wise."

"That reminds me, Miss Keeldar, that perhaps you had better not enter
this chamber or come near this couch. I do not believe my illness is
infectious. I scarcely fear" - with a sort of smile - " you will take it;
but why should you run even the shadow of a risk? Leave me."

"Patience, I will go soon; but I should like to do something for you
before I depart - any little service - - "

"They will miss you below."

"No; the gentlemen are still at table."

"They will not linger long. Sir Philip Nunnely is no wine-bibber, and I
hear him just now pass from the dining-room to the drawing-room."

"It is a servant."

"It is Sir Philip; I know his step."

"Your hearing is acute."

"It is never dull, and the sense seems sharpened at present. Sir Philip
was here to tea last night. I heard you sing to him some song which he
had brought you. I heard him, when he took his departure at eleven
o'clock, call you out on to the pavement, to look at the evening star."

"You must be nervously sensitive."

"I heard him kiss your hand."

"Impossible!"

"No: my chamber is over the hall, the window just above the front door;
the sash was a little raised, for I felt feverish. You stood ten minutes
with him on the steps. I heard your discourse, every word, and I heard
the salute. - Henry, give me some water."

"Let me give it him."

But he half rose to take the glass from young Sympson, and declined her
attendance.

"And can I do nothing?"

"Nothing; for you cannot guarantee me a night's peaceful rest, and it is
all I at present want."

"You do not sleep well?"

"Sleep has left me."

"Yet you said you were not very ill?"

"I am often sleepless when in high health."

"If I had power, I would lap you in the most placid slumber - quite deep
and hushed, without a dream."

"Blank annihilation! I do not ask that."

"With dreams of all you most desire."

"Monstrous delusions! The sleep would be delirium, the waking death."

"Your wishes are not so chimerical; you are no visionary."

"Miss Keeldar, I suppose you think so; but my character is not, perhaps,
quite as legible to you as a page of the last new novel might be."

"That is possible. But this sleep - I should like to woo it to your
pillow, to win for you its favour. If I took a book and sat down and
read some pages? I can well spare half an hour."

"Thank you, but I will not detain you."

"I would read softly."

"It would not do. I am too feverish and excitable to bear a soft,
cooing, vibrating voice close at my ear. You had better leave me."

"Well, I will go."

"And no good-night?"

"Yes, sir, yes. Mr. Moore, good-night."  Exit Shirley. 

"Henry, my boy, go to bed now; it is time you had some repose."

"Sir, it would please me to watch at your bedside all night."

"Nothing less called for. I am getting better. There, go."

"Give me your blessing, sir."

"God bless you, my best pupil!"

"You never call me your dearest pupil!"

"No, nor ever shall."

          

Possibly Miss Keeldar resented her former teacher's rejection of her
courtesy. It is certain she did not repeat the offer of it. Often as her
light step traversed the gallery in the course of a day, it did not
again pause at his door; nor did her "cooing, vibrating voice" disturb a
second time the hush of the sickroom. A sickroom, indeed, it soon ceased
to be; Mr. Moore's good constitution quickly triumphed over his
indisposition. In a few days he shook it off, and resumed his duties as
tutor.

That "auld lang syne" had still its authority both with preceptor and
scholar was proved by the manner in which he sometimes promptly passed
the distance she usually maintained between them, and put down her high
reserve with a firm, quiet hand.

One afternoon the Sympson family were gone out to take a carriage
airing. Shirley, never sorry to snatch a reprieve from their society,
had remained behind, detained by business, as she said. The business - a
little letter-writing - was soon dispatched after the yard gates had
closed on the carriage; Miss Keeldar betook herself to the garden.

It was a peaceful autumn day. The gilding of the Indian summer mellowed
the pastures far and wide. The russet woods stood ripe to be stripped,
but were yet full of leaf. The purple of heath-bloom, faded but not
withered, tinged the hills. The beck wandered down to the Hollow,
through a silent district; no wind followed its course or haunted its
woody borders. Fieldhead gardens bore the seal of gentle decay. On the
walks, swept that morning, yellow leaves had fluttered down again. Its
time of flowers, and even of fruits, was over; but a scantling of
apples enriched the trees. Only a blossom here and there expanded pale
and delicate amidst a knot of faded leaves.

These single flowers - the last of their race - Shirley culled as she
wandered thoughtfully amongst the beds. She was fastening into her
girdle a hueless and scentless nosegay, when Henry Sympson called to her
as he came limping from the house.

"Shirley, Mr. Moore would be glad to see you in the schoolroom and to
hear you read a little French, if you have no more urgent occupation."

The messenger delivered his commission very simply, as if it were a mere
matter of course.

"Did Mr. Moore tell you to say that?"

"Certainly; why not? And now, do come, and let us once more be as we
were at Sympson Grove. We used to have pleasant school-hours in those
days."

Miss Keeldar perhaps thought that circumstances were changed since then;
however, she made no remark, but after a little reflection quietly
followed Henry.

Entering the schoolroom, she inclined her head with a decent obeisance,
as had been her wont in former times. She removed her bonnet, and hung
it up beside Henry's cap. Louis Moore sat at his desk, turning the
leaves of a book, open before him, and marking passages with his pencil.
He just moved, in acknowledgment of her curtsy, but did not rise.

"You proposed to read to me a few nights ago," said he. "I could not
hear you then. My attention is now at your service. A little renewed
practice in French may not be unprofitable. Your accent, I have
observed, begins to rust."

"What book shall I take?"

"Here are the posthumous works of St. Pierre. Read a few pages of the
'Fragments de l'Amazone.'"

She accepted the chair which he had placed in readiness near his own;
the volume lay on his desk - there was but one between them; her sweeping
curls dropped so low as to hide the page from him.

"Put back your hair," he said.

For one moment Shirley looked not quite certain whether she would obey
the request or disregard it. A flicker of her eye beamed furtive on the
professor's face. Perhaps if he had been looking at her harshly or
timidly, or if one undecided line had marked his countenance, she would
have rebelled, and the lesson had ended there and then; but he was only
awaiting her compliance - as calm as marble, and as cool. She threw the
veil of tresses behind her ear. It was well her face owned an agreeable
outline, and that her cheek possessed the polish and the roundness of
early youth, or, thus robbed of a softening shade, the contours might
have lost their grace. But what mattered that in the present society?
Neither Calypso nor Eucharis cared to fascinate Mentor.

She began to read. The language had become strange to her tongue; it
faltered; the lecture flowed unevenly, impeded by hurried breath, broken
by Anglicized tones. She stopped.

"I can't  do it. Read me a paragraph, if you please, Mr. Moore."

What he read she repeated. She caught his accent in three minutes.

"Tres bien," was the approving comment at the close of the piece.

"C'est presque le Français rattrapé, n'est-ce pas?"

"You could not write French as you once could, I dare say?"

"Oh no! I should make strange work of my concords now."

"You could not compose the devoir of 'La Premiere Femme Savante'?"

"Do you still remember that rubbish?"

"Every line."

"I doubt you."

"I will engage to repeat it word for word."

"You would stop short at the first line."

"Challenge me to the experiment."

"I challenge you."

He proceeded to recite the following. He gave it in French, but we must
translate, on pain of being unintelligible to some readers.

          

 "And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of
 the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons
 of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they
 took them wives of all which they chose."

This was in the dawn of time, before the morning stars were set, and
while they yet sang together.

The epoch is so remote, the mists and dewy gray of matin twilight veil
it with so vague an obscurity, that all distinct feature of custom, all
clear line of locality, evade perception and baffle research. It must
suffice to know that the world then existed; that men peopled it; that
man's nature, with its passions, sympathies, pains, and pleasures,
informed the planet and gave it soul.

A certain tribe colonized a certain spot on the globe; of what race this
tribe - unknown; in what region that spot - untold. We usually think of
the East when we refer to transactions of that date; but who shall
declare that there was no life in the West, the South, the North? What
is to disprove that this tribe, instead of camping under palm groves in
Asia, wandered beneath island oak woods rooted in our own seas of
Europe?

It is no sandy plain, nor any circumscribed and scant oasis I seem to
realize. A forest valley, with rocky sides and brown profundity of
shade, formed by tree crowding on tree, descends deep before me. Here,
indeed, dwell human beings, but so few, and in alleys so thick branched
and overarched, they are neither heard nor seen. Are they savage?
Doubtless. They live by the crook and the bow; half shepherds, half
hunters, their flocks wander wild as their prey. Are they happy? No, not
more happy than we are at this day. Are they good? No, not better than
ourselves. Their nature is our nature - human both. There is one in this
tribe too often miserable - a child bereaved of both parents. None cares
for this child. She is fed sometimes, but oftener forgotten. A hut
rarely receives her; the hollow tree and chill cavern are her home.
Forsaken, lost, and wandering, she lives more with the wild beast and
bird than with her own kind. Hunger and cold are her comrades; sadness
hovers over, and solitude besets her round. Unheeded and unvalued, she
should die; but she both lives and grows. The green wilderness nurses
her, and becomes to her a mother; feeds her on juicy berry, on
saccharine root and nut.

There is something in the air of this clime which fosters life kindly.
There must be something, too, in its dews which heals with sovereign
balm. Its gentle seasons exaggerate no passion, no sense; its
temperature tends to harmony; its breezes, you would say, bring down
from heaven the germ of pure thought and purer feeling. Not grotesquely
fantastic are the forms of cliff and foliage, not violently vivid the
colouring of flower and bird. In all the grandeur of these forests
there is repose; in all their freshness there is tenderness.

The gentle charm vouchsafed to flower and tree, bestowed on deer and
dove, has not been denied to the human nursling. All solitary, she has
sprung up straight and graceful. Nature cast her features in a fine
mould; they have matured in their pure, accurate first lines, unaltered
by the shocks of disease. No fierce dry blast has dealt rudely with the
surface of her frame; no burning sun has crisped or withered her
tresses. Her form gleams ivory-white through the trees; her hair flows
plenteous, long, and glossy; her eyes, not dazzled by vertical fires,
beam in the shade large and open, and full and dewy. Above those eyes,
when the breeze bares her forehead, shines an expanse fair and ample - a
clear, candid page, whereon knowledge, should knowledge ever come, might
write a golden record. You see in the desolate young savage nothing
vicious or vacant. She haunts the wood harmless and thoughtful, though
of what one so untaught can think it is not easy to divine.

On the evening of one summer day, before the Flood, being utterly
alone - for she had lost all trace of her tribe, who had wandered leagues
away, she knew not where - she went up from the vale, to watch Day take
leave and Night arrive. A crag overspread by a tree was her station. The
oak roots, turfed and mossed, gave a seat; the oak boughs, thick-leaved,
wove a canopy.

Slow and grand the Day withdrew, passing in purple fire, and parting to
the farewell of a wild, low chorus from the woodlands. Then Night
entered, quiet as death. The wind fell, the birds ceased singing. Now
every nest held happy mates, and hart and hind slumbered blissfully safe
in their lair.

The girl sat, her body still, her soul astir; occupied, however, rather
in feeling than in thinking, in wishing than hoping, in imagining than
projecting. She felt the world, the sky, the night, boundlessly mighty.
Of all things herself seemed to herself the centre - a small, forgotten
atom of life, a spark of soul, emitted inadvertent from the great
creative source, and now burning unmarked to waste in the heart of a
black hollow. She asked, was she thus to burn out and perish, her living
light doing no good, never seen, never needed - a star in an else
starless firmament, which nor shepherd, nor wanderer, nor sage, nor
priest tracked as a guide or read as a prophecy? Could this be, she
demanded, when the flame of her intelligence burned so vivid; when her
life beat so true, and real, and potent; when something within her
stirred disquieted, and restlessly asserted a God-given strength, for
which it insisted she should find exercise?

She gazed abroad on Heaven and Evening. Heaven and Evening gazed back on
her. She bent down, searching bank, hill, river, spread dim below. All
she questioned responded by oracles. She heard - she was impressed; but
she could not understand. Above her head she raised her hands joined
together.

"Guidance - help - comfort - come!" was her cry.

There was no voice, nor any that answered.

She waited, kneeling, steadfastly looking up. Yonder sky was sealed; the
solemn stars shone alien and remote.

At last one overstretched chord of her agony slacked; she thought
Something above relented; she felt as if Something far round drew
nigher; she heard as if Silence spoke. There was no language, no word,
only a tone.

Again - a fine, full, lofty tone, a deep, soft sound, like a storm
whispering, made twilight undulate.

Once more, profounder, nearer, clearer, it rolled harmonious.

Yet again - a distinct voice passed between Heaven and Earth.

"Eva!"

If Eva were not this woman's name, she had none. She rose. "Here am I."

"Eva!"

"O Night  it can be but Night that speaks , I am here!"

The voice, descending, reached Earth.

"Eva!"

"Lord," she cried, "behold thine handmaid!"

She had her religion - all tribes held some creed.

"I come - a Comforter!"

"Lord, come quickly!"

The Evening flushed full of hope; the Air panted; the Moon - rising
before - ascended large, but her light showed no shape.

"Lean towards me, Eva. Enter my arms; repose thus."

"Thus I lean, O Invisible but felt! And what art thou?"

"Eva, I have brought a living draught from heaven. Daughter of Man,
drink of my cup!"

"I drink: it is as if sweetest dew visited my lips in a full current. My
arid heart revives; my affliction is lightened; my strait and struggle
are gone. And the night changes! the wood, the hill, the moon, the wide
sky - all change!"

"All change, and for ever. I take from thy vision darkness; I loosen
from thy faculties fetters! I level in thy path obstacles; I with my
presence fill vacancy. I claim as mine the lost atom of life. I take to
myself the spark of soul - burning heretofore forgotten!"

"O take me! O claim me! This is a god."

"This is a son of God - one who feels himself in the portion of life that
stirs you. He is suffered to reclaim his own, and so to foster and aid
that it shall not perish hopeless."

"A son of God! Am I indeed chosen?"

"Thou only in this land. I saw thee that thou wert fair; I knew thee
that thou wert mine. To me it is given to rescue, to sustain, to cherish
mine own. Acknowledge in me that Seraph on earth named Genius."

"My glorious Bridegroom! true Dayspring from on high! All I would have
at last I possess. I receive a revelation. The dark hint, the obscure
whisper, which have haunted me from childhood, are interpreted. Thou art
He I sought. Godborn, take me, thy bride!"

"Unhumbled, I can take what is mine. Did I not give from the altar the
very flame which lit Eva's being? Come again into the heaven whence thou
wert sent."

That Presence, invisible but mighty, gathered her in like a lamb to the
fold; that voice, soft but all-pervading, vibrated through her heart
like music. Her eye received no image; and yet a sense visited her
vision and her brain as of the serenity of stainless air, the power of
sovereign seas, the majesty of marching stars, the energy of colliding
elements, the rooted endurance of hills wide based, and, above all, as
of the lustre of heroic beauty rushing victorious on the Night,
vanquishing its shadows like a diviner sun.

Such was the bridal hour of Genius and Humanity. Who shall rehearse the
tale of their after-union? Who shall depict its bliss and bale? Who
shall tell how He between whom and the Woman God put enmity forged
deadly plots to break the bond or defile its purity? Who shall record
the long strife between Serpent and Seraph: - How still the Father of
Lies insinuated evil into good, pride into wisdom, grossness into glory,
pain into bliss, poison into passion? How the "dreadless Angel" defied,
resisted, and repelled? How again and again he refined the polluted cup,
exalted the debased emotion, rectified the perverted impulse, detected
the lurking venom, baffled the frontless temptation - purified,
justified, watched, and withstood? How, by his patience, by his
strength, by that unutterable excellence he held from God - his
Origin - this faithful Seraph fought for Humanity a good fight through
time; and, when Time's course closed, and Death was encountered at the
end, barring with fleshless arm the portals of Eternity, how Genius
still held close his dying bride, sustained her through the agony of the
passage, bore her triumphant into his own home, Heaven; restored her,
redeemed, to Jehovah, her Maker; and at last, before Angel and
Archangel, crowned her with the crown of Immortality?

Who shall of these things write the chronicle?

          

"I never could correct that composition," observed Shirley, as Moore
concluded. "Your censor-pencil scored it with condemnatory lines, whose
signification I strove vainly to fathom."

She had taken a crayon from the tutor's desk, and was drawing little
leaves, fragments of pillars, broken crosses, on the margin of the book.

"French may be half forgotten, but the habits of the French lesson are
retained, I see," said Louis. "My books would now, as erst, be unsafe
with you. My newly-bound St. Pierre would soon be like my Racine - Miss
Keeldar, her mark, traced on every page."

Shirley dropped her crayon as if it burned her fingers.

"Tell me what were the faults of that devoir ?" she asked. "Were they
grammatical errors, or did you object to the substance?"

"I never said that the lines I drew were indications of faults at all.
You would have it that such was the case, and I refrained from
contradiction."

"What else did they denote?"

"No matter now."

"Mr. Moore," cried Henry, "make Shirley repeat some of the pieces she
used to say so well by heart."

"If I ask for any, it will be 'Le Cheval Dompté,'" said Moore, trimming
with his penknife the pencil Miss Keeldar had worn to a stump.

She turned aside her head; the neck, the clear cheek, forsaken by their
natural veil, were seen to flush warm.

"Ah! she has not forgotten, you see, sir," said Henry, exultant. "She
knows how naughty she was."

A smile, which Shirley would not permit to expand, made her lip tremble;
she bent her face, and hid it half with her arms, half in her curls,
which, as she stooped, fell loose again. "Certainly I was a rebel," she
answered.

"A rebel!" repeated Henry. "Yes; you and papa had quarrelled terribly,
and you set both him and mamma, and Mrs. Pryor, and everybody, at
defiance. You said he had insulted you - - "

"He had insulted me," interposed Shirley.

"And you wanted to leave Sympson Grove directly. You packed your things
up, and papa threw them out of your trunk; mamma cried, Mrs. Pryor
cried; they both stood wringing their hands begging you to be patient;
and you knelt on the floor with your things and your up-turned box
before you, looking, Shirley, looking - why, in one of your passions.
Your features, in such passions, are not distorted; they are fixed, but
quite beautiful. You scarcely look angry, only resolute, and in a
certain haste; yet one feels that at such times an obstacle cast across
your path would be split as with lightning. Papa lost heart, and called
Mr. Moore."

"Enough, Henry."

"No, it is not enough. I hardly know how Mr. Moore managed, except that
I recollect he suggested to papa that agitation would bring on his gout;
and then he spoke quietly to the ladies, and got them away; and
afterwards he said to you, Miss Shirley, that it was of no use talking
or lecturing now, but that the tea-things were just brought into the
schoolroom, and he was very thirsty, and he would be glad if you would
leave your packing for the present and come and make a cup of tea for
him and me. You came; you would not talk at first, but soon you softened
and grew cheerful. Mr. Moore began to tell us about the Continent, the
war, and Bonaparte - subjects we were both fond of listening to. After
tea he said we should neither of us leave him that evening; he would not
let us stray out of his sight, lest we should again get into mischief.
We sat one on each side of him. We were so happy. I never passed so
pleasant an evening. The next day he gave you, missy, a lecture of an
hour, and wound it up by marking you a piece to learn in Bossuet as a
punishment-lesson - 'Le Cheval Dompté.' You learned it instead of packing
up, Shirley. We heard no more of your running away. Mr. Moore used to
tease you on the subject for a year afterwards."

"She never said a lesson with greater spirit," subjoined Moore. "She
then, for the first time, gave me the treat of hearing my native tongue
spoken without accent by an English girl."

"She was as sweet as summer cherries for a month afterwards," struck in
Henry: "a good hearty quarrel always left Shirley's temper better than
it found it."

"You talk of me as if I were not present," observed Miss Keeldar, who
had not yet lifted her face.

"Are you sure you are present?" asked Moore. "There have been moments
since my arrival here when I have been tempted to inquire of the lady of
Fieldhead if she knew what had become of my former pupil."

"She is here now."

"I see her, and humble enough; but I would neither advise Harry nor
others to believe too implicitly in the humility which one moment can
hide its blushing face like a modest little child, and the next lift it
pale and lofty as a marble Juno."

"One man in times of old, it is said, imparted vitality to the statue he
had chiselled; others may have the contrary gift of turning life to
stone."

Moore paused on this observation before he replied to it. His look, at
once struck and meditative, said, "A strange phrase; what may it mean?"
He turned it over in his mind, with thought deep and slow, as some
German pondering metaphysics.

"You mean," he said at last, "that some men inspire repugnance, and so
chill the kind heart."

"Ingenious!" responded Shirley. "If the interpretation pleases you, you
are welcome to hold it valid. I don't  care."

And with that she raised her head, lofty in look and statue-like in hue,
as Louis had described it.

"Behold the metamorphosis!" he said; 'scarce imagined ere it is
realized: a lowly nymph develops to an inaccessible goddess. But Henry
must not be disappointed of his recitation, and Olympia will deign to
oblige him. Let us begin."

"I have forgotten the very first line."

"Which I have not. My memory, if a slow, is a retentive one. I acquire
deliberately both knowledge and liking. The acquisition grows into my
brain, and the sentiment into my breast; and it is not as the
rapid-springing produce which, having no root in itself, flourishes
verdurous enough for a time, but too soon falls withered away.
Attention, Henry! Miss Keeldar consents to favour you. 'Voyez ce cheval
ardent et impétueux,' so it commences."

Miss Keeldar did consent to make the effort; but she soon stopped.

"Unless I heard the whole repeated I cannot continue it," she said.

"Yet it was quickly learned - 'soon gained, soon gone,'" moralized the
tutor. He recited the passage deliberately, accurately, with slow,
impressive emphasis.

Shirley, by degrees, inclined her ear as he went on. Her face, before
turned from him, re turned towards him. When he ceased, she took the
word up as if from his lips; she took his very tone; she seized his very
accent; she delivered the periods as he had delivered them; she
reproduced his manner, his pronunciation, his expression.

It was now her turn to petition.

"Recall 'Le Songe d'Athalie,'" she entreated, "and say it."

He said it for her. She took it from him; she found lively excitement in
the pleasure of making his language her own. She asked for further
indulgence; all the old school pieces were revived, and with them
Shirley's old school days.

He had gone through some of the best passages of Racine and Corneille,
and then had heard the echo of his own deep tones in the girl's voice,
that modulated itself faithfully on his. "Le chene et le Roseau," that
most beautiful of La Fontaine's fables, had been recited, well recited,
by the tutor, and the pupil had animatedly availed herself of the
lesson. Perhaps a simultaneous feeling seized them now, that their
enthusiasm had kindled to a glow, which the slight fuel of French poetry
no longer sufficed to feed; perhaps they longed for a trunk of English
oak to be thrown as a Yule log to the devouring flame. Moore observed,
"And these are our best pieces! And we have nothing more dramatic,
nervous, natural!"

And then he smiled and was silent. His whole nature seemed serenely
alight. He stood on the hearth, leaning his elbow on the mantelpiece,
musing not unblissfully.

Twilight was closing on the diminished autumn day. The schoolroom
windows - darkened with creeping plants, from which no high October winds
had as yet swept the sere foliage - admitted scarce a gleam of sky; but
the fire gave light enough to talk by.

And now Louis Moore addressed his pupil in French, and she answered at
first with laughing hesitation and in broken phrase. Moore encouraged
while he corrected her. Henry joined in the lesson; the two scholars
stood opposite the master, their arms round each other's waists. Tartar,
who long since had craved and obtained admission, sat sagely in the
centre of the rug, staring at the blaze which burst fitful from morsels
of coal among the red cinders. The group were happy enough, but - 

 "Pleasures are like poppies spread;
 You seize the flower - its bloom is shed."

The dull, rumbling sound of wheels was heard on the pavement in the
yard.

"It is the carriage returned," said Shirley; "and dinner must be just
ready, and I am not dressed."

A servant came in with Mr. Moore's candle and tea; for the tutor and his
pupil usually dined at luncheon time.

"Mr. Sympson and the ladies are returned," she said, "and Sir Philip
Nunnely is with them."

"How you did start, and how your hand trembled, Shirley!" said Henry,
when the maid had closed the shutter and was gone. "But I know
why - don't  you, Mr. Moore? I know what papa intends. He is a little ugly
man, that Sir Philip. I wish he had not come. I wish sisters and all of
them had stayed at De Walden Hall to dine. - Shirley should once more
have made tea for you and me, Mr. Moore, and we would have had a happy
evening of it."

Moore was locking up his desk and putting away his St. Pierre. "That was
 your plan, was it, my boy?"

"Don't  you approve it, sir?"

"I approve nothing utopian. Look Life in its iron face; stare Reality
out of its brassy countenance. Make the tea, Henry; I shall be back in a
minute."

He left the room; so did Shirley, by another door.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

PHOBE.


Shirley probably got on pleasantly with Sir Philip that evening, for the
next morning she came down in one of her best moods.

"Who will take a walk with me?" she asked, after breakfast. "Isabella
and Gertrude, will you?"

So rare was such an invitation from Miss Keeldar to her female cousins
that they hesitated before they accepted it. Their mamma, however,
signifying acquiescence in the project, they fetched their bonnets, and
the trio set out.

It did not suit these three young persons to be thrown much together.
Miss Keeldar liked the society of few ladies; indeed, she had a cordial
pleasure in that of none except Mrs. Pryor and Caroline Helstone. She
was civil, kind, attentive even to her cousins; but still she usually
had little to say to them. In the sunny mood of this particular morning,
she contrived to entertain even the Misses Sympson. Without deviating
from her wonted rule of discussing with them only ordinary themes, she
imparted to these themes an extraordinary interest; the sparkle of her
spirit glanced along her phrases.

What made her so joyous? All the cause must have been in herself. The
day was not bright. It was dim - a pale, waning autumn day. The walks
through the dun woods were damp; the atmosphere was heavy, the sky
overcast; and yet it seemed that in Shirley's heart lived all the light
and azure of Italy, as all its fervour laughed in her gray English eye.

Some directions necessary to be given to her foreman, John, delayed her
behind her cousins as they neared Fieldhead on their return. Perhaps an
interval of twenty minutes elapsed between her separation from them and
her re-entrance into the house. In the meantime she had spoken to John,
and then she had lingered in the lane at the gate. A summons to
luncheon called her in. She excused herself from the meal, and went
upstairs.

"Is not Shirley coming to luncheon?" asked Isabella. "She said she was
hungry."

An hour after, as she did not quit her chamber, one of her cousins went
to seek her there. She was found sitting at the foot of the bed, her
head resting on her hand; she looked quite pale, very thoughtful, almost
sad.

"You are not ill?" was the question put.

"A little sick," replied Miss Keeldar.

Certainly she was not a little changed from what she had been two hours
before.

This change, accounted for only by those three words, explained no
otherwise; this change - whencesoever springing, effected in a brief ten
minutes - passed like no light summer cloud. She talked when she joined
her friends at dinner, talked as usual. She remained with them during
the evening. When again questioned respecting her health, she declared
herself perfectly recovered. It had been a mere passing faintness, a
momentary sensation, not worth a thought; yet it was felt there was a
difference in Shirley.

The next day - the day, the week, the fortnight after - this new and
peculiar shadow lingered on the countenance, in the manner of Miss
Keeldar. A strange quietude settled over her look, her movements, her
very voice. The alteration was not so marked as to court or permit
frequent questioning, yet it was there, and it would not pass away. It
hung over her like a cloud which no breeze could stir or disperse. Soon
it became evident that to notice this change was to annoy her. First she
shrank from remark; and, if persisted in, she, with her own peculiar
 hauteur , repelled it. "Was she ill?" The reply came with decision.

"I am not ."

"Did anything weigh on her mind? Had anything happened to affect her
spirits?"

She scornfully ridiculed the idea. "What did they mean by spirits? She
had no spirits, black or white, blue or gray, to affect."

"Something must be the matter - she was so altered."

"She supposed she had a right to alter at her ease. She knew she was
plainer. If it suited her to grow ugly, why need others fret themselves
on the subject?"

"There must be a cause for the change. What was it?"

She peremptorily requested to be let alone.

Then she would make every effort to appear quite gay, and she seemed
indignant at herself that she could not perfectly succeed. Brief
self-spurning epithets burst from her lips when alone. "Fool! coward!"
she would term herself. "Poltroon!" she would say, "if you must tremble,
tremble in secret! Quail where no eye sees you!"

"How dare you," she would ask herself - "how dare you show your weakness
and betray your imbecile anxieties? Shake them off; rise above them. If
you cannot do this, hide them."

And to hide them she did her best. She once more became resolutely
lively in company. When weary of effort and forced to relax, she sought
solitude - not the solitude of her chamber  she refused to mope, shut up
between four walls , but that wilder solitude which lies out of doors,
and which she could chase, mounted on Zoë, her mare. She took long rides
of half a day. Her uncle disapproved, but he dared not remonstrate. It
was never pleasant to face Shirley's anger, even when she was healthy
and gay; but now that her face showed thin, and her large eye looked
hollow, there was something in the darkening of that face and kindling
of that eye which touched as well as alarmed.

To all comparative strangers who, unconscious of the alterations in her
spirits, commented on the alteration in her looks, she had one reply, - 

"I am perfectly well; I have not an ailment."

And health, indeed, she must have had, to be able to bear the exposure
to the weather she now encountered. Wet or fair, calm or storm, she took
her daily ride over Stilbro' Moor, Tartar keeping up at her side, with
his wolf-like gallop, long and untiring.

Twice, three times, the eyes of gossips - those eyes which are
everywhere, in the closet and on the hill-top - noticed that instead of
turning on Rushedge, the top ridge of Stilbro' Moor, she rode forwards
all the way to the town. Scouts were not wanting to mark her destination
there. It was ascertained that she alighted at the door of one Mr.
Pearson Hall, a solicitor, related to the vicar of Nunnely. This
gentleman and his ancestors had been the agents of the Keeldar family
for generations back. Some people affirmed that Miss Keeldar was become
involved in business speculations connected with Hollow's Mill - that she
had lost money, and was constrained to mortgage her land. Others
conjectured that she was going to be married, and that the settlements
were preparing.

          

Mr. Moore and Henry Sympson were together in the schoolroom. The tutor
was waiting for a lesson which the pupil seemed busy in preparing.

"Henry, make haste. The afternoon is getting on."

"Is it, sir?"

"Certainly. Are you nearly ready with that lesson?"

"No."

"Not nearly ready?"

"I have not construed a line."

Mr. Moore looked up. The boy's tone was rather peculiar.

"The task presents no difficulties, Henry; or, if it does, bring them to
me. We will work together."

"Mr. Moore, I can do no work."

"My boy, you are ill."

"Sir, I am not worse in bodily health than usual, but my heart is full."

"Shut the book. Come hither, Harry. Come to the fireside."

Harry limped forward. His tutor placed him in a chair; his lips were
quivering, his eyes brimming. He laid his crutch on the floor, bent down
his head, and wept.

"This distress is not occasioned by physical pain, you say, Harry? You
have a grief; tell it me."

"Sir, I have such a grief as I never had before. I wish it could be
relieved in some way; I can hardly bear it."

"Who knows but, if we talk it over, we may relieve it? What is the
cause? Whom does it concern?"

"The cause, sir, is Shirley; it concerns Shirley."

"Does it? You think her changed?"

"All who know her think her changed - you too, Mr. Moore."

"Not seriously - no. I see no alteration but such as a favourable turn
might repair in a few weeks; besides, her own word must go for
something: she says she is well."

"There it is, sir. As long as she maintained she was well, I believed
her. When I was sad out of her sight, I soon recovered spirits in her
presence. Now - - "

"Well, Harry, now. Has she said anything to you? You and she were
together in the garden two hours this morning. I saw her talking, and
you listening. Now, my dear Harry, if Miss Keeldar has said she is ill,
and enjoined you to keep her secret, do not obey her. For her life's
sake, avow everything. Speak, my boy."

" She say she is ill! I believe, sir, if she were dying, she would
smile, and aver, 'Nothing ails me.'"

"What have you learned then? What new circumstance?"

"I have learned that she has just made her will."

"Made her will?"

The tutor and pupil were silent.

"She told you that?" asked Moore, when some minutes had elapsed.

"She told me quite cheerfully, not as an ominous circumstance, which I
felt it to be. She said I was the only person besides her solicitor,
Pearson Hall, and Mr. Helstone and Mr. Yorke, who knew anything about
it; and to me, she intimated, she wished specially to explain its
provisions."

"Go on, Harry."

"'Because,' she said, looking down on me with her beautiful eyes - oh!
they are beautiful, Mr. Moore! I love them! I love her! She is my
star! Heaven must not claim her! She is lovely in this world, and fitted
for this world. Shirley is not an angel; she is a woman, and she shall
live with men. Seraphs shall not have her! Mr. Moore, if one of the
'sons of God,' with wings wide and bright as the sky, blue and sounding
as the sea, having seen that she was fair, descended to claim her, his
claim should be withstood - withstood by me - boy and cripple as I am."

"Henry Sympson, go on, when I tell you."

"'Because,' she said, 'if I made no will, and died before you, Harry,
all my property would go to you; and I do not intend that it should be
so, though your father would like it. But you,' she said, 'will have his
whole estate, which is large - larger than Fieldhead. Your sisters will
have nothing; so I have left them some money, though I do not love them,
both together, half so much as I love one lock of your fair hair.' She
said these words, and she called me her 'darling,' and let me kiss her.
She went on to tell me that she had left Caroline Helstone some money
too; that this manor house, with its furniture and books, she had
bequeathed to me, as she did not choose to take the old family place
from her own blood; and that all the rest of her property, amounting to
about twelve thousand pounds, exclusive of the legacies to my sisters
and Miss Helstone, she had willed, not to me, seeing I was already rich,
but to a good man, who would make the best use of it that any human
being could do - a man, she said, that was both gentle and brave, strong
and merciful - a man that might not profess to be pious, but she knew he
had the secret of religion pure and undefiled before God. The spirit of
love and peace was with him. He visited the fatherless and widows in
their affliction, and kept himself unspotted from the world. Then she
asked, 'Do you approve what I have done, Harry?' I could not answer. My
tears choked me, as they do now."

Mr. Moore allowed his pupil a moment to contend with and master his
emotion. He then demanded, "What else did she say?"

"When I had signified my full consent to the conditions of her will, she
told me I was a generous boy, and she was proud of me. 'And now,' she
added, 'in case anything should happen, you will know what to say to
Malice when she comes whispering hard things in your ear, insinuating
that Shirley has wronged you, that she did not love you. You will know
that I did love you, Harry; that no sister could have loved you
better - my own treasure.' Mr. Moore, sir, when I remember her voice, and
recall her look, my heart beats as if it would break its strings. She
 may go to heaven before me - if God commands it, she must ; but the
rest of my life - and my life will not be long, I am glad of that
now - shall be a straight, quick, thoughtful journey in the path her step
has pressed. I thought to enter the vault of the Keeldars before her.
Should it be otherwise, lay my coffin by Shirley's side."

Moore answered him with a weighty calm, that offered a strange contrast
to the boy's perturbed enthusiasm.

"You are wrong, both of you - you harm each other. If youth once falls
under the influence of a shadowy terror, it imagines there will never be
full sunlight again; its first calamity it fancies will last a lifetime.
What more did she say? Anything more?"

"We settled one or two family points between ourselves."

"I should rather like to know what - - "

"But, Mr. Moore, you smile. I could not smile to see Shirley in such a
mood."

"My boy, I am neither nervous, nor poetic, nor inexperienced. I see
things as they are; you don't  as yet. Tell me these family points."

"Only, sir, she asked me whether I considered myself most of a Keeldar
or a Sympson; and I answered I was Keeldar to the core of the heart and
to the marrow of the bones. She said she was glad of it; for, besides
her, I was the only Keeldar left in England. And then we agreed on some
matters."

"Well?"

"Well, sir, that if I lived to inherit my father's estate, and her
house, I was to take the name of Keeldar, and to make Fieldhead my
residence. Henry Shirley Keeldar I said I would be called; and I will.
Her name and her manor house are ages old, and Sympson and Sympson Grove
are of yesterday."

"Come, you are neither of you going to heaven yet. I have the best hopes
of you both, with your proud distinctions - a pair of half-fledged
eaglets. Now, what is your inference from all you have told me? Put it
into words."

"That Shirley thinks she is going to die."

"She referred to her health?"

"Not once; but I assure you she is wasting. Her hands are grown quite
thin, and so is her cheek."

"Does she ever complain to your mother or sisters?"

"Never. She laughs at them when they question her. Mr. Moore, she is a
strange being, so fair and girlish - not a man-like woman at all, not an
Amazon, and yet lifting her head above both help and sympathy."

"Do you know where she is now, Henry? Is she in the house, or riding
out?"

"Surely not out, sir. It rains fast."

"True; which, however, is no guarantee that she is not at this moment
cantering over Rushedge. Of late she has never permitted weather to be a
hindrance to her rides."

"You remember, Mr. Moore, how wet and stormy it was last Wednesday - so
wild, indeed, that she would not permit Zoë to be saddled? Yet the blast
she thought too tempestuous for her mare she herself faced on foot; that
afternoon she walked nearly as far as Nunnely. I asked her, when she
came in, if she was not afraid of taking cold. 'Not I,' she said. 'It
would be too much good luck for me. I don't  know, Harry, but the best
thing that could happen to me would be to take a good cold and fever,
and so pass off like other Christians.' She is reckless, you see, sir."

"Reckless indeed! Go and find out where she is, and if you can get an
opportunity of speaking to her without attracting attention, request her
to come here a minute."

"Yes, sir."

He snatched his crutch, and started up to go.

"Harry!"

He returned.

"Do not deliver the message formally. Word it as, in former days, you
would have worded an ordinary summons to the schoolroom."

"I see, sir. She will be more likely to obey."

"And, Harry - - "

"Sir?"

"I will call you when I want you. Till then, you are dispensed from
lessons."

He departed. Mr. Moore, left alone, rose from his desk.

"I can be very cool and very supercilious with Henry," he said. "I can
seem to make light of his apprehensions, and look down du haut de ma
grandeur on his youthful ardour. To him I can speak as if, in my
eyes, they were both children. Let me see if I can keep up the same r"le
with her. I have known the moment when I seemed about to forget it, when
Confusion and Submission seemed about to crush me with their soft
tyranny, when my tongue faltered, and I have almost let the mantle drop,
and stood in her presence, not master - no - but something else. I trust I
shall never so play the fool. It is well for a Sir Philip Nunnely to
redden when he meets her eye. He may permit himself the indulgence of
submission. He may even, without disgrace, suffer his hand to tremble
when it touches hers; but if one of her farmers were to show himself
susceptible and sentimental, he would merely prove his need of a strait
waistcoat. So far I have always done very well. She has sat near me, and
I have not shaken - more than my desk. I have encountered her looks and
smiles like - why, like a tutor, as I am. Her hand I never yet
touched - never underwent that test. Her farmer or her footman I am
not - no serf nor servant of hers have I ever been; but I am poor, and it
behoves me to look to my self-respect - not to compromise an inch of it.
What did she mean by that allusion to the cold people who petrify flesh
to marble? It pleased me - I hardly know why; I would not permit myself
to inquire. I never do indulge in scrutiny either of her language or
countenance; for if I did, I should sometimes forget common sense and
believe in romance. A strange, secret ecstasy steals through my veins at
moments. I'll not encourage - I'll not remember it. I am resolved, as
long as may be, to retain the right to say with Paul, 'I am not mad, but
speak forth the words of truth and soberness.'"

He paused, listening.

"Will she come, or will she not come?" he inquired. "How will she take
the message? Naively or disdainfully? Like a child or like a queen? Both
characters are in her nature.

"If she comes, what shall I say to her? How account, firstly, for the
freedom of the request? Shall I apologize to her? I could in all
humility; but would an apology tend to place us in the positions we
ought relatively to occupy in this matter? I must keep up the
professor, otherwise - - I hear a door."

He waited. Many minutes passed.

"She will refuse me. Henry is entreating her to come; she declines. My
petition is presumption in her eyes. Let her only come, I can teach
her to the contrary. I would rather she were a little perverse; it will
steel me. I prefer her cuirassed in pride, armed with a taunt. Her scorn
startles me from my dreams; I stand up myself. A sarcasm from her eyes
or lips puts strength into every nerve and sinew I have. Some step
approaches, and not Henry's."

The door unclosed; Miss Keeldar came in. The message, it appeared, had
found her at her needle; she brought her work in her hand. That day she
had not been riding out; she had evidently passed it quietly. She wore
her neat indoor dress and silk apron. This was no Thalestris from the
fields, but a quiet domestic character from the fireside. Mr. Moore had
her at advantage. He should have addressed her at once in solemn
accents, and with rigid mien. Perhaps he would, had she looked saucy;
but her air never showed less of crânerie . A soft kind of youthful
shyness depressed her eyelid and mantled on her cheek. The tutor stood
silent.

She made a full stop between the door and his desk.

"Did you want me, sir?" she asked.

"I ventured, Miss Keeldar, to send for you - that is, to ask an interview
of a few minutes."

She waited; she plied her needle.

"Well, sir"  not lifting her eyes , "what about?"

"Be seated first. The subject I would broach is one of some moment.
Perhaps I have hardly a right to approach it. It is possible I ought to
frame an apology; it is possible no apology can excuse me. The liberty I
have taken arises from a conversation with Henry. The boy is unhappy
about your health; all your friends are unhappy on that subject. It is
of your health I would speak."

"I am quite well," she said briefly.

"Yet changed."

"That matters to none but myself. We all change."

"Will you sit down? Formerly, Miss Keeldar, I had some influence with
you: have I any now? May I feel that what I am saying is not accounted
positive presumption?"

"Let me read some French, Mr. Moore, or I will even take a spell at the
Latin grammar, and let us proclaim a truce to all sanitary discussions."

"No, no. It is time there were discussions."

"Discuss away, then, but do not choose me for your text. I am a healthy
subject."

"Do you not think it wrong to affirm and reaffirm what is substantially
untrue?"

"I say I am well. I have neither cough, pain, nor fever."

"Is there no equivocation in that assertion? Is it the direct truth?"

"The direct truth."

Louis Moore looked at her earnestly.

"I can myself," he said, "trace no indications of actual disease. But
why, then, are you altered?"

" Am I altered?"

"We will try. We will seek a proof."

"How?"

"I ask, in the first place, do you sleep as you used to?"

"I do not; but it is not because I am ill."

"Have you the appetite you once had?"

"No; but it is not because I am ill."

"You remember this little ring fastened to my watch-chain? It was my
mother's, and is too small to pass the joint of my little finger. You
have many a time sportively purloined it. It fitted your fore-finger.
Try now."

She permitted the test. The ring dropped from the wasted little hand.
Louis picked it up, and reattached it to the chain. An uneasy flush
coloured his brow. Shirley again said, "It is not because I am ill."

"Not only have you lost sleep, appetite, and flesh," proceeded Moore,
"but your spirits are always at ebb. Besides, there is a nervous alarm
in your eye, a nervous disquiet in your manner. These peculiarities were
not formerly yours."

"Mr. Moore, we will pause here. You have exactly hit it. I am nervous.
Now, talk of something else. What wet weather we have - steady, pouring
rain!"

" You nervous? Yes; and if Miss Keeldar is nervous, it is not without a
cause. Let me reach it. Let me look nearer. The ailment is not physical.
I have suspected that. It came in one moment. I know the day. I noticed
the change. Your pain is mental."

"Not at all. It is nothing so dignified - merely nervous. Oh! dismiss the
topic."

"When it is exhausted; not till then. Nervous alarms should always be
communicated, that they may be dissipated. I wish I had the gift of
persuasion, and could incline you to speak willingly. I believe
confession, in your case, would be half equivalent to cure."

"No," said Shirley abruptly. "I wish that were at all probable; but I am
afraid it is not."

She suspended her work a moment. She was now seated. Resting her elbow
on the table, she leaned her head on her hand. Mr. Moore looked as if he
felt he had at last gained some footing in this difficult path. She was
serious, and in her wish was implied an important admission; after that
she could no longer affirm that nothing ailed her.

The tutor allowed her some minutes for repose and reflection ere he
returned to the charge. Once his lips moved to speak, but he thought
better of it, and prolonged the pause. Shirley lifted her eye to his.
Had he betrayed injudicious emotion, perhaps obstinate persistence in
silence would have been the result; but he looked calm, strong,
trustworthy.

"I had better tell you than my aunt," she said, "or than my cousins,
or my uncle. They would all make such a bustle, and it is that very
bustle I dread - the alarm, the flurry, the éclat . In short, I never
liked to be the centre of a small domestic whirlpool. You can bear a
little shock - eh?"

"A great one, if necessary."

Not a muscle of the man's frame moved, and yet his large heart beat fast
in his deep chest. What was she going to tell him? Was irremediable
mischief done?

"Had I thought it right to go to you, I would never have made a secret
of the matter one moment," she continued. "I would have told you at
once, and asked advice."

"Why was it not right to come to me?"

"It might be right - I do not mean that; but I could not do it. I
seemed to have no title to trouble you. The mishap concerned me only. I
wanted to keep it to myself, and people will not let me. I tell you, I
hate to be an object of worrying attention, or a theme for village
gossip. Besides, it may pass away without result - God knows!"

Moore, though tortured with suspense, did not demand a quick
explanation. He suffered neither gesture, glance, nor word to betray
impatience. His tranquillity tranquillized Shirley; his confidence
reassured her.

"Great effects may spring from trivial causes," she remarked, as she
loosened a bracelet from her wrist. Then, unfastening her sleeve, and
partially turning it up, "Look here, Mr. Moore."

She showed a mark in her white arm - rather a deep though healed-up
indentation - something between a burn and a cut.

"I would not show that to any one in Briarfield but you, because you can
take it quietly."

"Certainly there is nothing in the little mark to shock. Its history
will explain."

"Small as it is, it has taken my sleep away, and made me nervous, thin,
and foolish; because, on account of that little mark, I am obliged to
look forward to a possibility that has its terrors."

The sleeve was readjusted, the bracelet replaced.

"Do you know that you try me?" he said, smiling. "I am a patient sort of
man, but my pulse is quickening."

"Whatever happens, you will befriend me, Mr. Moore? You will give me the
benefit of your self-possession, and not leave me at the mercy of
agitated cowards?"

"I make no promise now. Tell me the tale, and then exact what pledge you
will."

"It is a very short tale. I took a walk with Isabella and Gertrude one
day, about three weeks ago. They reached home before me; I stayed behind
to speak to John. After leaving him, I pleased myself with lingering in
the lane, where all was very still and shady. I was tired of chattering
to the girls, and in no hurry to rejoin them. As I stood leaning against
the gate-pillar, thinking some very happy thoughts about my future
life - for that morning I imagined that events were beginning to turn as
I had long wished them to turn - - "

"Ah! Nunnely had been with her the evening before!" thought Moore
parenthetically.

"I heard a panting sound; a dog came running up the lane. I know most of
the dogs in this neighbourhood. It was Phobe, one of Mr. Sam Wynne's
pointers. The poor creature ran with her head down, her tongue hanging
out; she looked as if bruised and beaten all over. I called her. I meant
to coax her into the house and give her some water and dinner. I felt
sure she had been ill-used. Mr. Sam often flogs his pointers cruelly.
She was too flurried to know me; and when I attempted to pat her head,
she turned and snatched at my arm. She bit it so as to draw blood, then
ran panting on. Directly after, Mr. Wynne's keeper came up, carrying a
gun. He asked if I had seen a dog. I told him I had seen Phobe.

"'You had better chain up Tartar, ma'am,' he said, 'and tell your people
to keep within the house. I am after Phobe to shoot her, and the groom
is gone another way. She is raging mad.'"

Mr. Moore leaned back in his chair and folded his arms across his chest.
Miss Keeldar resumed her square of silk canvas, and continued the
creation of a wreath of Parmese violets.

"And you told no one, sought no help, no cure? You would not come to
me?"

"I got as far as the schoolroom door; there my courage failed. I
preferred to cushion the matter."

"Why? What can I demand better in this world than to be of use to you?"

"I had no claim."

"Monstrous! And you did nothing?"

"Yes. I walked straight into the laundry, where they are ironing most of
the week, now that I have so many guests in the house. While the maid
was busy crimping or starching, I took an Italian iron from the fire,
and applied the light scarlet glowing tip to my arm. I bored it well
in. It cauterized the little wound. Then I went upstairs."

"I dare say you never once groaned?"

"I am sure I don't  know. I was very miserable - not firm or tranquil at
all, I think. There was no calm in my mind."

"There was calm in your person. I remember listening the whole time we
sat at luncheon, to hear if you moved in the room above. All was quiet."

"I was sitting at the foot of the bed, wishing Phobe had not bitten
me."

"And alone. You like solitude."

"Pardon me."

"You disdain sympathy."

"Do I, Mr. Moore?"

"With your powerful mind you must feel independent of help, of advice,
of society."

"So be it, since it pleases you."

She smiled. She pursued her embroidery carefully and quickly, but her
eyelash twinkled, and then it glittered, and then a drop fell.

Mr. Moore leaned forward on his desk, moved his chair, altered his
attitude.

"If it is not so," he asked, with a peculiar, mellow change in his
voice, "how is it, then?"

"I don't  know."

"You do know, but you won't  speak. All must be locked up in yourself."

"Because it is not worth sharing."

"Because nobody can give the high price you require for your confidence.
Nobody is rich enough to purchase it. Nobody has the honour, the
intellect, the power you demand in your adviser. There is not a shoulder
in England on which you would rest your hand for support, far less a
bosom which you would permit to pillow your head. Of course you must
live alone."

"I can live alone, if need be. But the question is not how to live,
but how to die alone. That strikes me in a more grisly light."

"You apprehend the effects of the virus? You anticipate an indefinitely
threatening, dreadful doom?"

She bowed.

"You are very nervous and womanish."

"You complimented me two minutes since on my powerful mind."

"You are very womanish. If the whole affair were coolly examined and
discussed, I feel assured it would turn out that there is no danger of
your dying at all."

"Amen! I am very willing to live, if it please God. I have felt life
sweet."

"How can it be otherwise than sweet with your endowments and nature? Do
you truly expect that you will be seized with hydrophobia, and die
raving mad?"

"I expect it, and have feared it. Just now I fear nothing."

"Nor do I, on your account. I doubt whether the smallest particle of
virus mingled with your blood; and if it did, let me assure you that,
young, healthy, faultlessly sound as you are, no harm will ensue. For
the rest, I shall inquire whether the dog was really mad. I hold she was
not mad."

"Tell nobody that she bit me."

"Why should I, when I believe the bite innocuous as a cut of this
penknife? Make yourself easy. I am easy, though I value your life as
much as I do my own chance of happiness in eternity. Look up."

"Why, Mr. Moore?"

"I wish to see if you are cheered. Put your work down; raise your head."

"There - - "

"Look at me. Thank you. And is the cloud broken?"

"I fear nothing."

"Is your mind restored to its own natural sunny clime?"

"I am very content; but I want your promise."

"Dictate."

"You know, in case the worst I have feared should happen, they will
smother me. You need not smile. They will; they always do. My uncle will
be full of horror, weakness, precipitation; and that is the only
expedient which will suggest itself to him. Nobody in the house will be
self-possessed but you. Now promise to befriend me - to keep Mr. Sympson
away from me, not to let Henry come near, lest I should hurt him.
Mind - mind that you take care of yourself too. But I shall not injure
you; I know I shall not. Lock the chamber door against the surgeons;
turn them out if they get in. Let neither the young nor the old MacTurk
lay a finger on me; nor Mr. Greaves, their colleague; and lastly, if I
give trouble, with your own hand administer to me a strong
narcotic - such a sure dose of laudanum as shall leave no mistake.
 Promise to do this. "

Moore left his desk, and permitted himself the recreation of one or two
turns through the room. Stopping behind Shirley's chair, he bent over
her, and said, in a low, emphatic voice, "I promise all you ask - without
comment, without reservation."

"If female help is needed, call in my housekeeper, Mrs. Gill. Let her
lay me out if I die. She is attached to me. She wronged me again and
again, and again and again I forgave her. She now loves me, and would
not defraud me of a pin. Confidence has made her honest; forbearance has
made her kind-hearted. At this day I can trust both her integrity, her
courage, and her affection. Call her; but keep my good aunt and my timid
cousins away. Once more, promise."

"I promise."

"That is good in you," she said, looking up at him as he bent over her,
and smiling.

"Is it good? Does it comfort?"

"Very much."

"I will be with you - I and Mrs. Gill only - in any, in every extremity
where calm and fidelity are needed. No rash or coward hand shall
meddle."

"Yet you think me childish?"

"I do."

"Ah! you despise me."

"Do we despise children?"

"In fact, I am neither so strong, nor have I such pride in my strength,
as people think, Mr. Moore; nor am I so regardless of sympathy. But when
I have any grief, I fear to impart it to those I love, lest it should
pain them; and to those whom I view with indifference I cannot
condescend to complain. After all, you should not taunt me with being
childish, for if you were as unhappy as I have been for the last three
weeks, you too would want some friend."

"We all want a friend, do we not?"

"All of us that have anything good in our natures."

"Well, you have Caroline Helstone."

"Yes. And you have Mr. Hall."

"Yes. Mrs. Pryor is a wise, good woman. She can counsel you when you
need counsel."

"For your part, you have your brother Robert."

"For any right-hand defections, there is the Rev. Matthewson Helstone,
M.A., to lean upon; for any left-hand fallings-off there is Hiram Yorke,
Esq. Both elders pay you homage."

"I never saw Mrs. Yorke so motherly to any young man as she is to you. I
don't  know how you have won her heart, but she is more tender to you
than she is to her own sons. You have, besides, your sister Hortense."

"It appears we are both well provided."

"It appears so."

"How thankful we ought to be!"

"Yes."

"How contented!"

"Yes."

"For my part, I am almost contented just now, and very thankful.
Gratitude is a divine emotion. It fills the heart, but not to bursting;
it warms it, but not to fever. I like to taste leisurely of bliss.
Devoured in haste, I do not know its flavour."

Still leaning on the back of Miss Keeldar's chair, Moore watched the
rapid motion of her fingers, as the green and purple garland grew
beneath them. After a prolonged pause, he again asked, "Is the shadow
 quite gone?"

"Wholly. As I was two hours since, and as I am now, are two
different states of existence. I believe, Mr. Moore, griefs and fears
nursed in silence grow like Titan infants."

"You will cherish such feelings no more in silence?"

"Not if I dare speak."

"In using the word ' dare ,' to whom do you allude?"

"To you."

"How is it applicable to me?"

"On account of your austerity and shyness."

"Why am I austere and shy?"

"Because you are proud."

"Why am I proud?"

"I should like to know. Will you be good enough to tell me?"

"Perhaps, because I am poor, for one reason. Poverty and pride often go
together."

"That is such a nice reason. I should be charmed to discover another
that would pair with it. Mate that turtle, Mr. Moore."

"Immediately. What do you think of marrying to sober Poverty many-tinted
Caprice?"

"Are you capricious?"

" You are."

"A libel. I am steady as a rock, fixed as the polar star."

"I look out at some early hour of the day, and see a fine, perfect
rainbow, bright with promise, gloriously spanning the beclouded welkin
of life. An hour afterwards I look again: half the arch is gone, and the
rest is faded. Still later, the stern sky denies that it ever wore so
benign a symbol of hope."

"Well, Mr. Moore, you should contend against these changeful humours.
They are your besetting sin. One never knows where to have you."

"Miss Keeldar, I had once, for two years, a pupil who grew very dear to
me. Henry is dear, but she was dearer. Henry never gives me trouble;
she - well, she did. I think she vexed me twenty-three hours out of the
twenty-four - - "

"She was never with you above three hours, or at the most six at a
time."

"She sometimes spilled the draught from my cup, and stole the food from
my plate; and when she had kept me unfed for a day  and that did not
suit me, for I am a man accustomed to take my meals with reasonable
relish, and to ascribe due importance to the rational enjoyment of
creature comforts  - - "

"I know you do. I can tell what sort of dinners you like best - perfectly
well. I know precisely the dishes you prefer - - "

"She robbed these dishes of flavour, and made a fool of me besides. I
like to sleep well. In my quiet days, when I was my own man, I never
quarrelled with the night for being long, nor cursed my bed for its
thorns. She changed all this."

"Mr. Moore - - "

"And having taken from me peace of mind and ease of life, she took from
me herself - quite coolly, just as if, when she was gone, the world would
be all the same to me. I knew I should see her again at some time. At
the end of two years, it fell out that we encountered again under her
own roof, where she was mistress. How do you think she bore herself
towards me, Miss Keeldar?"

"Like one who had profited well by lessons learned from yourself."

"She received me haughtily. She meted out a wide space between us, and
kept me aloof by the reserved gesture, the rare and alienated glance,
the word calmly civil."

"She was an excellent pupil! Having seen you distant, she at once
learned to withdraw. Pray, sir, admire in her hauteur a careful
improvement on your own coolness."

"Conscience, and honour, and the most despotic necessity dragged me
apart from her, and kept me sundered with ponderous fetters. She was
free: she might have been clement."

"Never free to compromise her self-respect, to seek where she had been
shunned."

"Then she was inconsistent; she tantalized as before. When I thought I
had made up my mind to seeing in her only a lofty stranger, she would
suddenly show me such a glimpse of loving simplicity - she would warm me
with such a beam of reviving sympathy, she would gladden an hour with
converse so gentle, gay, and kindly - that I could no more shut my heart
on her image than I could close that door against her presence. Explain
why she distressed me so."

"She could not bear to be quite outcast; and then she would sometimes
get a notion into her head, on a cold, wet day, that the schoolroom was
no cheerful place, and feel it incumbent on her to go and see if you and
Henry kept up a good fire; and once there, she liked to stay."

"But she should not be changeful. If she came at all, she should come
oftener."

"There is such a thing as intrusion."

"To-morrow you will not be as you are to-day."

"I don't  know. Will you?"

"I am not mad, most noble Berenice! We may give one day to dreaming, but
the next we must awake; and I shall awake to purpose the morning you are
married to Sir Philip Nunnely. The fire shines on you and me, and shows
us very clearly in the glass, Miss Keeldar; and I have been gazing on
the picture all the time I have been talking. Look up! What a difference
between your head and mine! I look old for thirty!"

"You are so grave; you have such a square brow; and your face is sallow.
I never regard you as a young man, nor as Robert's junior."

"Don't  you? I thought not. Imagine Robert's clear-cut, handsome face
looking over my shoulder. Does not the apparition make vividly manifest
the obtuse mould of my heavy traits? There!"  he started , "I have been
expecting that wire to vibrate this last half-hour."

The dinner-bell rang, and Shirley rose.

"Mr. Moore," she said, as she gathered up her silks, "have you heard
from your brother lately? Do you know what he means by staying in town
so long? Does he talk of returning?"

"He talks of returning; but what has caused his long absence I cannot
tell. To speak the truth, I thought none in Yorkshire knew better than
yourself why he was reluctant to come home."

A crimson shadow passed across Miss Keeldar's cheek.

"Write to him and urge him to come," she said. "I know there has been no
impolicy in protracting his absence thus far. It is good to let the mill
stand, while trade is so bad; but he must not abandon the county."

"I am aware," said Louis, "that he had an interview with you the evening
before he left, and I saw him quit Fieldhead afterwards. I read his
countenance, or tried to read it. He turned from me. I divined that he
would be long away. Some fine, slight fingers have a wondrous knack at
pulverizing a man's brittle pride. I suppose Robert put too much trust
in his manly beauty and native gentlemanhood. Those are better off who,
being destitute of advantage, cannot cherish delusion. But I will write,
and say you advise his return."

"Do not say I advise his return, but that his return is advisable."

The second bell rang, and Miss Keeldar obeyed its call.




CHAPTER XXIX.

LOUIS MOORE.


Louis Moore was used to a quiet life. Being a quiet man, he endured it
better than most men would. Having a large world of his own in his own
head and heart, he tolerated confinement to a small, still corner of the
real world very patiently.

How hushed is Fieldhead this evening! All but Moore - Miss Keeldar, the
whole family of the Sympsons, even Henry - are gone to Nunnely. Sir
Philip would have them come; he wished to make them acquainted with his
mother and sisters, who are now at the priory. Kind gentleman as the
baronet is, he asked the tutor too; but the tutor would much sooner have
made an appointment with the ghost of the Earl of Huntingdon to meet
him, and a shadowy ring of his merry men, under the canopy of the
thickest, blackest, oldest oak in Nunnely Forest. Yes, he would rather
have appointed tryst with a phantom abbess, or mist-pale nun, among the
wet and weedy relics of that ruined sanctuary of theirs, mouldering in
the core of the wood. Louis Moore longs to have something near him
to-night; but not the boy-baronet, nor his benevolent but stern mother,
nor his patrician sisters, nor one soul of the Sympsons.

This night is not calm; the equinox still struggles in its storms. The
wild rains of the day are abated; the great single cloud disparts and
rolls away from heaven, not passing and leaving a sea all sapphire, but
tossed buoyant before a continued, long-sounding, high-rushing moonlight
tempest. The moon reigns glorious, glad of the gale, as glad as if she
gave herself to his fierce caress with love. No Endymion will watch for
his goddess to-night. There are no flocks out on the mountains; and it
is well, for to-night she welcomes Aolus.

Moore, sitting in the schoolroom, heard the storm roar round the other
gable and along the hall-front. This end was sheltered. He wanted no
shelter; he desired no subdued sounds or screened position.

"All the parlours are empty," said he. "I am sick at heart of this
cell."

He left it, and went where the casements, larger and freer than the
branch-screened lattice of his own apartment, admitted unimpeded the
dark-blue, the silver-fleeced, the stirring and sweeping vision of the
autumn night-sky. He carried no candle; unneeded was lamp or fire. The
broad and clear though cloud-crossed and fluctuating beam of the moon
shone on every floor and wall.

Moore wanders through all the rooms. He seems following a phantom from
parlour to parlour. In the oak room he stops. This is not chill, and
polished, and fireless like the salon . The hearth is hot and ruddy;
the cinders tinkle in the intense heat of their clear glow; near the rug
is a little work-table, a desk upon it, a chair near it.

Does the vision Moore has tracked occupy that chair? You would think so,
could you see him standing before it. There is as much interest now in
his eye, and as much significance in his face, as if in this household
solitude he had found a living companion, and was going to speak to it.

He makes discoveries. A bag - a small satin bag - hangs on the chair-back.
The desk is open, the keys are in the lock. A pretty seal, a silver pen,
a crimson berry or two of ripe fruit on a green leaf, a small, clean,
delicate glove - these trifles at once decorate and disarrange the stand
they strew. Order forbids details in a picture - she puts them tidily
away; but details give charm.

Moore spoke.

"Her mark," he said. "Here she has been - careless, attractive
thing! - called away in haste, doubtless, and forgetting to return and
put all to rights. Why does she leave fascination in her footprints?
Whence did she acquire the gift to be heedless and never offend? There
is always something to chide in her, and the reprimand never settles in
displeasure on the heart, but, for her lover or her husband, when it had
trickled a while in words, would naturally melt from his lips in a kiss.
Better pass half an hour in remonstrating with her than a day in
admiring or praising any other woman alive. Am I muttering?
soliloquizing? Stop that."

He did stop it. He stood thinking, and then he made an arrangement for
his evening's comfort.

He dropped the curtains over the broad window and regal moon. He shut
out sovereign and court and starry armies; he added fuel to the hot but
fast-wasting fire; he lit a candle, of which there were a pair on the
table; he placed another chair opposite that near the workstand; and
then he sat down. His next movement was to take from his pocket a small,
thick book of blank paper, to produce a pencil, and to begin to write in
a cramp, compact hand. Come near, by all means, reader. Do not be shy.
Stoop over his shoulder fearlessly, and read as he scribbles.

"It is nine o'clock; the carriage will not return before eleven, I am
certain. Freedom is mine till then; till then I may occupy her room, sit
opposite her chair, rest my elbow on her table, have her little
mementoes about me.

"I used rather to like Solitude - to fancy her a somewhat quiet and
serious, yet fair nymph; an Oread, descending to me from lone
mountain-passes, something of the blue mist of hills in her array and of
their chill breeze in her breath, but much also of their solemn beauty
in her mien. I once could court her serenely, and imagine my heart
easier when I held her to it - all mute, but majestic.

"Since that day I called S. to me in the schoolroom, and she came and
sat so near my side; since she opened the trouble of her mind to me,
asked my protection, appealed to my strength - since that hour I abhor
Solitude. Cold abstraction, fleshless skeleton, daughter, mother, and
mate of Death!

"It is pleasant to write about what is near and dear as the core of my
heart. None can deprive me of this little book, and through this pencil
I can say to it what I will - say what I dare utter to nothing
living - say what I dare not think aloud.

"We have scarcely encountered each other since that evening. Once, when
I was alone in the drawing-room, seeking a book of Henry's, she entered,
dressed for a concert at Stilbro'. Shyness - her shyness, not
mine - drew a silver veil between us. Much cant have I heard and read
about 'maiden modesty,' but, properly used, and not hackneyed, the words
are good and appropriate words. As she passed to the window, after
tacitly but gracefully recognizing me, I could call her nothing in my
own mind save 'stainless virgin.' To my perception, a delicate
splendour robed her, and the modesty of girlhood was her halo. I may be
the most fatuous, as I am one of the plainest, of men, but in truth that
shyness of hers touched me exquisitely; it flattered my finest
sensations. I looked a stupid block, I dare say. I was alive with a life
of Paradise, as she turned her glance from my glance, and softly
averted her head to hide the suffusion of her cheek.

"I know this is the talk of a dreamer - of a rapt, romantic lunatic. I
 do dream. I will dream now and then; and if she has inspired romance
into my prosaic composition, how can I help it?

"What a child she is sometimes! What an unsophisticated, untaught thing!
I see her now looking up into my face, and entreating me to prevent them
from smothering her, and to be sure and give her a strong narcotic. I
see her confessing that she was not so self-sufficing, so independent of
sympathy, as people thought. I see the secret tear drop quietly from her
eyelash. She said I thought her childish, and I did. She imagined I
despised her. Despised her! It was unutterably sweet to feel myself at
once near her and above her - to be conscious of a natural right and
power to sustain her, as a husband should sustain his wife.

"I worship her perfections; but it is her faults, or at least her
foibles, that bring her near to me, that nestle her to my heart, that
fold her about with my love, and that for a most selfish but
deeply-natural reason. These faults are the steps by which I mount to
ascendency over her. If she rose a trimmed, artificial mound, without
inequality, what vantage would she offer the foot? It is the natural
hill, with its mossy breaks and hollows, whose slope invites ascent,
whose summit it is pleasure to gain.

"To leave metaphor. It delights my eye to look on her. She suits me. If
I were a king and she the housemaid that swept my palace-stairs, across
all that space between us my eye would recognize her qualities; a true
pulse would beat for her in my heart, though an unspanned gulf made
acquaintance impossible. If I were a gentleman, and she waited on me as
a servant, I could not help liking that Shirley. Take from her her
education; take her ornaments, her sumptuous dress, all extrinsic
advantages; take all grace, but such as the symmetry of her form renders
inevitable; present her to me at a cottage door, in a stuff gown; let
her offer me there a draught of water, with that smile, with that warm
good-will with which she now dispenses manorial hospitality - I should
like her. I should wish to stay an hour; I should linger to talk with
that rustic. I should not feel as I now do; I should find in her
nothing divine; but whenever I met the young peasant, it would be with
pleasure; whenever I left her, it would be with regret.

"How culpably careless in her to leave her desk open, where I know she
has money! In the lock hang the keys of all her repositories, of her
very jewel-casket. There is a purse in that little satin bag; I see the
tassel of silver beads hanging out. That spectacle would provoke my
brother Robert. All her little failings would, I know, be a source of
irritation to him. If they vex me it is a most pleasurable vexation. I
delight to find her at fault; and were I always resident with her, I am
aware she would be no niggard in thus ministering to my enjoyment. She
would just give me something to do, to rectify - a theme for my tutor
lectures. I never lecture Henry, never feel disposed to do so. If he
does wrong - and that is very seldom, dear, excellent lad! - a word
suffices. Often I do no more than shake my head. But the moment her
 minois mutin meets my eye, expostulatory words crowd to my lips. From
a taciturn man I believe she would transform me into a talker. Whence
comes the delight I take in that talk? It puzzles myself sometimes. The
more crâne, malin, taquin is her mood, consequently the clearer
occasion she gives me for disapprobation, the more I seek her, the
better I like her. She is never wilder than when equipped in her habit
and hat, never less manageable than when she and Zoë come in fiery from
a race with the wind on the hills; and I confess it - to this mute page I
may confess it - I have waited an hour in the court for the chance of
witnessing her return, and for the dearer chance of receiving her in my
arms from the saddle. I have noticed  again it is to this page only I
would make the remark  that she will never permit any man but myself to
render her that assistance. I have seen her politely decline Sir Philip
Nunnely's aid. She is always mighty gentle with her young baronet,
mighty tender for his feelings, forsooth, and of his very thin-skinned
 amour propre . I have marked her haughtily reject Sam Wynne's. Now I
know - my heart knows it, for it has felt it - that she resigns herself to
me unreluctantly. Is she conscious how my strength rejoices to serve
her? I myself am not her slave - I declare it - but my faculties gather
to her beauty, like the genii to the glisten of the lamp. All my
knowledge, all my prudence, all my calm, and all my power stand in her
presence humbly waiting a task. How glad they are when a mandate comes!
What joy they take in the toils she assigns! Does she know it?

"I have called her careless. It is remarkable that her carelessness
never compromises her refinement. Indeed, through this very loophole of
character, the reality, depth, genuineness of that refinement may be
ascertained. A whole garment sometimes covers meagreness and
malformation; through a rent sleeve a fair round arm may be revealed. I
have seen and handled many of her possessions, because they are
frequently astray. I never saw anything that did not proclaim the
lady - nothing sordid, nothing soiled. In one sense she is as scrupulous
as, in another, she is unthinking. As a peasant girl, she would go ever
trim and cleanly. Look at the pure kid of this little glove, at the
fresh, unsullied satin of the bag.

"What a difference there is between S. and that pearl C. H.! Caroline, I
fancy, is the soul of conscientious punctuality and nice exactitude. She
would precisely suit the domestic habits of a certain fastidious kinsman
of mine - so delicate, dexterous, quaint, quick, quiet - all done to a
minute, all arranged to a strawbreadth. She would suit Robert. But what
could I do with anything so nearly faultless? She is my equal, poor
as myself. She is certainly pretty: a little Raffaelle head
hers - Raffaelle in feature, quite English in expression, all insular
grace and purity; but where is there anything to alter, anything to
endure, anything to reprimand, to be anxious about? There she is, a lily
of the valley, untinted, needing no tint. What change could improve her?
What pencil dare to paint? My sweetheart, if I ever have one, must
bear nearer affinity to the rose - a sweet, lively delight guarded with
prickly peril. My wife, if I ever marry, must stir my great frame with
a sting now and then; she must furnish use to her husband's vast mass of
patience. I was not made so enduring to be mated with a lamb; I should
find more congenial responsibility in the charge of a young lioness or
leopardess. I like few things sweet but what are likewise pungent - few
things bright but what are likewise hot. I like the summer day, whose
sun makes fruit blush and corn blanch. Beauty is never so beautiful as
when, if I tease it, it wreathes back on me with spirit. Fascination is
never so imperial as when, roused and half ireful, she threatens
transformation to fierceness. I fear I should tire of the mute,
monotonous innocence of the lamb; I should ere long feel as burdensome
the nestling dove which never stirred in my bosom; but my patience would
exult in stilling the flutterings and training the energies of the
restless merlin. In managing the wild instincts of the scarce manageable
 bete fauve my powers would revel.

"O my pupil! O Peri! too mutinous for heaven, too innocent for hell,
never shall I do more than see, and worship, and wish for thee. Alas!
knowing I could make thee happy, will it be my doom to see thee
possessed by those who have not that power?

"However kindly the hand, if it is feeble, it cannot bend Shirley; and
she must be bent. It cannot curb her; and she must be curbed.

"Beware, Sir Philip Nunnely! I never see you walking or sitting at her
side, and observe her lips compressed, or her brow knit, in resolute
endurance of some trait of your character which she neither admires nor
likes, in determined toleration of some weakness she believes atoned for
by a virtue, but which annoys her despite that belief; I never mark the
grave glow of her face, the unsmiling sparkle of her eye, the slight
recoil of her whole frame when you draw a little too near, and gaze a
little too expressively, and whisper a little too warmly - I never
witness these things but I think of the fable of Semele reversed.

"It is not the daughter of Cadmus I see, nor do I realize her fatal
longing to look on Jove in the majesty of his god-head. It is a priest
of Juno that stands before me, watching late and lone at a shrine in an
Argive temple. For years of solitary ministry he has lived on dreams.
There is divine madness upon him. He loves the idol he serves, and prays
day and night that his frenzy may be fed, and that the Ox-eyed may smile
on her votary. She has heard; she will be propitious. All Argos
slumbers. The doors of the temple are shut; the priest waits at the
altar.

"A shock of heaven and earth is felt - not by the slumbering city, only
by that lonely watcher, brave and unshaken in his fanaticism. In the
midst of silence, with no preluding sound, he is wrapped in sudden
light. Through the roof, through the rent, wide-yawning, vast,
white-blazing blue of heaven above, pours a wondrous descent, dread as
the downrushing of stars. He has what he asked. Withdraw - forbear to
look - I am blinded. I hear in that fane an unspeakable sound. Would that
I could not hear it! I see an insufferable glory burning terribly
between the pillars. Gods be merciful and quench it!

"A pious Argive enters to make an early offering in the cool dawn of
morning. There was thunder in the night; the bolt fell here. The shrine
is shivered, the marble pavement round split and blackened. Saturnia's
statue rises chaste, grand, untouched; at her feet piled ashes lie pale.
No priest remains; he who watched will be seen no more.

          

"There is the carriage! Let me lock up the desk and pocket the keys. She
will be seeking them to-morrow; she will have to come to me. I hear her:
'Mr. Moore, have you seen my keys?'

"So she will say, in her clear voice, speaking with reluctance, looking
ashamed, conscious that this is the twentieth time of asking. I will
tantalize her, keep her with me, expecting, doubting; and when I do 
restore them, it shall not be without a lecture. Here is the bag, too,
and the purse; the glove - pen - seal. She shall wring them all out of me
slowly and separately - only by confession, penitence, entreaty. I never
can touch her hand, or a ringlet of her head, or a ribbon of her dress,
but I will make privileges for myself. Every feature of her face, her
bright eyes, her lips, shall go through each change they know, for my
pleasure - display each exquisite variety of glance and curve, to
delight, thrill, perhaps more hopelessly to enchain me. If I must be her
slave, I will not lose my freedom for nothing."

He locked the desk, pocketed all the property, and went.




CHAPTER XXX.

RUSHEDGE - A CONFESSIONAL.


Everybody said it was high time for Mr. Moore to return home. All
Briarfield wondered at his strange absence, and Whinbury and Nunnely
brought each its separate contribution of amazement.

Was it known why he stayed away? Yes. It was known twenty - forty times
over, there being at least forty plausible reasons adduced to account
for the unaccountable circumstance. Business it was not - that the
gossips agreed. He had achieved the business on which he departed long
ago. His four ringleaders he had soon scented out and run down. He had
attended their trial, heard their conviction and sentence, and seen them
safely shipped prior to transportation.

This was known at Briarfield. The newspapers had reported it. The
 Stilbro' Courier had given every particular, with amplifications. None
applauded his perseverance or hailed his success, though the mill-owners
were glad of it, trusting that the terrors of law vindicated would
henceforward paralyze the sinister valour of disaffection. Disaffection,
however, was still heard muttering to himself. He swore ominous oaths
over the drugged beer of alehouses, and drank strange toasts in fiery
British gin.

One report affirmed that Moore dared not come to Yorkshire; he knew
his life was not worth an hour's purchase if he did.

"I'll tell him that," said Mr. Yorke, when his foreman mentioned the
rumour; "and if that does not bring him home full gallop, nothing
will."

Either that or some other motive prevailed at last to recall him. He
announced to Joe Scott the day he should arrive at Stilbro', desiring
his hackney to be sent to the George for his accommodation; and Joe
Scott having informed Mr. Yorke, that gentleman made it in his way to
meet him.

It was market-day. Moore arrived in time to take his usual place at the
market dinner. As something of a stranger, and as a man of note and
action, the assembled manufacturers received him with a certain
distinction. Some, who in public would scarcely have dared to
acknowledge his acquaintance, lest a little of the hate and vengeance
laid up in store for him should perchance have fallen on them, in
private hailed him as in some sort their champion. When the wine had
circulated, their respect would have kindled to enthusiasm had not
Moore's unshaken nonchalance held it in a damp, low, smouldering state.

Mr. Yorke, the permanent president of these dinners, witnessed his young
friend's bearing with exceeding complacency. If one thing could stir his
temper or excite his contempt more than another, it was to see a man
befooled by flattery or elate with popularity. If one thing smoothed,
soothed, and charmed him especially, it was the spectacle of a public
character incapable of relishing his publicity - incapable , I say.
Disdain would but have incensed; it was indifference that appeased his
rough spirit.

Robert, leaning back in his chair, quiet and almost surly, while the
clothiers and blanket-makers vaunted his prowess and rehearsed his
deeds - many of them interspersing their flatteries with coarse
invectives against the operative class - was a delectable sight for Mr.
Yorke. His heart tingled with the pleasing conviction that these gross
eulogiums shamed Moore deeply, and made him half scorn himself and his
work. On abuse, on reproach, on calumny, it is easy to smile; but
painful indeed is the panegyric of those we contemn. Often had Moore
gazed with a brilliant countenance over howling crowds from a hostile
hustings. He had breasted the storm of unpopularity with gallant bearing
and soul elate; but he drooped his head under the half-bred tradesmen's
praise, and shrank chagrined before their congratulations.

Yorke could not help asking him how he liked his supporters, and whether
he did not think they did honour to his cause. "But it is a pity, lad,"
he added, "that you did not hang these four samples of the unwashed. If
you had managed that feat, the gentry here would have riven the horses
out of the coach, yoked to a score of asses, and drawn you into Stilbro'
like a conquering general."

Moore soon forsook the wine, broke from the party, and took the road.
In less than five minutes Mr. Yorke followed him. They rode out of
Stilbro' together.

It was early to go home, but yet it was late in the day. The last ray of
the sun had already faded from the cloud-edges, and the October night
was casting over the moorlands the shadow of her approach.

Mr. Yorke, moderately exhilarated with his moderate libations, and not
displeased to see young Moore again in Yorkshire, and to have him for
his comrade during the long ride home, took the discourse much to
himself. He touched briefly, but scoffingly, on the trials and the
conviction; he passed thence to the gossip of the neighbourhood, and ere
long he attacked Moore on his own personal concerns.

"Bob, I believe you are worsted, and you deserve it. All was smooth.
Fortune had fallen in love with you. She had decreed you the first prize
in her wheel - twenty thousand pounds; she only required that you should
hold your hand out and take it. And what did you do? You called for a
horse and rode a-hunting to Warwickshire. Your sweetheart - Fortune, I
mean - was perfectly indulgent. She said, 'I'll excuse him; he's young.'
She waited, like 'Patience on a monument,' till the chase was over and
the vermin-prey run down. She expected you would come back then, and be
a good lad. You might still have had her first prize.

"It capped her beyond expression, and me too, to find that, instead of
thundering home in a breakneck gallop and laying your assize laurels at
her feet, you coolly took coach up to London. What you have done there
Satan knows; nothing in this world, I believe, but sat and sulked. Your
face was never lily fair, but it is olive green now. You're not as bonny
as you were, man."

"And who is to have this prize you talk so much about?"

"Only a baronet; that is all. I have not a doubt in my own mind you've 
lost her. She will be Lady Nunnely before Christmas."

"Hem! Quite probable."

"But she need not to have been. Fool of a lad! I swear you might have
had her."

"By what token, Mr. Yorke?"

"By every token - by the light of her eyes, the red of her cheeks. Red
they grew when your name was mentioned, though of custom they are pale."

"My chance is quite over, I suppose?"

"It ought to be. But try; it is worth trying. I call this Sir Philip
milk and water. And then he writes verses, they say - tags rhymes. You 
are above that, Bob, at all events."

"Would you advise me to propose, late as it is, Mr. Yorke - at the
eleventh hour?"

"You can but make the experiment, Robert. If she has a fancy for
you - and, on my conscience, I believe she has or had - she will forgive
much. But, my lad, you are laughing. Is it at me? You had better grin at
your own perverseness. I see, however, you laugh at the wrong side of
your mouth. You have as sour a look at this moment as one need wish to
see."

"I have so quarrelled with myself, Yorke. I have so kicked against the
pricks, and struggled in a strait waistcoat, and dislocated my wrists
with wrenching them in handcuffs, and battered my hard head by driving
it against a harder wall."

"Ha! I'm glad to hear that. Sharp exercise yon! I hope it has done you
good - ta'en some of the self-conceit out of you?"

"Self-conceit? What is it? Self-respect, self-tolerance even, what are
they? Do you sell the articles? Do you know anybody who does? Give an
indication. They would find in me a liberal chapman. I would part with
my last guinea this minute to buy."

"Is it so with you, Robert? I find that spicy. I like a man to speak his
mind. What has gone wrong?"

"The machinery of all my nature; the whole enginery of this human mill;
the boiler, which I take to be the heart, is fit to burst."

"That suld be putten i' print; it's striking. It's almost blank verse.
Ye'll be jingling into poetry just e'now. If the afflatus comes, give
way, Robert. Never heed me; I'll bear it this whet  time ."

"Hideous, abhorrent, base blunder! You may commit in a moment what you
will rue for years - what life cannot cancel."

"Lad, go on. I call it pie, nuts, sugar-candy. I like the taste
uncommonly. Go on. It will do you good to talk. The moor is before us
now, and there is no life for many a mile round."

"I will talk. I am not ashamed to tell. There is a sort of wild cat in
my breast, and I choose that you shall hear how it can yell."

"To me it is music. What grand voices you and Louis have! When Louis
sings - tones off like a soft, deep bell - I've  felt myself tremble again.
The night is still. It listens. It is just leaning down to you, like a
black priest to a blacker penitent. Confess, lad. Smooth naught down. Be
candid as a convicted, justified, sanctified Methody at an experience
meeting. Make yourself as wicked as Beelzebub. It will ease your mind."

"As mean as Mammon, you would say. Yorke, if I got off horseback and
laid myself down across the road, would you have the goodness to gallop
over me, backwards and forwards, about twenty times?"

"Wi' all the pleasure in life, if there were no such thing as a
coroner's inquest."

"Hiram Yorke, I certainly believed she loved me. I have seen her eyes
sparkle radiantly when she has found me out in a crowd; she has flushed
up crimson when she has offered me her hand, and said, 'How do you do,
Mr. Moore?'

"My name had a magical influence over her. When others uttered it she
changed countenance - I know she did. She pronounced it herself in the
most musical of her many musical tones. She was cordial to me; she took
an interest in me; she was anxious about me; she wished me well; she
sought, she seized every opportunity to benefit me. I considered,
paused, watched, weighed, wondered. I could come to but one
conclusion - this is love.

"I looked at her, Yorke. I saw in her youth and a species of beauty. I
saw power in her. Her wealth offered me the redemption of my honour and
my standing. I owed her gratitude. She had aided me substantially and
effectually by a loan of five thousand pounds. Could I remember these
things? Could I believe she loved me? Could I hear wisdom urge me to
marry her, and disregard every dear advantage, disbelieve every
flattering suggestion, disdain every well-weighed counsel, turn and
leave her? Young, graceful, gracious - my benefactress, attached to me,
enamoured of me. I used to say so to myself; dwell on the word; mouth it
over and over again; swell over it with a pleasant, pompous complacency,
with an admiration dedicated entirely to myself, and unimpaired even by
esteem for her; indeed I smiled in deep secrecy at her naiveté and
simplicity in being the first to love, and to show it. That whip of
yours seems to have a good heavy handle, Yorke; you can swing it about
your head and knock me out of the saddle, if you choose. I should rather
relish a loundering whack."

"Tak patience, Robert, till the moon rises and I can see you. Speak
plain out - did you love her or not? I could like to know. I feel
curious."

"Sir - sir - I say - she is very pretty, in her own style, and very
attractive. She has a look, at times, of a thing made out of fire and
air, at which I stand and marvel, without a thought of clasping and
kissing it. I felt in her a powerful magnet to my interest and vanity. I
never felt as if nature meant her to be my other and better self. When a
question on that head rushed upon me, I flung it off, saying brutally I
should be rich with her and ruined without her - vowing I would be
practical, and not romantic."

"A very sensible resolve. What mischief came of it, Bob?"

"With this sensible resolve I walked up to Fieldhead one night last
August. It was the very eve of my departure for Birmingham; for, you
see, I wanted to secure Fortune's splendid prize. I had previously
dispatched a note requesting a private interview. I found her at home,
and alone.

"She received me without embarrassment, for she thought I came on
business. I was embarrassed enough, but determined. I hardly know how
I got the operation over; but I went to work in a hard, firm
fashion - frightful enough, I dare say. I sternly offered myself - my fine
person - with my debts, of course, as a settlement.

"It vexed me, it kindled my ire, to find that she neither blushed,
trembled, nor looked down. She responded, 'I doubt whether I have
understood you, Mr. Moore.'

"And I had to go over the whole proposal twice, and word it as plainly
as A B C, before she would fully take it in. And then, what did she do?
Instead of faltering a sweet Yes, or maintaining a soft, confused
silence  which would have been as good , she started up, walked twice
fast through the room, in the way that she only does, and no other
woman, and ejaculated, 'God bless me!'

"Yorke, I stood on the hearth, backed by the mantelpiece; against it I
leaned, and prepared for anything - everything. I knew my doom, and I
knew myself. There was no misunderstanding her aspect and voice. She
stopped and looked at me.

"'God bless me!' she piteously repeated, in that shocked, indignant, yet
saddened accent. 'You have made a strange proposal - strange from you ;
and if you knew how strangely you worded it and looked it, you would be
startled at yourself. You spoke like a brigand who demanded my purse
rather than like a lover who asked my heart.'

"A queer sentence, was it not, Yorke? And I knew, as she uttered it, it
was true as queer. Her words were a mirror in which I saw myself.

"I looked at her, dumb and wolfish. She at once enraged and shamed me.

"'Gérard Moore, you know you don't  love Shirley Keeldar.' I might have
broken out into false swearing - vowed that I did love her; but I could
not lie in her pure face. I could not perjure myself in her truthful
presence. Besides, such hollow oaths would have been vain as void. She
would no more have believed me than she would have believed the ghost of
Judas, had he broken from the night and stood before her. Her female
heart had finer perceptions than to be cheated into mistaking my
half-coarse, half-cold admiration for true-throbbing, manly love.

"What next happened? you will say, Mr. Yorke.

"Why, she sat down in the window-seat and cried. She cried passionately.
Her eyes not only rained but lightened. They flashed, open, large, dark,
haughty, upon me. They said, 'You have pained me; you have outraged me;
you have deceived me.'

"She added words soon to looks.

"'I did respect - I did admire - I did like you,' she said - 'yes, as
much as if you were my brother; and you - you want to make a
speculation of me. You would immolate me to that mill, your Moloch!'

"I had the common sense to abstain from any word of excuse, any attempt
at palliation. I stood to be scorned.

"Sold to the devil for the time being, I was certainly infatuated. When
I did speak, what do you think I said?

"'Whatever my own feelings were, I was persuaded you loved me , Miss
Keeldar.'

"Beautiful, was it not? She sat quite confounded. 'Is it Robert Moore
that speaks?' I heard her mutter. 'Is it a man - or something lower?'

"'Do you mean,' she asked aloud - 'do you mean you thought I loved you as
we love those we wish to marry?'

"It was my meaning, and I said so.

"'You conceived an idea obnoxious to a woman's feelings,' was her
answer. 'You have announced it in a fashion revolting to a woman's soul.
You insinuate that all the frank kindness I have shown you has been a
complicated, a bold, and an immodest manouvre to ensnare a husband. You
imply that at last you come here out of pity to offer me your hand,
because I have courted you. Let me say this: Your sight is jaundiced;
you have seen wrong. Your mind is warped; you have judged wrong. Your
tongue betrays you; you now speak wrong. I never loved you. Be at rest
there. My heart is as pure of passion for you as yours is barren of
affection for me.'

"I hope I was answered, Yorke?

"'I seem to be a blind, besotted sort of person,' was my remark.

"' Loved you!' she cried. 'Why, I have been as frank with you as a
sister - never shunned you, never feared you. You cannot,' she affirmed
triumphantly - 'you cannot make me tremble with your coming, nor
accelerate my pulse by your influence.'

"I alleged that often, when she spoke to me, she blushed, and that the
sound of my name moved her.

"'Not for your sake!' she declared briefly. I urged explanation, but
could get none.

"'When I sat beside you at the school feast, did you think I loved you
then? When I stopped you in Maythorn Lane, did you think I loved you
then? When I called on you in the counting-house, when I walked with you
on the pavement, did you think I loved you then?'

"So she questioned me; and I said I did.

"By the Lord! Yorke, she rose, she grew tall, she expanded and refined
almost to flame. There was a trembling all through her, as in live coal
when its vivid vermilion is hottest.

"'That is to say that you have the worst opinion of me; that you deny me
the possession of all I value most. That is to say that I am a traitor
to all my sisters; that I have acted as no woman can act without
degrading herself and her sex; that I have sought where the incorrupt of
my kind naturally scorn and abhor to seek.' She and I were silent for
many a minute. 'Lucifer, Star of the Morning,' she went on, 'thou art
fallen! You, once high in my esteem, are hurled down; you, once intimate
in my friendship, are cast out. Go!'

"I went not. I had heard her voice tremble, seen her lip quiver. I knew
another storm of tears would fall, and then I believed some calm and
some sunshine must come, and I would wait for it.

"As fast, but more quietly than before, the warm rain streamed down.
There was another sound in her weeping - a softer, more regretful sound.
While I watched, her eyes lifted to me a gaze more reproachful than
haughty, more mournful than incensed.

"'O Moore!' said she. It was worse than 'Et tu, Brute!'

"I relieved myself by what should have been a sigh, but it became a
groan. A sense of Cain-like desolation made my breast ache.

"'There has been error in what I have done,' I said, 'and it has won me
bitter wages, which I will go and spend far from her who gave them.'

"I took my hat. All the time I could not have borne to depart so, and I
believed she would not let me. Nor would she but for the mortal pang I
had given her pride, that cowed her compassion and kept her silent.

"I was obliged to turn back of my own accord when I reached the door, to
approach her, and to say, 'Forgive me.'

"'I could, if there was not myself to forgive too,' was her reply; 'but
to mislead a sagacious man so far I must have done wrong.'

"I broke out suddenly with some declamation I do not remember. I know
that it was sincere, and that my wish and aim were to absolve her to
herself. In fact, in her case self-accusation was a chimera.

"At last she extended her hand. For the first time I wished to take her
in my arms and kiss her. I did kiss her hand many times.

"'Some day we shall be friends again,' she said, 'when you have had time
to read my actions and motives in a true light, and not so horribly to
misinterpret them. Time may give you the right key to all. Then,
perhaps, you will comprehend me, and then we shall be reconciled.'

"Farewell drops rolled slow down her cheeks. She wiped them away.

"'I am sorry for what has happened - deeply sorry,' she sobbed. So was I,
God knows! Thus were we severed."

"A queer tale!" commented Mr. Yorke.

"I'll do it no more," vowed his companion; "never more will I mention
marriage to a woman unless I feel love. Henceforth credit and commerce
may take care of themselves. Bankruptcy may come when it lists. I have
done with slavish fear of disaster. I mean to work diligently, wait
patiently, bear steadily. Let the worst come, I will take my axe and an
emigrant's berth, and go out with Louis to the West; he and I have
settled it. No woman shall ever again look at me as Miss Keeldar looked,
ever again feel towards me as Miss Keeldar felt. In no woman's presence
will I ever again stand at once such a fool and such a knave, such a
brute and such a puppy."

"Tut!" said the imperturbable Yorke, "you make too much of it; but
still, I say, I am capped. Firstly, that she did not love you; and
secondly, that you did not love her. You are both young; you are both
handsome; you are both well enough for wit and even for temper - take you
on the right side. What ailed you that you could not agree?"

"We never have been, never could be at home with each other,
Yorke. Admire each other as we might at a distance, still we jarred when
we came very near. I have sat at one side of a room and observed her at
the other, perhaps in an excited, genial moment, when she had some of
her favourites round her - her old beaux, for instance, yourself and
Helstone, with whom she is so playful, pleasant, and eloquent. I have
watched her when she was most natural, most lively, and most lovely; my
judgment has pronounced her beautiful. Beautiful she is at times, when
her mood and her array partake of the splendid. I have drawn a little
nearer, feeling that our terms of acquaintance gave me the right of
approach. I have joined the circle round her seat, caught her eye, and
mastered her attention; then we have conversed; and others, thinking me,
perhaps, peculiarly privileged, have withdrawn by degrees, and left us
alone. Were we happy thus left? For myself, I must say No. Always a
feeling of constraint came over me; always I was disposed to be stern
and strange. We talked politics and business. No soft sense of domestic
intimacy ever opened our hearts, or thawed our language and made it flow
easy and limpid. If we had confidences, they were confidences of the
counting-house, not of the heart. Nothing in her cherished affection in
me, made me better, gentler; she only stirred my brain and whetted my
acuteness. She never crept into my heart or influenced its pulse; and
for this good reason, no doubt, because I had not the secret of making
her love me."

"Well, lad, it is a queer thing. I might laugh at thee, and reckon to
despise thy refinements; but as it is dark night and we are by
ourselves, I don't  mind telling thee that thy talk brings back a glimpse
of my own past life. Twenty-five years ago I tried to persuade a
beautiful woman to love me, and she would not. I had not the key to her
nature; she was a stone wall to me, doorless and windowless."

"But you loved her , Yorke; you worshipped Mary Cave. Your conduct,
after all, was that of a man - never of a fortune-hunter."

"Ay, I did love her; but then she was beautiful as the moon we do
 not see to-night. There is naught like her in these days. Miss
Helstone, maybe, has a look of her, but nobody else."

"Who has a look of her?"

"That black-coated tyrant's niece - that quiet, delicate Miss Helstone.
Many a time I have put on my spectacles to look at the lassie in church,
because she has gentle blue een, wi' long lashes; and when she sits in
shadow, and is very still and very pale, and is, happen, about to fall
asleep wi' the length of the sermon and the heat of the biggin', she is
as like one of Canova's marbles as aught else."

"Was Mary Cave in that style?"

"Far grander! - less lass-like and flesh-like. You wondered why she
hadn't  wings and a crown. She was a stately, peaceful angel was my
Mary."

"And you could not persuade her to love you?"

"Not with all I could do, though I prayed Heaven many a time, on my
bended knees, to help me."

"Mary Cave was not what you think her, Yorke. I have seen her picture at
the rectory. She is no angel, but a fair, regular-featured,
taciturn-looking woman - rather too white and lifeless for my taste. But,
supposing she had been something better than she was - - "

"Robert," interrupted Yorke, "I could fell you off your horse at this
moment. However, I'll hold my hand. Reason tells me you are right and I
am wrong. I know well enough that the passion I still have is only the
remnant of an illusion. If Miss Cave had possessed either feeling or
sense, she could not have been so perfectly impassible to my regard as
she showed herself; she must have preferred me to that copper-faced
despot."

"Supposing, Yorke, she had been educated  no women were educated in
those days ; supposing she had possessed a thoughtful, original mind, a
love of knowledge, a wish for information, which she took an artless
delight in receiving from your lips, and having measured out to her by
your hand; supposing her conversation, when she sat at your side, was
fertile, varied, imbued with a picturesque grace and genial interest,
quiet flowing but clear and bounteous; supposing that when you stood
near her by chance, or when you sat near her by design, comfort at once
became your atmosphere, and content your element; supposing that
whenever her face was under your gaze, or her idea filled your thoughts,
you gradually ceased to be hard and anxious, and pure affection, love of
home, thirst for sweet discourse, unselfish longing to protect and
cherish, replaced the sordid, cankering calculations of your trade;
supposing, with all this, that many a time, when you had been so happy
as to possess your Mary's little hand, you had felt it tremble as you
held it, just as a warm little bird trembles when you take it from its
nest; supposing you had noticed her shrink into the background on your
entrance into a room, yet if you sought her in her retreat she welcomed
you with the sweetest smile that ever lit a fair virgin face, and only
turned her eyes from the encounter of your own lest their clearness
should reveal too much; supposing, in short, your Mary had been not
cold, but modest; not vacant, but reflective; not obtuse, but sensitive;
not inane, but innocent; not prudish, but pure, - would you have left her
to court another woman for her wealth?"

Mr. Yorke raised his hat, wiped his forehead with his handkerchief.

"The moon is up," was his first not quite relevant remark, pointing with
his whip across the moor. "There she is, rising into the haze, staring
at us wi' a strange red glower. She is no more silver than old
Helstone's brow is ivory. What does she mean by leaning her cheek on
Rushedge i' that way, and looking at us wi' a scowl and a menace?"

"Yorke, if Mary had loved you silently yet faithfully, chastely yet
fervently, as you would wish your wife to love, would you have left
her?"

"Robert!" - he lifted his arm, he held it suspended, and paused - "Robert!
this is a queer world, and men are made of the queerest dregs that
Chaos churned up in her ferment. I might swear sounding oaths - oaths
that would make the poachers think there was a bittern booming in
Bilberry Moss - that, in the case you put, death only should have parted
me from Mary. But I have lived in the world fifty-five years; I have
been forced to study human nature; and, to speak a dark truth, the odds
are, if Mary had loved and not scorned me, if I had been secure of her
affection, certain of her constancy, been irritated by no doubts, stung
by no humiliations - the odds are"  he let his hand fall heavy on the
saddle  - "the odds are I should have left her!"

They rode side by side in silence. Ere either spoke again they were on
the other side of Rushedge. Briarfield lights starred the purple skirt
of the moor. Robert, being the youngest, and having less of the past to
absorb him than his comrade, recommenced first.

"I believe - I daily find it proved - that we can get nothing in this
world worth keeping, not so much as a principle or a conviction, except
out of purifying flame or through strengthening peril. We err, we fall,
we are humbled; then we walk more carefully. We greedily eat and drink
poison out of the gilded cup of vice or from the beggar's wallet of
avarice. We are sickened, degraded; everything good in us rebels against
us; our souls rise bitterly indignant against our bodies; there is a
period of civil war; if the soul has strength, it conquers and rules
thereafter."

"What art thou going to do now, Robert? What are thy plans?"

"For my private plans, I'll keep them to myself - which is very easy, as
at present I have none. No private life is permitted a man in my
position - a man in debt. For my public plans, my views are a little
altered. While I was in Birmingham I looked a little into reality,
considered closely and at their source the causes of the present
troubles of this country. I did the same in London. Unknown, I could go
where I pleased, mix with whom I would. I went where there was want of
food, of fuel, of clothing; where there was no occupation and no hope. I
saw some, with naturally elevated tendencies and good feelings, kept
down amongst sordid privations and harassing griefs. I saw many
originally low, and to whom lack of education left scarcely anything but
animal wants, disappointed in those wants, ahungered, athirst, and
desperate as famished animals. I saw what taught my brain a new lesson,
and filled my breast with fresh feelings. I have no intention to profess
more softness or sentiment than I have hitherto professed; mutiny and
ambition I regard as I have always regarded them. I should resist a
riotous mob just as heretofore; I should open on the scent of a runaway
ringleader as eagerly as ever, and run him down as relentlessly, and
follow him up to condign punishment as rigorously; but I should do it
now chiefly for the sake and the security of those he misled. Something
there is to look to, Yorke, beyond a man's personal interest, beyond the
advancement of well-laid schemes, beyond even the discharge of
dishonouring debts. To respect himself, a man must believe he renders
justice to his fellow-men. Unless I am more considerate to ignorance,
more forbearing to suffering, than I have hitherto been, I shall scorn
myself as grossly unjust. - What now?" he said, addressing his horse,
which, hearing the ripple of water, and feeling thirsty, turned to a
wayside trough, where the moonbeam was playing in a crystal eddy.

"Yorke," pursued Moore, "ride on; I must let him drink."

Yorke accordingly rode slowly forwards, occupying himself as he advanced
in discriminating, amongst the many lights now spangling the distance,
those of Briarmains. Stilbro' Moor was left behind; plantations rose
dusk on either hand; they were descending the hill; below them lay the
valley with its populous parish: they felt already at home.

Surrounded no longer by heath, it was not startling to Mr. Yorke to see
a hat rise, and to hear a voice speak behind the wall. The words,
however, were peculiar.

"When the wicked perisheth there is shouting," it said; and added, "As
the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more"  with a deeper growl :
"terrors take hold of him as waters; hell is naked before him. He shall
die without knowledge."

A fierce flash and sharp crack violated the calm of night. Yorke, ere he
turned, knew the four convicts of Birmingham were avenged.




CHAPTER XXXI.

UNCLE AND NIECE.


The die was cast. Sir Philip Nunnely knew it; Shirley knew it; Mr.
Sympson knew it. That evening, when all the Fieldhead family dined at
Nunnely Priory, decided the business.

Two or three things conduced to bring the baronet to a point. He had
observed that Miss Keeldar looked pensive and delicate. This new phase
in her demeanour smote him on his weak or poetic side. A spontaneous
sonnet brewed in his brain; and while it was still working there, one of
his sisters persuaded his lady-love to sit down to the piano and sing a
ballad - one of Sir Philip's own ballads. It was the least elaborate, the
least affected - out of all comparison the best of his numerous efforts.

It chanced that Shirley, the moment before, had been gazing from a
window down on the park. She had seen that stormy moonlight which "le
Professeur Louis" was perhaps at the same instant contemplating from her
own oak-parlour lattice; she had seen the isolated trees of the
domain - broad, strong, spreading oaks, and high-towering heroic
beeches - wrestling with the gale. Her ear had caught the full roar of
the forest lower down; the swift rushing of clouds, the moon, to the
eye, hasting swifter still, had crossed her vision. She turned from
sight and sound - touched, if not rapt; wakened, if not inspired.

She sang, as requested. There was much about love in the
ballad - faithful love that refused to abandon its object; love that
disaster could not shake; love that in calamity waxed fonder, in poverty
clung closer. The words were set to a fine old air; in themselves they
were simple and sweet. Perhaps, when read, they wanted force; when
 well sung, they wanted nothing. Shirley sang them well. She breathed
into the feeling softness; she poured round the passion force. Her voice
was fine that evening, its expression dramatic. She impressed all, and
charmed one.

On leaving the instrument she went to the fire, and sat down on a
seat - semi-stool, semi-cushion. The ladies were round her; none of them
spoke. The Misses Sympson and the Misses Nunnely looked upon her as
quiet poultry might look on an egret, an ibis, or any other strange
fowl. What made her sing so? They never sang so. Was it proper to
sing with such expression, with such originality - so unlike a
school-girl? Decidedly not. It was strange, it was unusual. What was
 strange must be wrong ; what was unusual must be improper .
Shirley was judged.

Moreover, old Lady Nunnely eyed her stonily from her great chair by the
fireside. Her gaze said, "This woman is not of mine or my daughters'
kind. I object to her as my son's wife."

Her son, catching the look, read its meaning. He grew alarmed. What he
so wished to win there was danger he might lose. He must make haste.

The room they were in had once been a picture-gallery. Sir Philip's
father - Sir Monckton - had converted it into a saloon; but still it had a
shadowy, long-withdrawing look. A deep recess with a window - a recess
that held one couch, one table, and a fairy cabinet - formed a room
within a room. Two persons standing there might interchange a dialogue,
and, so it were neither long nor loud, none be the wiser.

Sir Philip induced two of his sisters to perpetrate a duet. He gave
occupation to the Misses Sympson. The elder ladies were conversing
together. He was pleased to remark that meantime Shirley rose to look at
the pictures. He had a tale to tell about one ancestress, whose dark
beauty seemed as that of a flower of the south. He joined her, and began
to tell it.

There were mementoes of the same lady in the cabinet adorning the
recess; and while Shirley was stooping to examine the missal and the
rosary on the inlaid shelf, and while the Misses Nunnely indulged in a
prolonged screech, guiltless of expression, pure of originality,
perfectly conventional and absolutely unmeaning, Sir Philip stooped too,
and whispered a few hurried sentences. At first Miss Keeldar was struck
so still you might have fancied that whisper a charm which had changed
her to a statue; but she presently looked up and answered. They parted.
Miss Keeldar returned to the fire, and resumed her seat. The baronet
gazed after her, then went and stood behind his sisters. Mr.
Sympson - Mr. Sympson only - had marked the pantomime.

That gentleman drew his own conclusions. Had he been as acute as he was
meddling, as profound as he was prying, he might have found that in Sir
Philip's face whereby to correct his inference. Ever shallow, hasty, and
positive, he went home quite cock-a-hoop.

He was not a man that kept secrets well. When elate on a subject, he
could not avoid talking about it. The next morning, having occasion to
employ his son's tutor as his secretary, he must needs announce to him,
in mouthing accents, and with much flimsy pomp of manner, that he had
better hold himself prepared for a return to the south at an early day,
as the important business which had detained him  Mr. Sympson  so long
in Yorkshire was now on the eve of fortunate completion. His anxious and
laborious efforts were likely, at last, to be crowned with the happiest
success. A truly eligible addition was about to be made to the family
connections.

"In Sir Philip Nunnely?" Louis Moore conjectured.

Whereupon Mr. Sympson treated himself simultaneously to a pinch of snuff
and a chuckling laugh, checked only by a sudden choke of dignity, and an
order to the tutor to proceed with business.

For a day or two Mr. Sympson continued as bland as oil, but also he
seemed to sit on pins, and his gait, when he walked, emulated that of a
hen treading a hot girdle. He was for ever looking out of the window and
listening for chariot-wheels. Bluebeard's wife - Sisera's mother - were
nothing to him. He waited when the matter should be opened in form, when
himself should be consulted, when lawyers should be summoned, when
settlement discussions and all the delicious worldly fuss should
pompously begin.

At last there came a letter. He himself handed it to Miss Keeldar out of
the bag. He knew the handwriting; he knew the crest on the seal. He did
not see it opened and read, for Shirley took it to her own room; nor did
he see it answered, for she wrote her reply shut up, and was very long
about it - the best part of a day. He questioned her whether it was
answered; she responded, "Yes."

Again he waited - waited in silence, absolutely not daring to speak, kept
mute by something in Shirley's face - a very awful something - inscrutable
to him as the writing on the wall to Belshazzar. He was moved more than
once to call Daniel, in the person of Louis Moore, and to ask an
interpretation; but his dignity forbade the familiarity. Daniel himself,
perhaps, had his own private difficulties connected with that baffling
bit of translation; he looked like a student for whom grammars are blank
and dictionaries dumb.

          

Mr. Sympson had been out, to while away an anxious hour in the society
of his friends at De Walden Hall. He returned a little sooner than was
expected. His family and Miss Keeldar were assembled in the oak parlour.
Addressing the latter, he requested her to step with him into another
room. He wished to have with her a " strictly private interview."

She rose, asking no questions and professing no surprise.

"Very well, sir," she said, in the tone of a determined person who is
informed that the dentist is come to extract that large double tooth of
his, from which he has suffered such a purgatory this month past. She
left her sewing and her thimble in the window-seat, and followed her
uncle where he led.

Shut into the drawing-room, the pair took seats, each in an arm-chair,
placed opposite, a few yards between them.

"I have been to De Walden Hall," said Mr. Sympson. He paused. Miss
Keeldar's eyes were on the pretty white-and-green carpet. That 
information required no response. She gave none.

"I have learned," he went on slowly - "I have learned a circumstance
which surprises me."

Resting her cheek on her forefinger, she waited to be told what 
circumstance.

"It seems that Nunnely Priory is shut up - that the family are gone back
to their place in - - shire. It seems that the baronet - that the
baronet - that Sir Philip himself has accompanied his mother and
sisters."

"Indeed!" said Shirley.

"May I ask if you share the amazement with which I received this news?"

"No, sir."

" Is it news to you?"

"Yes, sir."

"I mean - I mean," pursued Mr. Sympson, now fidgeting in his chair,
quitting his hitherto brief and tolerably clear phraseology, and
returning to his customary wordy, confused, irritable style - "I mean to
have a thorough explanation. I will not be put off. I - I - shall
 insist on being heard, and on - on having my own way. My questions
 must be answered. I will have clear, satisfactory replies. I am not to
be trifled with.  Silence. 

"It is a strange and an extraordinary thing - a very singular - a most odd
thing! I thought all was right, knew no other; and there - the family are
gone!"

"I suppose, sir, they had a right to go."

" Sir Philip is gone! "  with emphasis .

Shirley raised her brows. " Bon voyage! " said she.

"This will not do; this must be altered, ma'am."

He drew his chair forward; he pushed it back; he looked perfectly
incensed, and perfectly helpless.

"Come, come now, uncle," expostulated Shirley, "do not begin to fret and
fume, or we shall make no sense of the business. Ask me what you want to
know. I am as willing to come to an explanation as you. I promise you
truthful replies."

"I want - I demand to know, Miss Keeldar, whether Sir Philip has made you
an offer?"

"He has."

"You avow it?"

"I avow it. But now, go on. Consider that point settled."

"He made you an offer that night we dined at the priory?"

"It is enough to say that he made it. Go on."

"He proposed in the recess - in the room that used to be a
picture-gallery - that Sir Monckton converted into it saloon?"

No answer.

"You were both examining a cabinet. I saw it all. My sagacity was not at
fault - it never is. Subsequently you received a letter from him. On what
subject - of what nature were the contents?"

"No matter."

"Ma'am, is that the way in which you speak to me?"

Shirley's foot tapped quick on the carpet.

"There you sit, silent and sullen - you who promised truthful replies."

"Sir, I have answered you thus far. Proceed."

"I should like to see that letter."

"You cannot see it."

"I must and shall , ma'am; I am your guardian."

"Having ceased to be a ward, I have no guardian."

"Ungrateful being! Reared by me as my own daughter - - "

"Once more, uncle, have the kindness to keep to the point. Let us both
remain cool. For my part, I do not wish to get into a passion; but, you
know, once drive me beyond certain bounds, I care little what I say - I
am not then soon checked. Listen! You have asked me whether Sir Philip
made me an offer. That question is answered. What do you wish to know
next?"

"I desire to know whether you accepted or refused him, and know it I
will."

"Certainly, you ought to know it. I refused him."

"Refused him! You - you , Shirley Keeldar, refused Sir Philip
Nunnely?"

"I did."

The poor gentleman bounced from his chair, and first rushed and then
trotted through the room.

"There it is! There it is! There it is!"

"Sincerely speaking, I am sorry, uncle, you are so disappointed."

Concession, contrition, never do any good with some people. Instead of
softening and conciliating, they but embolden and harden them. Of that
number was Mr. Sympson.

" I disappointed? What is it to me? Have I an interest in it? You
would insinuate, perhaps, that I have motives?"

"Most people have motives of some sort for their actions."

"She accuses me to my face! I, that have been a parent to her, she
charges with bad motives!"

" Bad motives I did not say."

"And now you prevaricate; you have no principles!"

"Uncle, you tire me. I want to go away."

"Go you shall not! I will be answered. What are your intentions, Miss
Keeldar?"

"In what respect?"

"In respect of matrimony?"

"To be quiet, and to do just as I please."

"Just as you please! The words are to the last degree indecorous."

"Mr. Sympson, I advise you not to become insulting. You know I will not
bear that."

"You read French. Your mind is poisoned with French novels. You have
imbibed French principles."

"The ground you are treading now returns a mighty hollow sound under
your feet. Beware!"

"It will end in infamy, sooner or later. I have foreseen it all along."

"Do you assert, sir, that something in which I am concerned will end
in infamy?"

"That it will - that it will. You said just now you would act as you
please. You acknowledge no rules - no limitations."

"Silly stuff, and vulgar as silly!"

"Regardless of decorum, you are prepared to fly in the face of
propriety."

"You tire me, uncle."

"What, madam - what could be your reasons for refusing Sir Philip?"

"At last there is another sensible question; I shall be glad to reply to
it. Sir Philip is too young for me. I regard him as a boy. All his
relations - his mother especially - would be annoyed if he married me.
Such a step would embroil him with them. I am not his equal in the
world's estimation."

"Is that all?"

"Our dispositions are not compatible."

"Why, a more amiable gentleman never breathed."

"He is very amiable - very excellent - truly estimable; but not my
master - not in one point. I could not trust myself with his happiness.
I would not undertake the keeping of it for thousands. I will accept no
hand which cannot hold me in check."

"I thought you liked to do as you please. You are vastly inconsistent."

"When I promise to obey, it shall be under the conviction that I can
keep that promise. I could not obey a youth like Sir Philip. Besides, he
would never command me. He would expect me always to rule - to guide - and
I have no taste whatever for the office."

" You no taste for swaggering, and subduing, and ordering, and ruling?"

"Not my husband; only my uncle."

"Where is the difference?"

"There is a slight difference - that is certain. And I know full well
any man who wishes to live in decent comfort with me as a husband must
be able to control me."

"I wish you had a real tyrant."

"A tyrant would not hold me for a day, not for an hour. I would
rebel - break from him - defy him."

"Are you not enough to bewilder one's brain with your
self-contradiction?"

"It is evident I bewilder your brain."

"You talk of Sir Philip being young. He is two-and-twenty."

"My husband must be thirty, with the sense of forty."

"You had better pick out some old man - some white-headed or bald-headed
swain."

"No, thank you."

"You could lead some doting fool; you might pin him to your apron."

"I might do that with a boy; but it is not my vocation. Did I not say I
prefer a master - one in whose presence I shall feel obliged and
disposed to be good; one whose control my impatient temper must
acknowledge; a man whose approbation can reward, whose displeasure
punish me; a man I shall feel it impossible not to love, and very
possible to fear?"

"What is there to hinder you from doing all this with Sir Philip? He is
a baronet - a man of rank, property, connections far above yours. If you
talk of intellect, he is a poet - he writes verses; which you, I take it,
cannot do, with all your cleverness."

"Neither his title, wealth, pedigree, nor poetry avail to invest him
with the power I describe. These are feather-weights; they want ballast.
A measure of sound, solid, practical sense would have stood him in
better stead with me."

"You and Henry rave about poetry! You used to catch fire like tinder on
the subject when you were a girl."

"O uncle, there is nothing really valuable in this world, there is
nothing glorious in the world to come that is not poetry!"

"Marry a poet, then, in God's name!"

"Show him me, and I will."

"Sir Philip."

"Not at all. You are almost as good a poet as he."

"Madam, you are wandering from the point."

"Indeed, uncle, I wanted to do so, and I shall be glad to lead you away
with me. Do not let us get out of temper with each other; it is not
worth while."

"Out of temper, Miss Keeldar! I should be glad to know who is out of
temper."

" I am not, yet."

"If you mean to insinuate that I am, I consider that you are guilty of
impertinence."

"You will be soon, if you go on at that rate."

"There it is! With your pert tongue you would try the patience of a
Job."

"I know I should."

"No levity, miss! This is not a laughing matter. It is an affair I am
resolved to probe thoroughly, convinced that there is mischief at the
bottom. You described just now, with far too much freedom for your years
and sex, the sort of individual you would prefer as a husband. Pray, did
you paint from the life?"

Shirley opened her lips, but instead of speaking she only glowed
rose-red.

"I shall have an answer to that question," affirmed Mr. Sympson,
assuming vast courage and consequence on the strength of this symptom of
confusion.

"It was an historical picture, uncle, from several originals."

"Several originals! Bless my heart!"

"I have been in love several times."

"This is cynical."

"With heroes of many nations."

"What next - - "

"And philosophers."

"She is mad - - "

"Don't  ring the bell, uncle; you will alarm my aunt."

"Your poor dear aunt, what a niece has she!"

"Once I loved Socrates."

"Pooh! no trifling, ma'am."

"I admired Themistocles, Leonidas, Epaminondas."

"Miss Keeldar - - "

"To pass over a few centuries, Washington was a plain man, but I liked
him; but to speak of the actual present - - "

"Ah! the actual present."

"To quit crude schoolgirl fancies, and come to realities."

"Realities! That is the test to which you shall be brought, ma'am."

"To avow before what altar I now kneel - to reveal the present idol of my
soul - - "

"You will make haste about it, if you please. It is near luncheon time,
and confess you shall ."

"Confess I must. My heart is full of the secret. It must be spoken. I
only wish you were Mr. Helstone instead of Mr. Sympson; you would
sympathize with me better."

"Madam, it is a question of common sense and common prudence, not of
sympathy and sentiment, and so on. Did you say it was Mr. Helstone?"

"Not precisely, but as near as may be; they are rather alike."

"I will know the name; I will have particulars."

"They positively are rather alike. Their very faces are not
dissimilar - a pair of human falcons - and dry, direct, decided both. But
my hero is the mightier of the two. His mind has the clearness of the
deep sea, the patience of its rocks, the force of its billows."

"Rant and fustian!"

"I dare say he can be harsh as a saw-edge and gruff as a hungry raven."

"Miss Keeldar, does the person reside in Briarfield? Answer me that."

"Uncle, I am going to tell you; his name is trembling on my tongue."

"Speak, girl!"

"That was well said, uncle. 'Speak, girl!' It is quite tragic. England
has howled savagely against this man, uncle, and she will one day roar
exultingly over him. He has been unscared by the howl, and he will be
unelated by the shout."

"I said she was mad. She is."

"This country will change and change again in her demeanour to him; he
will never change in his duty to her. Come, cease to chafe, uncle, I'll
tell you his name."

"You shall tell me, or - - "

"Listen! Arthur Wellesley, Lord Wellington."

Mr. Sympson rose up furious. He bounced out of the room, but immediately
bounced back again, shut the door, and resumed his seat.

"Ma'am, you shall tell me this . Will your principles permit you to
marry a man without money - a man below you?"

"Never a man below me."

 In a high voice.  "Will you, Miss Keeldar, marry a poor man?"

"What right have you, Mr. Sympson, to ask me?"

"I insist upon knowing."

"You don't  go the way to know."

"My family respectability shall not be compromised."

"A good resolution; keep it."

"Madam, it is you who shall keep it."

"Impossible, sir, since I form no part of your family."

"Do you disown us?"

"I disdain your dictatorship."

"Whom will you marry, Miss Keeldar?"

"Not Mr. Sam Wynne, because I scorn him; not Sir Philip Nunnely, because
I only esteem him."

"Whom have you in your eye?"

"Four rejected candidates."

"Such obstinacy could not be unless you were under improper influence."

"What do you mean? There are certain phrases potent to make my blood
boil. Improper influence! What old woman's cackle is that?"

"Are you a young lady?"

"I am a thousand times better: I am an honest woman, and as such I will
be treated."

"Do you know"  leaning mysteriously forward, and speaking with ghastly
solemnity  - "do you know the whole neighbourhood teems with rumours
respecting you and a bankrupt tenant of yours, the foreigner Moore?"

"Does it?"

"It does. Your name is in every mouth."

"It honours the lips it crosses, and I wish to the gods it may purify
them."

"Is it that person who has power to influence you?"

"Beyond any whose cause you have advocated."

"Is it he you will marry?"

"He is handsome, and manly, and commanding."

"You declare it to my face! The Flemish knave! the low trader!"

"He is talented, and venturous, and resolute. Prince is on his brow, and
ruler in his bearing."

"She glories in it! She conceals nothing! No shame, no fear!"

"When we speak the name of Moore, shame should be forgotten and fear
discarded. The Moores know only honour and courage."

"I say she is mad."

"You have taunted me till my blood is up; you have worried me till I
turn again."

"That Moore is the brother of my son's tutor. Would you let the usher
call you sister?"

Bright and broad shone Shirley's eye as she fixed it on her questioner
now.

"No, no; not for a province of possession, not for a century of life."

"You cannot separate the husband from his family."

"What then?"

"Mr. Louis Moore's sister you will be."

"Mr. Sympson, I am sick at heart with all this weak trash; I will bear
no more. Your thoughts are not my thoughts, your aims are not my aims,
your gods are not my gods. We do not view things in the same light; we
do not measure them by the same standard; we hardly speak in the same
tongue. Let us part."

"It is not," she resumed, much excited - "it is not that I hate you; you
are a good sort of man. Perhaps you mean well in your way. But we cannot
suit; we are ever at variance. You annoy me with small meddling, with
petty tyranny; you exasperate my temper, and make and keep me
passionate. As to your small maxims, your narrow rules, your little
prejudices, aversions, dogmas, bundle them off. Mr. Sympson, go, offer
them a sacrifice to the deity you worship; I'll none of them. I wash my
hands of the lot. I walk by another creed, light, faith, and hope than
you."

"Another creed! I believe she is an infidel."

"An infidel to your religion, an atheist to your god."

" An - atheist!!! "

"Your god, sir, is the world. In my eyes you too, if not an infidel, are
an idolater. I conceive that you ignorantly worship; in all things you
appear to me too superstitious. Sir, your god, your great Bel, your
fish-tailed Dagon, rises before me as a demon. You, and such as you,
have raised him to a throne, put on him a crown, given him a sceptre.
Behold how hideously he governs! See him busied at the work he likes
best - making marriages. He binds the young to the old, the strong to the
imbecile. He stretches out the arm of Mezentius, and fetters the dead to
the living. In his realm there is hatred - secret hatred; there is
disgust - unspoken disgust; there is treachery - family treachery; there
is vice - deep, deadly domestic vice. In his dominions children grow
unloving between parents who have never loved; infants are nursed on
deception from their very birth; they are reared in an atmosphere
corrupt with lies. Your god rules at the bridal of kings; look at your
royal dynasties! Your deity is the deity of foreign aristocracies;
analyze the blue blood of Spain! Your god is the Hymen of France; what
is French domestic life? All that surrounds him hastens to decay; all
declines and degenerates under his sceptre. Your god is a masked
Death."

"This language is terrible! My daughters and you must associate no
longer, Miss Keeldar; there is danger in such companionship. Had I known
you a little earlier - but, extraordinary as I thought you, I could not
have believed - - "

"Now, sir, do you begin to be aware that it is useless to scheme for me;
that in doing so you but sow the wind to reap the whirlwind? I sweep
your cobweb projects from my path, that I may pass on unsullied. I am
anchored on a resolve you cannot shake. My heart, my conscience shall
dispose of my hand - they only . Know this at last."

Mr. Sympson was becoming a little bewildered.

"Never heard such language!" he muttered again and again; "never was so
addressed in my life - never was so used!"

"You are quite confused, sir. You had better withdraw, or I will."

He rose hastily. "We must leave this place; they must pack up at once."

"Do not hurry my aunt and cousins; give them time."

"No more intercourse; she's not proper."

He made his way to the door. He came back for his handkerchief. He
dropped his snuff-box, leaving the contents scattered on the carpet; he
stumbled out. Tartar lay outside across the mat; Mr. Sympson almost fell
over him. In the climax of his exasperation he hurled an oath at the dog
and a coarse epithet at his mistress.

"Poor Mr. Sympson! he is both feeble and vulgar," said Shirley to
herself. "My head aches, and I am tired," she added; and leaning her
head upon a cushion, she softly subsided from excitement to repose. One,
entering the room a quarter of an hour afterwards, found her asleep.
When Shirley had been agitated, she generally took this natural
refreshment; it would come at her call.

The intruder paused in her unconscious presence, and said, "Miss
Keeldar."

Perhaps his voice harmonized with some dream into which she was passing.
It did not startle, it hardly roused her. Without opening her eyes, she
but turned her head a little, so that her cheek and profile, before
hidden by her arm, became visible. She looked rosy, happy, half smiling,
but her eyelashes were wet. She had wept in slumber; or perhaps, before
dropping asleep, a few natural tears had fallen after she had heard that
epithet. No man - no woman - is always strong, always able to bear up
against the unjust opinion, the vilifying word. Calumny, even from the
mouth of a fool, will sometimes cut into unguarded feelings. Shirley
looked like a child that had been naughty and punished, but was now
forgiven and at rest.

"Miss Keeldar," again said the voice. This time it woke her. She looked
up, and saw at her side Louis Moore - not close at her side, but
standing, with arrested step, two or three yards from her.

"O Mr. Moore!" she said. "I was afraid it was my uncle again: he and I
have quarrelled."

"Mr. Sympson should let you alone," was the reply. "Can he not see that
you are as yet far from strong?"

"I assure you he did not find me weak. I did not cry when he was here."

"He is about to evacuate Fieldhead - so he says. He is now giving orders
to his family. He has been in the schoolroom issuing commands in a
manner which, I suppose, was a continuation of that with which he has
harassed you."

"Are you and Henry to go?"

"I believe, as far as Henry is concerned, that was the tenor of his
scarcely intelligible directions; but he may change all to-morrow. He is
just in that mood when you cannot depend on his consistency for two
consecutive hours. I doubt whether he will leave you for weeks yet. To
myself he addressed some words which will require a little attention and
comment by-and-by, when I have time to bestow on them. At the moment he
came in I was busied with a note I had got from Mr. Yorke - so fully
busied that I cut short the interview with him somewhat abruptly. I left
him raving. Here is the note. I wish you to see it. It refers to my
brother Robert." And he looked at Shirley.

"I shall be glad to hear news of him. Is he coming home?"

"He is come. He is in Yorkshire. Mr. Yorke went yesterday to Stilbro' to
meet him."

"Mr. Moore, something is wrong - - "

"Did my voice tremble? He is now at Briarmains, and I am going to see
him."

"What has occurred?"

"If you turn so pale I shall be sorry I have spoken. It might have been
worse. Robert is not dead, but much hurt."

"O sir, it is you who are pale. Sit down near me."

"Read the note. Let me open it."

Miss Keeldar read the note. It briefly signified that last night Robert
Moore had been shot at from behind the wall of Milldean plantation, at
the foot of the Brow; that he was wounded severely, but it was hoped not
fatally. Of the assassin, or assassins, nothing was known; they had
escaped. "No doubt," Mr. Yorke observed, "it was done in revenge. It was
a pity ill-will had ever been raised; but that could not be helped now."

"He is my only brother," said Louis, as Shirley returned the note. "I
cannot hear unmoved that ruffians have laid in wait for him, and shot
him down, like some wild beast from behind a wall."

"Be comforted; be hopeful. He will get better - I know he will."

Shirley, solicitous to soothe, held her hand over Mr. Moore's as it lay
on the arm of the chair. She just touched it lightly, scarce palpably.

"Well, give me your hand," he said. "It will be for the first time; it
is in a moment of calamity. Give it me."

Awaiting neither consent nor refusal, he took what he asked.

"I am going to Briarmains now," he went on. "I want you to step over to
the rectory and tell Caroline Helstone what has happened. Will you do
this? She will hear it best from you."

"Immediately," said Shirley, with docile promptitude. "Ought I to say
that there is no danger?"

"Say so."

"You will come back soon, and let me know more?"

"I will either come or write."

"Trust me for watching over Caroline. I will communicate with your
sister too; but doubtless she is already with Robert?"

"Doubtless, or will be soon. Good-morning now."

"You will bear up, come what may."

"We shall see that."

Shirley's fingers were obliged to withdraw from the tutor's. Louis was
obliged to relinquish that hand folded, clasped, hidden in his own.

"I thought I should have had to support her," he said, as he walked
towards Briarmains, "and it is she who has made me strong. That look of
pity, that gentle touch! No down was ever softer, no elixir more potent!
It lay like a snowflake; it thrilled like lightning. A thousand times I
have longed to possess that hand - to have it in mine. I have possessed
it; for five minutes I held it. Her fingers and mine can never be
strangers more. Having met once they must meet again."




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE SCHOOLBOY AND THE WOOD-NYMPH.


Briarmains being nearer than the Hollow, Mr. Yorke had conveyed his
young comrade there. He had seen him laid in the best bed of the house,
as carefully as if he had been one of his own sons. The sight of his
blood, welling from the treacherously inflicted wound, made him indeed
the son of the Yorkshire gentleman's heart. The spectacle of the sudden
event, of the tall, straight shape prostrated in its pride across the
road, of the fine southern head laid low in the dust, of that youth in
prime flung at once before him pallid, lifeless, helpless - this was the
very combination of circumstances to win for the victim Mr. Yorke's
liveliest interest.

No other hand was there to raise - to aid, no other voice to question
kindly, no other brain to concert measures; he had to do it all himself.
This utter dependence of the speechless, bleeding youth  as a youth he
regarded him  on his benevolence secured that benevolence most
effectually. Well did Mr. Yorke like to have power, and to use it. He
had now between his hands power over a fellow-creature's life. It suited
him.

No less perfectly did it suit his saturnine better half. The incident
was quite in her way and to her taste. Some women would have been
terror-struck to see a gory man brought in over their threshold, and
laid down in their hall in the "howe of the night." There, you would
suppose, was subject-matter for hysterics. No. Mrs. Yorke went into
hysterics when Jessie would not leave the garden to come to her
knitting, or when Martin proposed starting for Australia, with a view to
realize freedom and escape the tyranny of Matthew; but an attempted
murder near her door - a half-murdered man in her best bed - set her
straight, cheered her spirits, gave her cap the dash of a turban.

Mrs. Yorke was just the woman who, while rendering miserable the
drudging life of a simple maid-servant, would nurse like a heroine a
hospital full of plague patients. She almost loved Moore. Her tough
heart almost yearned towards him when she found him committed to her
charge - left in her arms, as dependent on her as her youngest-born in
the cradle. Had she seen a domestic or one of her daughters give him a
draught of water or smooth his pillow, she would have boxed the
intruder's ears. She chased Jessie and Rose from the upper realm of the
house; she forbade the housemaids to set their foot in it.

Now, if the accident had happened at the rectory gates, and old Helstone
had taken in the martyr, neither Yorke nor his wife would have pitied
him. They would have adjudged him right served for his tyranny and
meddling. As it was, he became, for the present, the apple of their eye.

Strange! Louis Moore was permitted to come - to sit down on the edge of
the bed and lean over the pillow; to hold his brother's hand, and press
his pale forehead with his fraternal lips; and Mrs. Yorke bore it well.
She suffered him to stay half the day there; she once suffered him to
sit up all night in the chamber; she rose herself at five o'clock of a
wet November morning, and with her own hands lit the kitchen fire, and
made the brothers a breakfast, and served it to them herself.
Majestically arrayed in a boundless flannel wrapper, a shawl, and her
nightcap, she sat and watched them eat, as complacently as a hen beholds
her chickens feed. Yet she gave the cook warning that day for venturing
to make and carry up to Mr. Moore a basin of sago-gruel; and the
housemaid lost her favour because, when Mr. Louis was departing, she
brought him his surtout aired from the kitchen, and, like a "forward
piece" as she was, helped him on with it, and accepted in return a
smile, a "Thank you, my girl," and a shilling. Two ladies called one
day, pale and anxious, and begged earnestly, humbly, to be allowed to
see Mr. Moore one instant. Mrs. Yorke hardened her heart, and sent them
packing - not without opprobrium.

But how was it when Hortense Moore came? Not so bad as might have been
expected. The whole family of the Moores really seemed to suit Mrs.
Yorke so as no other family had ever suited her. Hortense and she
possessed an exhaustless mutual theme of conversation in the corrupt
propensities of servants. Their views of this class were similar; they
watched them with the same suspicion, and judged them with the same
severity. Hortense, too, from the very first showed no manner of
jealousy of Mrs. Yorke's attentions to Robert - she let her keep the post
of nurse with little interference; and, for herself, found ceaseless
occupation in fidgeting about the house, holding the kitchen under
surveillance, reporting what passed there, and, in short, making herself
generally useful. Visitors they both of them agreed in excluding
sedulously from the sickroom. They held the young mill-owner captive,
and hardly let the air breathe or the sun shine on him.

Mr. MacTurk, the surgeon to whom Moore's case had been committed,
pronounced his wound of a dangerous, but, he trusted, not of a hopeless
character. At first he wished to place with him a nurse of his own
selection; but this neither Mrs. Yorke nor Hortense would hear of. They
promised faithful observance of directions. He was left, therefore, for
the present in their hands.

Doubtless they executed the trust to the best of their ability; but
something got wrong. The bandages were displaced or tampered with; great
loss of blood followed. MacTurk, being summoned, came with steed afoam.
He was one of those surgeons whom it is dangerous to vex - abrupt in his
best moods, in his worst savage. On seeing Moore's state he relieved his
feelings by a little flowery language, with which it is not necessary to
strew the present page. A bouquet or two of the choicest blossoms fell
on the unperturbed head of one Mr. Graves, a stony young assistant he
usually carried about with him; with a second nosegay he gifted another
young gentleman in his train - an interesting fac-simile of himself,
being indeed his own son; but the full corbeille of blushing bloom
fell to the lot of meddling womankind, en masse .

For the best part of one winter night himself and satellites were busied
about Moore. There at his bedside, shut up alone with him in his
chamber, they wrought and wrangled over his exhausted frame. They three
were on one side of the bed, and Death on the other. The conflict was
sharp; it lasted till day broke, when the balance between the
belligerents seemed so equal that both parties might have claimed the
victory.

At dawn Graves and young MacTurk were left in charge of the patient,
while the senior went himself in search of additional strength, and
secured it in the person of Mrs. Horsfall, the best nurse on his staff.
To this woman he gave Moore in charge, with the sternest injunctions
respecting the responsibility laid on her shoulders. She took this
responsibility stolidly, as she did also the easy-chair at the bedhead.
That moment she began her reign.

Mrs. Horsfall had one virtue - orders received from MacTurk she obeyed to
the letter. The ten commandments were less binding in her eyes than her
surgeon's dictum. In other respects she was no woman, but a dragon.
Hortense Moore fell effaced before her; Mrs. Yorke withdrew - crushed;
yet both these women were personages of some dignity in their own
estimation, and of some bulk in the estimation of others. Perfectly
cowed by the breadth, the height, the bone, and the brawn of Mrs.
Horsfall, they retreated to the back parlour. She, for her part, sat
upstairs when she liked, and downstairs when she preferred it. She took
her dram three times a day, and her pipe of tobacco four times.

As to Moore, no one now ventured to inquire about him. Mrs. Horsfall had
him at dry-nurse. It was she who was to do for him, and the general
conjecture now ran that she did for him accordingly.

Morning and evening MacTurk came to see him. His case, thus complicated
by a new mischance, was become one of interest in the surgeon's eyes. He
regarded him as a damaged piece of clockwork, which it would be
creditable to his skill to set agoing again. Graves and young
MacTurk - Moore's sole other visitors - contemplated him in the light in
which they were wont to contemplate the occupant for the time being of
the dissecting-room at Stilbro' Infirmary.

Robert Moore had a pleasant time of it - in pain, in danger, too weak to
move, almost too weak to speak, a sort of giantess his keeper, the three
surgeons his sole society. Thus he lay through the diminishing days and
lengthening nights of the whole drear month of November.

In the commencement of his captivity Moore used feebly to resist Mrs.
Horsfall. He hated the sight of her rough bulk, and dreaded the contact
of her hard hands; but she taught him docility in a trice. She made no
account whatever of his six feet, his manly thews and sinews; she turned
him in his bed as another woman would have turned a babe in its cradle.
When he was good she addressed him as "my dear" and "honey," and when he
was bad she sometimes shook him. Did he attempt to speak when MacTurk
was there, she lifted her hand and bade him "Hush!" like a nurse
checking a forward child. If she had not smoked, if she had not taken
gin, it would have been better, he thought; but she did both. Once, in
her absence, he intimated to MacTurk that "that woman was a
dram-drinker."

"Pooh! my dear sir, they are all so," was the reply he got for his
pains. "But Horsfall has this virtue," added the surgeon - "drunk or
sober, she always remembers to obey me ."

          

At length the latter autumn passed; its fogs, its rains withdrew from
England their mourning and their tears; its winds swept on to sigh over
lands far away. Behind November came deep winter - clearness, stillness,
frost accompanying.

A calm day had settled into a crystalline evening. The world wore a
North Pole colouring; all its lights and tints looked like the
 reflets  A  of white, or violet, or pale green gems. The hills wore a
lilac blue; the setting sun had purple in its red; the sky was ice, all
silvered azure; when the stars rose, they were of white crystal, not
gold; gray, or cerulean, or faint emerald hues - cool, pure, and
transparent - tinged the mass of the landscape.

  A  Find me an English word as good, reader, and I will gladly
 dispense with the French word. "Reflections" won't  do.

What is this by itself in a wood no longer green, no longer even russet,
a wood neutral tint - this dark blue moving object? Why, it is a
schoolboy - a Briarfield grammar-school boy - who has left his companions,
now trudging home by the highroad, and is seeking a certain tree, with a
certain mossy mound at its root, convenient as a seat. Why is he
lingering here? The air is cold and the time wears late. He sits down.
What is he thinking about? Does he feel the chaste charm Nature wears
to-night? A pearl-white moon smiles through the gray trees; does he care
for her smile?

Impossible to say; for he is silent, and his countenance does not speak.
As yet it is no mirror to reflect sensation, but rather a mask to
conceal it. This boy is a stripling of fifteen - slight, and tall of his
years. In his face there is as little of amenity as of servility, his
eye seems prepared to note any incipient attempt to control or overreach
him, and the rest of his features indicate faculties alert for
resistance. Wise ushers avoid unnecessary interference with that lad.
To break him in by severity would be a useless attempt; to win him by
flattery would be an effort worse than useless. He is best let alone.
Time will educate and experience train him.

Professedly Martin Yorke  it is a young Yorke, of course  tramples on
the name of poetry. Talk sentiment to him, and you would be answered by
sarcasm. Here he is, wandering alone, waiting duteously on Nature, while
she unfolds a page of stern, of silent, and of solemn poetry beneath his
attentive gaze.

Being seated, he takes from his satchel a book - not the Latin grammar,
but a contraband volume of fairy tales. There will be light enough yet
for an hour to serve his keen young vision. Besides, the moon waits on
him; her beam, dim and vague as yet, fills the glade where he sits.

He reads. He is led into a solitary mountain region; all round him is
rude and desolate, shapeless, and almost colourless. He hears bells
tinkle on the wind. Forth-riding from the formless folds of the mist
dawns on him the brightest vision - a green-robed lady, on a snow-white
palfrey. He sees her dress, her gems, and her steed. She arrests him
with some mysterious question. He is spell-bound, and must follow her
into fairyland.

A second legend bears him to the sea-shore. There tumbles in a strong
tide, boiling at the base of dizzy cliffs. It rains and blows. A reef of
rocks, black and rough, stretches far into the sea. All along, and
among, and above these crags dash and flash, sweep and leap, swells,
wreaths, drifts of snowy spray. Some lone wanderer is out on these
rocks, treading with cautious step the wet, wild seaweed; glancing down
into hollows where the brine lies fathoms deep and emerald clear, and
seeing there wilder and stranger and huger vegetation than is found on
land, with treasure of shells - some green, some purple, some
pearly - clustered in the curls of the snaky plants. He hears a cry.
Looking up and forward, he sees, at the bleak point of the reef, a tall,
pale thing - shaped like man, but made of spray - transparent, tremulous,
awful. It stands not alone. They are all human figures that wanton in
the rocks - a crowd of foam-women - a band of white, evanescent Nereids.

Hush! Shut the book; hide it in the satchel. Martin hears a tread. He
listens. No - yes. Once more the dead leaves, lightly crushed, rustle on
the wood path. Martin watches; the trees part, and a woman issues
forth.

She is a lady dressed in dark silk, a veil covering her face. Martin
never met a lady in this wood before - nor any female, save, now and
then, a village girl come to gather nuts. To-night the apparition does
not displease him. He observes, as she approaches, that she is neither
old nor plain, but, on the contrary, very youthful; and, but that he now
recognizes her for one whom he has often wilfully pronounced ugly, he
would deem that he discovered traits of beauty behind the thin gauze of
that veil.

She passes him and says nothing. He knew she would. All women are proud
monkeys, and he knows no more conceited doll than that Caroline
Helstone. The thought is hardly hatched in his mind when the lady
retraces those two steps she had got beyond him, and raising her veil,
reposes her glance on his face, while she softly asks, "Are you one of
Mr. Yorke's sons?"

No human evidence would ever have been able to persuade Martin Yorke
that he blushed when thus addressed; yet blush he did, to the ears.

"I am," he said bluntly, and encouraged himself to wonder,
superciliously, what would come next.

"You are Martin, I think?" was the observation that followed.

It could not have been more felicitous. It was a simple sentence - very
artlessly, a little timidly, pronounced; but it chimed in harmony to the
youth's nature. It stilled him like a note of music.

Martin had a keen sense of his personality; he felt it right and
sensible that the girl should discriminate him from his brothers. Like
his father, he hated ceremony. It was acceptable to hear a lady address
him as "Martin," and not Mr. Martin or Master Martin, which form would
have lost her his good graces for ever. Worse, if possible, than
ceremony was the other extreme of slipshod familiarity. The slight tone
of bashfulness, the scarcely perceptible hesitation, was considered
perfectly in place.

"I am Martin," he said.

"Are your father and mother well?"  it was lucky she did not say papa 
and mamma ; that would have undone all ; "and Rose and Jessie?"

"I suppose so."

"My cousin Hortense is still at Briarmains?"

"Oh yes."

Martin gave a comic half-smile and demi-groan. The half-smile was
responded to by the lady, who could guess in what sort of odour Hortense
was likely to be held by the young Yorkes.

"Does your mother like her?"

"They suit so well about the servants they can't  help liking each
other."

"It is cold to-night."

"Why are you out so late?"

"I lost my way in this wood."

Now, indeed, Martin allowed himself a refreshing laugh of scorn.

"Lost your way in the mighty forest of Briarmains! You deserve never
more to find it."

"I never was here before, and I believe I am trespassing now. You might
inform against me if you chose, Martin, and have me fined. It is your
father's wood."

"I should think I knew that. But since you are so simple as to lose your
way, I will guide you out."

"You need not. I have got into the track now. I shall be right. Martin"
 a little quickly , "how is Mr. Moore?"

Martin had heard certain rumours; it struck him that it might be amusing
to make an experiment.

"Going to die. Nothing can save him. All hope flung overboard!"

She put her veil aside. She looked into his eyes, and said, "To die!"

"To die. All along of the women, my mother and the rest. They did
something about his bandages that finished everything. He would have got
better but for them. I am sure they should be arrested, cribbed, tried,
and brought in for Botany Bay, at the very least."

The questioner, perhaps, did nor hear this judgment. She stood
motionless. In two minutes, without another word, she moved forwards; no
good-night, no further inquiry. This was not amusing, nor what Martin
had calculated on. He expected something dramatic and demonstrative. It
was hardly worth while to frighten the girl if she would not entertain
him in return. He called, "Miss Helstone!"

She did not hear or turn. He hastened after and overtook her.

"Come; are you uneasy about what I said?"

"You know nothing about death, Martin; you are too young for me to talk
to concerning such a thing."

"Did you believe me? It's all flummery! Moore eats like three men. They
are always making sago or tapioca or something good for him. I never go
into the kitchen but there is a saucepan on the fire, cooking him some
dainty. I think I will play the old soldier, and be fed on the fat of
the land like him."

"Martin! Martin!" Here her voice trembled, and she stopped.

"It is exceedingly wrong of you, Martin. You have almost killed me."

Again she stopped. She leaned against a tree, trembling, shuddering, and
as pale as death.

Martin contemplated her with inexpressible curiosity. In one sense it
was, as he would have expressed it, "nuts" to him to see this. It told
him so much, and he was beginning to have a great relish for discovering
secrets. In another sense it reminded him of what he had once felt when
he had heard a blackbird lamenting for her nestlings, which Matthew had
crushed with a stone, and that was not a pleasant feeling. Unable to
find anything very appropriate to say in order to comfort her, he
began to cast about in his mind what he could do . He smiled. The lad's
smile gave wondrous transparency to his physiognomy.

"Eureka!" he cried. "I'll set all straight by-and-by. You are better
now, Miss Caroline. Walk forward," he urged.

Not reflecting that it would be more difficult for Miss Helstone than
for himself to climb a wall or penetrate a hedge, he piloted her by a
short cut which led to no gate. The consequence was he had to help her
over some formidable obstacles, and while he railed at her for
helplessness, he perfectly liked to feel himself of use.

"Martin, before we separate, assure me seriously, and on your word of
honour, that Mr. Moore is better."

"How very much you think of that Moore!"

"No - but - many of his friends may ask me, and I wish to be able to give
an authentic answer."

"You may tell them he is well enough, only idle. You may tell them that
he takes mutton chops for dinner, and the best of arrowroot for supper.
I intercepted a basin myself one night on its way upstairs, and ate half
of it."

"And who waits on him, Martin? who nurses him?"

"Nurses him? The great baby! Why, a woman as round and big as our
largest water-butt - a rough, hard-favoured old girl. I make no doubt
she leads him a rich life. Nobody else is let near him. He is chiefly in
the dark. It is my belief she knocks him about terribly in that chamber.
I listen at the wall sometimes when I am in bed, and I think I hear her
thumping him. You should see her fist. She could hold half a dozen hands
like yours in her one palm. After all, notwithstanding the chops and
jellies he gets, I would not be in his shoes. In fact, it is my private
opinion that she eats most of what goes up on the tray to Mr. Moore. I
wish she may not be starving him."

Profound silence and meditation on Caroline's part, and a sly
watchfulness on Martin's.

"You never see him, I suppose, Martin?"

"I? No. I don't  care to see him, for my own part."

Silence again.

"Did not you come to our house once with Mrs. Pryor, about five weeks
since, to ask after him?" again inquired Martin.

"Yes."

"I dare say you wished to be shown upstairs?"

"We did wish it. We entreated it; but your mother declined."

"Ay! she declined. I heard it all. She treated you as it is her pleasure
to treat visitors now and then. She behaved to you rudely and harshly."

"She was not kind; for you know, Martin, we are relations, and it is
natural we should take an interest in Mr. Moore. But here we must part;
we are at your father's gate."

"Very well, what of that? I shall walk home with you."

"They will miss you, and wonder where you are."

"Let them. I can take care of myself, I suppose."

Martin knew that he had already incurred the penalty of a lecture, and
dry bread for his tea. No matter; the evening had furnished him with an
adventure. It was better than muffins and toast.

He walked home with Caroline. On the way he promised to see Mr. Moore,
in spite of the dragon who guarded his chamber, and appointed an hour on
the next day when Caroline was to come to Briarmains Wood and get
tidings of him. He would meet her at a certain tree. The scheme led to
nothing; still he liked it.

Having reached home, the dry bread and the lecture were duly
administered to him, and he was dismissed to bed at an early hour. He
accepted his punishment with the toughest stoicism.

Ere ascending to his chamber he paid a secret visit to the dining-room,
a still, cold, stately apartment, seldom used, for the family
customarily dined in the back parlour. He stood before the mantelpiece,
and lifted his candle to two pictures hung above - female heads: one, a
type of serene beauty, happy and innocent; the other, more lovely, but
forlorn and desperate.

"She looked like that ," he said, gazing on the latter sketch, "when
she sobbed, turned white, and leaned against the tree."

"I suppose," he pursued, when he was in his room, and seated on the edge
of his pallet-bed - "I suppose she is what they call ' in love ' - yes,
 in love with that long thing in the next chamber. Whisht! is that
Horsfall clattering him? I wonder he does not yell out. It really sounds
as if she had fallen on him tooth and nail; but I suppose she is making
the bed. I saw her at it once. She hit into the mattresses as if she was
boxing. It is queer, Zillah  they call her Zillah  - Zillah Horsfall is a
woman, and Caroline Helstone is a woman; they are two individuals of the
same species - not much alike though. Is she a pretty girl, that
Caroline? I suspect she is; very nice to look at - something so clear in
her face, so soft in her eyes. I approve of her looking at me; it does
me good. She has long eyelashes. Their shadow seems to rest where she
gazes, and to instil peace and thought. If she behaves well, and
continues to suit me as she has suited me to-day, I may do her a good
turn. I rather relish the notion of circumventing my mother and that
ogress old Horsfall. Not that I like humouring Moore; but whatever I do
I'll be paid for, and in coin of my own choosing. I know what reward I
will claim - one displeasing to Moore, and agreeable to myself."

He turned into bed.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

MARTIN'S TACTICS.


It was necessary to the arrangement of Martin's plan that he should stay
at home that day. Accordingly, he found no appetite for breakfast, and
just about school-time took a severe pain about his heart, which
rendered it advisable that, instead of setting out to the grammar school
with Mark, he should succeed to his father's arm-chair by the fireside,
and also to his morning paper. This point being satisfactorily settled,
and Mark being gone to Mr. Summer's class, and Matthew and Mr. Yorke
withdrawn to the counting-house, three other exploits - nay,
four - remained to be achieved.

The first of these was to realize the breakfast he had not yet tasted,
and with which his appetite of fifteen could ill afford to dispense; the
second, third, fourth, to get his mother, Miss Moore, and Mrs. Horsfall
successfully out of the way before four o'clock that afternoon.

The first was, for the present, the most pressing, since the work before
him demanded an amount of energy which the present empty condition of
his youthful stomach did not seem likely to supply.

Martin knew the way to the larder, and knowing this way he took it. The
servants were in the kitchen, breakfasting solemnly with closed doors;
his mother and Miss Moore were airing themselves on the lawn, and
discussing the closed doors aforesaid. Martin, safe in the larder, made
fastidious selection from its stores. His breakfast had been delayed; he
was determined it should be recherché . It appeared to him that a
variety on his usual somewhat insipid fare of bread and milk was both
desirable and advisable; the savoury and the salutary he thought might
be combined. There was store of rosy apples laid in straw upon a shelf;
he picked out three. There was pastry upon a dish; he selected an
apricot puff and a damson tart. On the plain household bread his eye
did not dwell; but he surveyed with favour some currant tea-cakes, and
condescended to make choice of one. Thanks to his clasp-knife, he was
able to appropriate a wing of fowl and a slice of ham; a cantlet of cold
custard-pudding he thought would harmonize with these articles; and
having made this final addition to his booty, he at length sallied forth
into the hall.

He was already half-way across - three steps more would have anchored him
in the harbour of the back parlour - when the front door opened, and
there stood Matthew. Better far had it been the Old Gentleman, in full
equipage of horns, hoofs, and tail.

Matthew, sceptic and scoffer, had already failed to subscribe a prompt
belief in that pain about the heart. He had muttered some words, amongst
which the phrase 'shamming Abraham" had been very distinctly audible,
and the succession to the armchair and newspaper had appeared to affect
him with mental spasms. The spectacle now before him - the apples, the
tarts, the tea-cakes, the fowl, ham, and pudding - offered evidence but
too well calculated to inflate his opinion of his own sagacity.

Martin paused interdit one minute, one instant; the next he knew his
ground, and pronounced all well. With the true perspicacity des âmes
élites , he at once saw how this at first sight untoward event might be
turned to excellent account. He saw how it might be so handled as to
secure the accomplishment of his second task - namely, the disposal of
his mother. He knew that a collision between him and Matthew always
suggested to Mrs. Yorke the propriety of a fit of hysterics. He further
knew that, on the principle of calm succeeding to storm, after a morning
of hysterics his mother was sure to indulge in an afternoon of bed. This
would accommodate him perfectly.

The collision duly took place in the hall. A dry laugh, an insulting
sneer, a contemptuous taunt, met by a nonchalant but most cutting reply,
were the signals. They rushed at it. Martin, who usually made little
noise on these occasions, made a great deal now. In flew the servants,
Mrs. Yorke, Miss Moore. No female hand could separate them. Mr. Yorke
was summoned.

"Sons," said he, "one of you must leave my roof if this occurs again. I
will have no Cain and Abel strife here."

Martin now allowed himself to be taken off. He had been hurt; he was the
youngest and slightest. He was quite cool, in no passion; he even
smiled, content that the most difficult part of the labour he had set
himself was over.

Once he seemed to flag in the course of the morning.

"It is not worth while to bother myself for that Caroline," he remarked.
But a quarter of an hour afterwards he was again in the dining-room,
looking at the head with dishevelled tresses, and eyes turbid with
despair.

"Yes," he said, "I made her sob, shudder, almost faint. I'll see her
smile before I've  done with her; besides, I want to outwit all these
womenites."

Directly after dinner Mrs. Yorke fulfilled her son's calculation by
withdrawing to her chamber. Now for Hortense.

That lady was just comfortably settled to stocking-mending in the back
parlour, when Martin - laying down a book which, stretched on the sofa
 he was still indisposed, according to his own account , he had been
perusing in all the voluptuous ease of a yet callow pacha - lazily
introduced some discourse about Sarah, the maid at the Hollow. In the
course of much verbal meandering he insinuated information that this
damsel was said to have three suitors - Frederic Murgatroyd, Jeremiah
Pighills, and John-of-Mally's-of-Hannah's-of-Deb's; and that Miss Mann
had affirmed she knew for a fact that, now the girl was left in sole
charge of the cottage, she often had her swains to meals, and
entertained them with the best the house afforded.

It needed no more. Hortense could not have lived another hour without
betaking herself to the scene of these nefarious transactions, and
inspecting the state of matters in person. Mrs. Horsfall remained.

Martin, master of the field now, extracted from his mother's work-basket
a bunch of keys; with these he opened the sideboard cupboard, produced
thence a black bottle and a small glass, placed them on the table,
nimbly mounted the stairs, made for Mr. Moore's door, tapped; the nurse
opened.

"If you please, ma'am, you are invited to step into the back parlour and
take some refreshment. You will not be disturbed; the family are out."

He watched her down; he watched her in; himself shut the door. He knew
she was safe.

The hard work was done; now for the pleasure. He snatched his cap, and
away for the wood.

It was yet but half-past three. It had been a fine morning, but the sky
looked dark now. It was beginning to snow; the wind blew cold; the wood
looked dismal, the old tree grim. Yet Martin approved the shadow on his
path. He found a charm in the spectral aspect of the doddered oak.

He had to wait. To and fro he walked, while the flakes fell faster; and
the wind, which at first had but moaned, pitifully howled.

"She is long in coming," he muttered, as he glanced along the narrow
track. "I wonder," he subjoined, "what I wish to see her so much for?
She is not coming for me. But I have power over her, and I want her to
come that I may use that power."

He continued his walk.

"Now," he resumed, when a further period had elapsed, "if she fails to
come, I shall hate and scorn her."

It struck four. He heard the church clock far away. A step so quick, so
light, that, but for the rustling of leaves, it would scarcely have
sounded on the wood-walk, checked his impatience. The wind blew fiercely
now, and the thickening white storm waxed bewildering; but on she came,
and not dismayed.

"Well, Martin," she said eagerly, "how is he?"

"It is queer how she thinks of him ," reflected Martin. "The blinding
snow and bitter cold are nothing to her, I believe; yet she is but a
'chitty-faced creature,' as my mother would say. I could find in my
heart to wish I had a cloak to wrap her in."

Thus meditating to himself, he neglected to answer Miss Helstone.

"You have seen him?"

"No."

"Oh! you promised you would."

"I mean to do better by you than that. Didn't  I say I don't  care to
see him?"

"But now it will be so long before I get to know any thing certain about
him, and I am sick of waiting. Martin, do see him, and give him
Caroline Helstone's regards, and say she wished to know how he was, and
if anything could be done for his comfort."

"I won't ."

"You are changed. You were so friendly last night."

"Come, we must not stand in this wood; it is too cold."

"But before I go promise me to come again to-morrow with news."

"No such thing. I am much too delicate to make and keep such
appointments in the winter season. If you knew what a pain I had in my
chest this morning, and how I went without breakfast, and was knocked
down besides, you'd feel the impropriety of bringing me here in the
snow. Come, I say."

"Are you really delicate, Martin?"

"Don't  I look so?"

"You have rosy cheeks."

"That's hectic. Will you come - or you won't ?"

"Where?"

"With me. I was a fool not to bring a cloak. I would have made you
cosy."

"You are going home; my nearest road lies in the opposite direction."

"Put your arm through mine; I'll take care of you."

"But the wall - the hedge - it is such hard work climbing, and you are too
slender and young to help me without hurting yourself."

"You shall go through the gate."

"But - - "

"But, but - will you trust me or not?"

She looked into his face.

"I think I will. Anything rather than return as anxious as I came."

"I can't  answer for that. This, however, I promise you: be ruled by me,
and you shall see Moore yourself."

"See him myself?"

"Yourself."

"But, dear Martin, does he know?"

"Ah! I'm dear now. No, he doesn't  know."

"And your mother and the others?"

"All is right."

Caroline fell into a long, silent fit of musing, but still she walked on
with her guide. They came in sight of Briarmains.

"Have you made up your mind?" he asked.

She was silent.

"Decide; we are just on the spot. I won't  see him - that I tell
you - except to announce your arrival."

"Martin, you are a strange boy, and this is a strange step; but all I
feel is and has been, for a long time, strange. I will see him."

"Having said that, you will neither hesitate nor retract?"

"No."

"Here we are, then. Do not be afraid of passing the parlour window; no
one will see you. My father and Matthew are at the mill, Mark is at
school, the servants are in the back kitchen, Miss Moore is at the
cottage, my mother in her bed, and Mrs. Horsfall in paradise. Observe - I
need not ring. I open the door; the hall is empty, the staircase quiet;
so is the gallery. The whole house and all its inhabitants are under a
spell, which I will not break till you are gone."

"Martin, I trust you."

"You never said a better word. Let me take your shawl. I will shake off
the snow and dry it for you. You are cold and wet. Never mind; there is
a fire upstairs. Are you ready?"

"Yes."

"Follow me."

He left his shoes on the mat, mounted the stair unshod. Caroline stole
after, with noiseless step. There was a gallery, and there was a
passage; at the end of that passage Martin paused before a door and
tapped. He had to tap twice - thrice. A voice, known to one listener, at
last said, "Come in."

The boy entered briskly.

"Mr. Moore, a lady called to inquire after you. None of the women were
about. It is washing-day, and the maids are over the crown of the head
in soap-suds in the back kitchen, so I asked her to step up."

"Up here, sir?"

"Up here, sir; but if you object, she shall go down again."

"Is this a place or am I a person to bring a lady to, you absurd lad?"

"No; so I'll take her off."

"Martin, you will stay here. Who is she?"

"Your grandmother from that château on the Scheldt Miss Moore talks
about."

"Martin," said the softest whisper at the door, "don't  be foolish."

"Is she there?" inquired Moore hastily. He had caught an imperfect
sound.

"She is there, fit to faint. She is standing on the mat, shocked at your
want of filial affection."

"Martin, you are an evil cross between an imp and a page. What is she
like?"

"More like me than you; for she is young and beautiful."

"You are to show her forward. Do you hear?"

"Come, Miss Caroline."

"Miss Caroline!" repeated Moore.

And when Miss Caroline entered she was encountered in the middle of the
chamber by a tall, thin, wasted figure, who took both her hands.

"I give you a quarter of an hour," said Martin, as he withdrew, "no
more. Say what you have to say in that time. Till it is past I will wait
in the gallery; nothing shall approach; I'll see you safe away. Should
you persist in staying longer, I leave you to your fate."

He shut the door. In the gallery he was as elate as a king. He had never
been engaged in an adventure he liked so well, for no adventure had ever
invested him with so much importance or inspired him with so much
interest.

"You are come at last," said the meagre man, gazing on his visitress
with hollow eyes.

"Did you expect me before?"

"For a month, near two months, we have been very near; and I have been
in sad pain, and danger, and misery, Cary."

"I could not come."

"Couldn't  you? But the rectory and Briarmains are very near - not two
miles apart."

There was pain and there was pleasure in the girl's face as she listened
to these implied reproaches. It was sweet, it was bitter to defend
herself.

"When I say I could not come, I mean I could not see you; for I came
with mamma the very day we heard what had happened. Mr. MacTurk then
told us it was impossible to admit any stranger."

"But afterwards - every fine afternoon these many weeks past I have
waited and listened. Something here, Cary" - laying his hand on his
breast - "told me it was impossible but that you should think of me. Not
that I merit thought; but we are old acquaintance - we are cousins."

"I came again, Robert; mamma and I came again."

"Did you? Come, that is worth hearing. Since you came again, we will sit
down and talk about it."

They sat down. Caroline drew her chair up to his. The air was now dark
with snow; an Iceland blast was driving it wildly. This pair neither
heard the long "wuthering" rush, nor saw the white burden it drifted.
Each seemed conscious but of one thing - the presence of the other.

"So mamma and you came again?"

"And Mrs. Yorke did treat us strangely. We asked to see you. 'No,' said
she, 'not in my house. I am at present responsible for his life; it
shall not be forfeited for half an hour's idle gossip.' But I must not
tell you all she said; it was very disagreeable. However, we came yet
again - mamma, Miss Keeldar, and I. This time we thought we should
conquer, as we were three against one, and Shirley was on our side. But
Mrs. Yorke opened such a battery."

Moore smiled. "What did she say?"

"Things that astonished us. Shirley laughed at last; I cried; mamma was
seriously annoyed. We were all three driven from the field. Since that
time I have only walked once a day past the house, just for the
satisfaction of looking up at your window, which I could distinguish by
the drawn curtains. I really dared not come in."

"I have wished for you, Caroline."

"I did not know that; I never dreamt one instant that you thought of me.
If I had but most distantly imagined such a possibility - - "

"Mrs. Yorke would still have beaten you."

"She would not. Stratagem should have been tried, if persuasion failed.
I would have come to the kitchen door; the servants should have let me
in, and I would have walked straight upstairs. In fact, it was far more
the fear of intrusion - the fear of yourself - that baffled me than the
fear of Mrs. Yorke."

"Only last night I despaired of ever seeing you again. Weakness has
wrought terrible depression in me - terrible depression."

"And you sit alone?"

"Worse than alone."

"But you must be getting better, since you can leave your bed?"

"I doubt whether I shall live. I see nothing for it, after such
exhaustion, but decline."

"You - you shall go home to the Hollow."

"Dreariness would accompany, nothing cheerful come near me."

"I will alter this. This shall be altered, were there ten Mrs.
Yorkes to do battle with."

"Cary, you make me smile."

"Do smile; smile again. Shall I tell you what I should like?"

"Tell me anything - only keep talking. I am Saul; but for music I should
perish."

"I should like you to be brought to the rectory, and given to me and
mamma."

"A precious gift! I have not laughed since they shot me till now."

"Do you suffer pain, Robert?"

"Not so much pain now; but I am hopelessly weak, and the state of my
mind is inexpressible - dark, barren, impotent. Do you not read it all in
my face? I look a mere ghost."

"Altered; yet I should have known you anywhere. But I understand your
feelings; I experienced something like it. Since we met, I too have been
very ill."

" Very ill?"

"I thought I should die. The tale of my life seemed told. Every night,
just at midnight, I used to wake from awful dreams; and the book lay
open before me at the last page, where was written 'Finis.' I had
strange feelings."

"You speak my experience."

"I believed I should never see you again; and I grew so thin - as thin as
you are now. I could do nothing for myself - neither rise nor lie down;
and I could not eat. Yet you see I am better."

"Comforter - sad as sweet. I am too feeble to say what I feel; but while
you speak I do feel."

"Here I am at your side, where I thought never more to be. Here I speak
to you. I see you listen to me willingly - look at me kindly. Did I count
on that? I despaired."

Moore sighed - a sigh so deep it was nearly a groan. He covered his eyes
with his hand.

"May I be spared to make some atonement."

Such was his prayer.

"And for what?"

"We will not touch on it now, Cary; unmanned as I am, I have not the
power to cope with such a topic. Was Mrs. Pryor with you during your
illness?"

"Yes" - Caroline smiled brightly - "you know she is mamma?"

"I have heard - Hortense told me; but that tale too I will receive from
yourself. Does she add to your happiness?"

"What! mamma? She is dear to me; how dear I cannot say. I was
altogether weary, and she held me up."

"I deserve to hear that in a moment when I can scarce lift my hand to my
head. I deserve it."

"It is no reproach against you."

"It is a coal of fire heaped on my head; and so is every word you
address to me, and every look that lights your sweet face. Come still
nearer, Lina; and give me your hand - if my thin fingers do not scare
you."

She took those thin fingers between her two little hands; she bent her
head et les effleura de ses levres .  I put that in French because the
word effleurer is an exquisite word.  Moore was much moved. A large
tear or two coursed down his hollow cheek.

"I'll keep these things in my heart, Cary; that kiss I will put by, and
you shall hear of it again one day."

"Come out!" cried Martin, opening the door - "come away; you have had
twenty minutes instead of a quarter of an hour."

"She will not stir yet, you hempseed."

"I dare not stay longer, Robert."

"Can you promise to return?"

"No, she can't ," responded Martin. "The thing mustn't  become customary.
I can't  be troubled. It's very well for once; I'll not have it
repeated."

" You 'll not have it repeated."

"Hush! don't  vex him; we could not have met to-day but for him. But I
will come again, if it is your wish that I should come."

"It is my wish - my one wish - almost the only wish I can feel."

"Come this minute. My mother has coughed, got up, set her feet on the
floor. Let her only catch you on the stairs, Miss Caroline. You're not
to bid him good-bye" - stepping between her and Moore - "you are to
march."

"My shawl, Martin."

"I have it. I'll put it on for you when you are in the hall."

He made them part. He would suffer no farewell but what could be
expressed in looks. He half carried Caroline down the stairs. In the
hall he wrapped her shawl round her, and, but that his mother's tread
then creaked in the gallery, and but that a sentiment of diffidence - the
proper, natural, therefore the noble impulse of his boy's heart - held
him back, he would have claimed his reward; he would have said, "Now,
Miss Caroline, for all this give me one kiss." But ere the words had
passed his lips she was across the snowy road, rather skimming than
wading the drifts.

"She is my debtor, and I will be paid."

He flattered himself that it was opportunity, not audacity, which had
failed him. He misjudged the quality of his own nature, and held it for
something lower than it was.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

CASE OF DOMESTIC PERSECUTION - REMARKABLE INSTANCE OF PIOUS PERSEVERANCE
IN THE DISCHARGE OF RELIGIOUS DUTIES.


Martin, having known the taste of excitement, wanted a second draught;
having felt the dignity of power, he loathed to relinquish it. Miss
Helstone - that girl he had always called ugly, and whose face was now
perpetually before his eyes, by day and by night, in dark and in
sunshine - had once come within his sphere. It fretted him to think the
visit might never be repeated.

Though a schoolboy he was no ordinary schoolboy; he was destined to grow
up an original. At a few years' later date he took great pains to pare
and polish himself down to the pattern of the rest of the world, but he
never succeeded; an unique stamp marked him always. He now sat idle at
his desk in the grammar school, casting about in his mind for the means
of adding another chapter to his commenced romance. He did not yet know
how many commenced life-romances are doomed never to get beyond the
first, or at most the second chapter. His Saturday half-holiday he spent
in the wood with his book of fairy legends, and that other unwritten
book of his imagination.

Martin harboured an irreligious reluctance to see the approach of
Sunday. His father and mother, while disclaiming community with the
Establishment, failed not duly, once on the sacred day, to fill their
large pew in Briarfield Church with the whole of their blooming family.
Theoretically, Mr. Yorke placed all sects and churches on a level. Mrs.
Yorke awarded the palm to Moravians and Quakers, on account of that
crown of humility by these worthies worn. Neither of them were ever
known, however, to set foot in a conventicle.

Martin, I say, disliked Sunday, because the morning service was long,
and the sermon usually little to his taste. This Saturday afternoon,
however, his woodland musings disclosed to him a new-found charm in the
coming day.

It proved a day of deep snow - so deep that Mrs. Yorke during breakfast
announced her conviction that the children, both boys and girls, would
be better at home; and her decision that, instead of going to church,
they should sit silent for two hours in the back parlour, while Rose and
Martin alternately read a succession of sermons - John Wesley's
"Sermons." John Wesley, being a reformer and an agitator, had a place
both in her own and her husband's favour.

"Rose will do as she pleases," said Martin, not looking up from the book
which, according to his custom then and in after-life, he was studying
over his bread and milk.

"Rose will do as she is told, and Martin too," observed the mother.

"I am going to church."

So her son replied, with the ineffable quietude of a true Yorke, who
knows his will and means to have it, and who, if pushed to the wall,
will let himself be crushed to death, provided no way of escape can be
found, but will never capitulate.

"It is not fit weather," said the father.

No answer. The youth read studiously; he slowly broke his bread and
sipped his milk.

"Martin hates to go to church, but he hates still more to obey," said
Mrs. Yorke.

"I suppose I am influenced by pure perverseness?"

"Yes, you are."

"Mother, I am not ."

"By what, then, are you influenced?"

"By a complication of motives, the intricacies of which I should as soon
think of explaining to you as I should of turning myself inside out to
exhibit the internal machinery of my frame."

"Hear Martin! hear him!" cried Mr. Yorke. "I must see and have this lad
of mine brought up to the bar. Nature meant him to live by his tongue.
Hesther, your third son must certainly be a lawyer; he has the
stock-in-trade - brass, self-conceit, and words - words - words."

"Some bread, Rose, if you please," requested Martin, with intense
gravity, serenity, phlegm. The boy had naturally a low, plaintive voice,
which in his "dour moods" rose scarcely above a lady's whisper. The more
inflexibly stubborn the humour, the softer, the sadder the tone. He
rang the bell, and gently asked for his walking-shoes.

"But, Martin," urged his sire, "there is drift all the way; a man could
hardly wade through it. However, lad," he continued, seeing that the boy
rose as the church bell began to toll, "this is a case wherein I would
by no means balk the obdurate chap of his will. Go to church by all
means. There is a pitiless wind, and a sharp, frozen sleet, besides the
depth under foot. Go out into it, since thou prefers it to a warm
fireside."

Martin quietly assumed his cloak, comforter, and cap, and deliberately
went out.

"My father has more sense than my mother," he pronounced. "How women
miss it! They drive the nail into the flesh, thinking they are hammering
away at insensate stone."

He reached church early.

"Now, if the weather frightens her  and it is a real December tempest ,
or if that Mrs. Pryor objects to her going out, and I should miss her
after all, it will vex me; but, tempest or tornado, hail or ice, she
 ought to come, and if she has a mind worthy of her eyes and features
she will come. She will be here for the chance of seeing me, as I am
here for the chance of seeing her. She will want to get a word
respecting her confounded sweetheart, as I want to get another flavour
of what I think the essence of life - a taste of existence, with the
spirit preserved in it, and not evaporated. Adventure is to stagnation
what champagne is to flat porter."

He looked round. The church was cold, silent, empty, but for one old
woman. As the chimes subsided and the single bell tolled slowly, another
and another elderly parishioner came dropping in, and took a humble
station in the free sittings. It is always the frailest, the oldest, and
the poorest that brave the worst weather, to prove and maintain their
constancy to dear old mother church. This wild morning not one affluent
family attended, not one carriage party appeared - all the lined and
cushioned pews were empty; only on the bare oaken seats sat ranged the
gray-haired elders and feeble paupers.

"I'll scorn her if she doesn't  come," muttered Martin, shortly and
savagely, to himself. The rector's shovel-hat had passed the porch. Mr.
Helstone and his clerk were in the vestry.

The bells ceased - the reading-desk was filled - the doors were
closed - the service commenced. Void stood the rectory pew - she was not
there. Martin scorned her.

"Worthless thing! vapid thing! commonplace humbug! Like all other
girls - weakly, selfish, shallow!"

Such was Martin's liturgy.

"She is not like our picture. Her eyes are not large and expressive; her
nose is not straight, delicate, Hellenic; her mouth has not that charm I
thought it had, which I imagined could beguile me of sullenness in my
worst moods. What is she? A thread-paper, a doll, a toy, a girl , in
short."

So absorbed was the young cynic he forgot to rise from his knees at the
proper place, and was still in an exemplary attitude of devotion when,
the litany over, the first hymn was given out. To be so caught did not
contribute to soothe him. He started up red  for he was as sensitive to
ridicule as any girl . To make the matter worse, the church door had
reopened, and the aisles were filling: patter, patter, patter, a hundred
little feet trotted in. It was the Sunday scholars. According to
Briarfield winter custom, these children had till now been kept where
there was a warm stove, and only led into church just before the
communion and sermon.

The little ones were settled first, and at last, when the boys and the
younger girls were all arranged - when the organ was swelling high, and
the choir and congregation were rising to uplift a spiritual song - a
tall class of young women came quietly in, closing the procession. Their
teacher, having seen them seated, passed into the rectory pew. The
French-gray cloak and small beaver bonnet were known to Martin; it was
the very costume his eyes had ached to catch. Miss Helstone had not
suffered the storm to prove an impediment. After all, she was come to
church. Martin probably whispered his satisfaction to his hymn book; at
any rate, he therewith hid his face two minutes.

Satisfied or not, he had time to get very angry with her again before
the sermon was over. She had never once looked his way; at least he had
not been so lucky as to encounter a glance.

"If," he said - "if she takes no notice of me, if she shows I am not in
her thoughts, I shall have a worse, a meaner opinion of her than ever.
Most despicable would it be to come for the sake of those sheep-faced
Sunday scholars, and not for my sake or that long skeleton Moore's."

The sermon found an end; the benediction was pronounced; the
congregation dispersed. She had not been near him.

Now, indeed, as Martin set his face homeward, he felt that the sleet was
sharp and the east wind cold.

His nearest way lay through some fields. It was a dangerous, because an
untrodden way. He did not care; he would take it. Near the second stile
rose a clump of trees. Was that an umbrella waiting there? Yes, an
umbrella, held with evident difficulty against the blast; behind it
fluttered a French-gray cloak. Martin grinned as he toiled up the steep,
encumbered field, difficult to the foot as a slope in the upper realms
of Etna. There was an inimitable look in his face when, having gained
the stile, he seated himself coolly thereupon, and thus opened a
conference which, for his own part, he was willing to prolong
indefinitely.

"I think you had better strike a bargain. Exchange me for Mrs. Pryor."

"I was not sure whether you would come this way, Martin, but I thought I
would run the chance. There is no such thing as getting a quiet word
spoken in the church or churchyard."

"Will you agree? - make over Mrs. Pryor to my mother, and put me in her
skirts?"

"As if I could understand you! What puts Mrs. Pryor into your head?"

"You call her 'mamma,' don't  you?"

"She is my mamma."

"Not possible - or so inefficient, so careless a mamma; I should make a
five times better one. You may laugh. I have no objection to see you
laugh. Your teeth - I hate ugly teeth; but yours are as pretty as a pearl
necklace, and a necklace of which the pearls are very fair, even, and
well matched too."

"Martin, what now? I thought the Yorkes never paid compliments?"

"They have not done till this generation; but I feel as if it were my
vocation to turn out a new variety of the Yorke species. I am rather
tired of my own ancestors. We have traditions going back for four
ages - tales of Hiram, which was the son of Hiram, which was the son of
Samuel, which was the son of John, which was the son of Zerubbabel
Yorke. All, from Zerubbabel down to the last Hiram, were such as you see
my father. Before that there was a Godfrey. We have his picture; it
hangs in Moore's bedroom; it is like me. Of his character we know
nothing; but I am sure it was different to his descendants. He has long,
curling dark hair; he is carefully and cavalierly dressed. Having said
that he is like me, I need not add that he is handsome."

"You are not handsome, Martin."

"No; but wait awhile - just let me take my time. I mean to begin from
this day to cultivate, to polish, and we shall see."

"You are a very strange, a very unaccountable boy, Martin. But don't 
imagine you ever will be handsome; you cannot."

"I mean to try. But we were talking about Mrs. Pryor. She must be the
most unnatural mamma in existence, coolly to let her daughter come out
in this weather. Mine was in such a rage because I would go to church;
she was fit to fling the kitchen brush after me."

"Mamma was very much concerned about me; but I am afraid I was
obstinate. I would go."

"To see me?"

"Exactly; I thought of nothing else. I greatly feared the snow would
hinder you from coming. You don't  know how pleased I was to see you all
by yourself in the pew."

" I came to fulfil my duty, and set the parish a good example. And so
you were obstinate, were you? I should like to see you obstinate, I
should. Wouldn't  I have you in good discipline if I owned you? Let me
take the umbrella."

"I can't  stay two minutes; our dinner will be ready."

"And so will ours; and we have always a hot dinner on Sundays. Roast
goose to-day, with apple-pie and rice-pudding. I always contrive to know
the bill of fare. Well, I like these things uncommonly; but I'll make
the sacrifice, if you will."

"We have a cold dinner. My uncle will allow no unnecessary cooking on
the Sabbath. But I must return; the house would be in commotion if I
failed to appear."

"So will Briarmains, bless you! I think I hear my father sending out the
overlooker and five of the dyers, to look in six directions for the body
of his prodigal son in the snow; and my mother repenting her of her
many misdeeds towards me, now I am gone."

"Martin, how is Mr. Moore?"

" That is what you came for, just to say that word."

"Come, tell me quickly."

"Hang him! he is no worse; but as ill-used as ever - mewed up, kept in
solitary confinement. They mean to make either an idiot or a maniac of
him, and take out a commission of lunacy. Horsfall starves him; you saw
how thin he was."

"You were very good the other day, Martin."

"What day? I am always good - a model."

"When will you be so good again?"

"I see what you are after; but you'll not wheedle me - I am no
cat's-paw."

"But it must be done. It is quite a right thing, and a necessary thing."

"How you encroach! Remember, I managed the matter of my own free will
before."

"And you will again."

"I won't . The business gave me far too much trouble. I like my ease."

"Mr. Moore wishes to see me, Martin, and I wish to see him."

"I dare say"  coolly .

"It is too bad of your mother to exclude his friends."

"Tell her so."

"His own relations."

"Come and blow her up."

"You know that would advance nothing. Well, I shall stick to my point.
See him I will. If you won't  help me, I'll manage without help."

"Do; there is nothing like self-reliance, self-dependence."

"I have no time to reason with you now; but I consider you provoking.
Good-morning."

Away she went, the umbrella shut, for she could not carry it against the
wind.

"She is not vapid; she is not shallow," said Martin. "I shall like to
watch, and mark how she will work her way without help. If the storm
were not of snow, but of fire - such as came refreshingly down on the
cities of the plain - she would go through it to procure five minutes'
speech of that Moore. Now, I consider I have had a pleasant morning.
The disappointments got time on; the fears and fits of anger only made
that short discourse pleasanter, when it came at last. She expected to
coax me at once. She'll not manage that in one effort. She shall come
again, again, and yet again. It would please me to put her in a
passion - to make her cry. I want to discover how far she will go - what
she will do and dare - to get her will. It seems strange and new to find
one human being thinking so much about another as she thinks about
Moore. But it is time to go home; my appetite tells me the hour. Won't  I
walk into that goose? and we'll try whether Matthew or I shall get the
largest cut of the apple-pie to-day."




CHAPTER XXXV.

WHEREIN MATTERS MAKE SOME PROGRESS, BUT NOT MUCH.


Martin had planned well. He had laid out a dexterously concerted scheme
for his private amusement. But older and wiser schemers than he are
often doomed to see their finest-spun projects swept to annihilation by
the sudden broom of Fate, that fell housewife whose red arm none can
control. In the present instance this broom was manufactured out of the
tough fibres of Moore's own stubborn purpose, bound tight with his will.
He was now resuming his strength, and making strange head against Mrs.
Horsfall. Each morning he amazed that matron with a fresh astonishment.
First he discharged her from her valet duties; he would dress himself.
Then he refused the coffee she brought him; he would breakfast with the
family. Lastly, he forbade her his chamber. On the same day, amidst the
outcries of all the women in the place, he put his head out of doors.
The morning after, he followed Mr. Yorke to his counting-house, and
requested an envoy to fetch a chaise from the Red House Inn. He was
resolved, he said, to return home to the Hollow that very afternoon. Mr.
Yorke, instead of opposing, aided and abetted him. The chaise was sent
for, though Mrs. Yorke declared the step would be his death. It came.
Moore, little disposed to speak, made his purse do duty for his tongue.
He expressed his gratitude to the servants and to Mrs. Horsfall by the
chink of his coin. The latter personage approved and understood this
language perfectly; it made amends for all previous contumacy. She and
her patient parted the best friends in the world.

The kitchen visited and soothed, Moore betook himself to the parlour. He
had Mrs. Yorke to appease; not quite so easy a task as the pacification
of her housemaids. There she sat plunged in sullen dudgeon, the
gloomiest speculations on the depths of man's ingratitude absorbing her
thoughts. He drew near and bent over her; she was obliged to look up,
if it were only to bid him "avaunt." There was beauty still in his pale,
wasted features; there was earnestness and a sort of sweetness - for he
was smiling - in his hollow eyes.

"Good-bye!" he said, and as he spoke the smile glittered and melted. He
had no iron mastery of his sensations now; a trifling emotion made
itself apparent in his present weak state.

"And what are you going to leave us for?" she asked. "We will keep you,
and do anything in the world for you, if you will only stay till you are
stronger."

"Good-bye!" he again said; and added, "You have been a mother to me;
give your wilful son one embrace."

Like a foreigner, as he was, he offered her first one cheek, then the
other. She kissed him.

"What a trouble - what a burden I have been to you!" he muttered.

"You are the worst trouble now, headstrong youth!" was the answer. "I
wonder who is to nurse you at Hollow's Cottage? Your sister Hortense
knows no more about such matters than a child."

"Thank God! for I have had nursing enough to last me my life."

Here the little girls came in - Jessie crying, Rose quiet but grave.
Moore took them out into the hall to soothe, pet, and kiss them. He knew
it was not in their mother's nature to bear to see any living thing
caressed but herself. She would have felt annoyed had he fondled a
kitten in her presence.

The boys were standing about the chaise as Moore entered it; but for
them he had no farewell. To Mr. Yorke he only said, "You have a good
riddance of me. That was an unlucky shot for you, Yorke; it turned
Briarmains into an hospital. Come and see me at the cottage soon."

He drew up the glass; the chaise rolled away. In half an hour he
alighted at his own garden wicket. Having paid the driver and dismissed
the vehicle, he leaned on that wicket an instant, at once to rest and to
muse.

"Six months ago I passed out at this gate," said he, "a proud, angry,
disappointed man. I come back sadder and wiser; weakly enough, but not
worried. A cold, gray, yet quiet world lies round - a world where, if I
hope little, I fear nothing. All slavish terrors of embarrassment have
left me. Let the worst come, I can work, as Joe Scott does, for an
honourable living; in such doom I yet see some hardship but no
degradation. Formerly, pecuniary ruin was equivalent in my eyes to
personal dishonour. It is not so now; I know the difference. Ruin is 
an evil, but one for which I am prepared; the day of whose coming I
know, for I have calculated. I can yet put it off six months - not an
hour longer. If things by that time alter, which is not probable; if
fetters, which now seem indissoluble, should be loosened from our trade
 of all things the most unlikely to happen , I might conquer in this
long struggle yet - I might - good God! what might I not do? But the
thought is a brief madness; let me see things with sane eyes. Ruin will
come, lay her axe to my fortune's roots, and hew them down. I shall
snatch a sapling, I shall cross the sea, and plant it in American woods.
Louis will go with me. Will none but Louis go? I cannot tell - I have no
right to ask."

He entered the house.

It was afternoon, twilight yet out of doors - starless and moonless
twilight; for though keenly freezing with a dry, black frost, heaven
wore a mask of clouds congealed and fast locked. The mill-dam too was
frozen. The Hollow was very still. Indoors it was already dark. Sarah
had lit a good fire in the parlour; she was preparing tea in the
kitchen.

"Hortense," said Moore, as his sister bustled up to help him off with
his cloak, "I am pleased to come home."

Hortense did not feel the peculiar novelty of this expression coming
from her brother, who had never before called the cottage his home, and
to whom its narrow limits had always heretofore seemed rather
restrictive than protective. Still, whatever contributed to his
happiness pleased her, and she expressed herself to that effect.

He sat down, but soon rose again. He went to the window; he came back to
the fire.

"Hortense!"

"Mon frere?"

"This little parlour looks very clean and pleasant - unusually bright,
somehow."

"It is true, brother; I have had the whole house thoroughly and
scrupulously cleaned in your absence."

"Sister, I think on this first day of your return home you ought to have
a friend or so to tea, if it were only to see how fresh and spruce you
have made the little place."

"True, brother. If it were not late I might send for Miss Mann."

"So you might; but it really is too late to disturb that good lady, and
the evening is much too cold for her to come out."

"How thoughtful in you, dear Gérard! We must put it off till another
day."

"I want some one to-day, dear sister - some quiet guest, who would tire
neither of us."

"Miss Ainley?"

"An excellent person, they say; but she lives too far off. Tell Harry
Scott to step up to the rectory with a request from you that Caroline
Helstone should come and spend the evening with you."

"Would it not be better to-morrow, dear brother?"

"I should like her to see the place as it is just now; its brilliant
cleanliness and perfect neatness are so much to your credit."

"It might benefit her in the way of example."

"It might and must; she ought to come."

He went into the kitchen.

"Sarah, delay tea half an hour." He then commissioned her to dispatch
Harry Scott to the rectory, giving her a twisted note hastily scribbled
in pencil by himself, and addressed "Miss Helstone."

Scarcely had Sarah time to get impatient under the fear of damage to her
toast already prepared when the messenger returned, and with him the
invited guest.

She entered through the kitchen, quietly tripped up Sarah's stairs to
take off her bonnet and furs, and came down as quietly, with her
beautiful curls nicely smoothed, her graceful merino dress and delicate
collar all trim and spotless, her gay little work-bag in her hand. She
lingered to exchange a few kindly words with Sarah, and to look at the
new tortoise-shell kitten basking on the kitchen hearth, and to speak to
the canary-bird, which a sudden blaze from the fire had startled on its
perch; and then she betook herself to the parlour.

The gentle salutation, the friendly welcome, were interchanged in such
tranquil sort as befitted cousins meeting; a sense of pleasure, subtle
and quiet as a perfume, diffused itself through the room; the
newly-kindled lamp burnt up bright; the tray and the singing urn were
brought in.

"I am pleased to come home," repeated Mr. Moore.

They assembled round the table. Hortense chiefly talked. She
congratulated Caroline on the evident improvement in her health. Her
colour and her plump cheeks were returning, she remarked. It was true.
There was an obvious change in Miss Helstone. All about her seemed
elastic; depression, fear, forlornness, were withdrawn. No longer
crushed, and saddened, and slow, and drooping, she looked like one who
had tasted the cordial of heart's ease, and been lifted on the wing of
hope.

After tea Hortense went upstairs. She had not rummaged her drawers for a
month past, and the impulse to perform that operation was now become
resistless. During her absence the talk passed into Caroline's hands.
She took it up with ease; she fell into her best tone of conversation. A
pleasing facility and elegance of language gave fresh charm to familiar
topics; a new music in the always soft voice gently surprised and
pleasingly captivated the listener; unwonted shades and lights of
expression elevated the young countenance with character, and kindled it
with animation.

"Caroline, you look as if you had heard good tidings," said Moore, after
earnestly gazing at her for some minutes.

"Do I?"

"I sent for you this evening that I might be cheered; but you cheer me
more than I had calculated."

"I am glad of that. And I really cheer you?"

"You look brightly, move buoyantly, speak musically."

"It is pleasant to be here again."

"Truly it is pleasant; I feel it so. And to see health on your cheek and
hope in your eye is pleasant, Cary; but what is this hope, and what is
the source of this sunshine I perceive about you?"

"For one thing, I am happy in mamma. I love her so much, and she loves
me. Long and tenderly she nursed me. Now, when her care has made me
well, I can occupy myself for and with her all the day. I say it is my
turn to attend to her; and I do attend to her. I am her waiting-woman
as well as her child. I like - you would laugh if you knew what pleasure
I have in making dresses and sewing for her. She looks so nice now,
Robert; I will not let her be old-fashioned. And then, she is charming
to talk to - full of wisdom, ripe in judgment, rich in information,
exhaustless in stores her observant faculties have quietly amassed.
Every day that I live with her I like her better, I esteem her more
highly, I love her more tenderly."

" That for one thing, then, Cary. You talk in such a way about 'mamma'
it is enough to make one jealous of the old lady."

"She is not old, Robert."

"Of the young lady, then."

"She does not pretend to be young."

"Well, of the matron. But you said 'mamma's' affection was one thing
that made you happy; now for the other thing."

"I am glad you are better."

"What besides?"

"I am glad we are friends."

"You and I?"

"Yes. I once thought we never should be."

"Cary, some day I mean to tell you a thing about myself that is not to
my credit, and consequently will not please you."

"Ah, don't ! I cannot bear to think ill of you."

"And I cannot bear that you should think better of me than I deserve."

"Well, but I half know your 'thing;' indeed, I believe I know all about
it."

"You do not."

"I believe I do."

"Whom does it concern besides me?"

She coloured; she hesitated; she was silent.

"Speak, Cary! Whom does it concern?"

She tried to utter a name, and could not.

"Tell me; there is none present but ourselves. Be frank."

"But if I guess wrong?"

"I will forgive. Whisper, Cary."

He bent his ear to her lips. Still she would not, or could not, speak
clearly to the point. Seeing that Moore waited and was resolved to hear
something, she at last said, "Miss Keeldar spent a day at the rectory
about a week since. The evening came on very wintry, and we persuaded
her to stay all night."

"And you and she curled your hair together?"

"How do you know that?"

"And then you chattered, and she told you - - "

"It was not at curling-hair time, so you are not as wise as you think;
and, besides, she didn't  tell me."

"You slept together afterwards?"

"We occupied the same room and bed. We did not sleep much; we talked the
whole night through."

"I'll be sworn you did! And then it all came out - tant pis . I would
rather you had heard it from myself."

"You are quite wrong. She did not tell me what you suspect - she is not
the person to proclaim such things; but yet I inferred something from
parts of her discourse. I gathered more from rumour, and I made out the
rest by instinct."

"But if she did not tell you that I wanted to marry her for the sake of
her money, and that she refused me indignantly and scornfully  you need
neither start nor blush; nor yet need you prick your trembling fingers
with your needle. That is the plain truth, whether you like it or
not  - if such was not the subject of her august confidences, on what
point did they turn? You say you talked the whole night through; what
about?"

"About things we never thoroughly discussed before, intimate friends as
we have been; but you hardly expect I should tell you?"

"Yes, yes, Cary; you will tell me. You said we were friends, and friends
should always confide in each other."

"But you are sure you won't  repeat it?"

"Quite sure."

"Not to Louis?"

"Not even to Louis. What does Louis care for young ladies' secrets?"

"Robert, Shirley is a curious, magnanimous being."

"I dare say. I can imagine there are both odd points and grand points
about her."

"I have found her chary in showing her feelings; but when they rush out,
river-like, and pass full and powerful before you - almost without leave
from her - you gaze, wonder; you admire, and - I think - love her."

"You saw this spectacle?"

"Yes; at dead of night, when all the house was silent, and starlight and
the cold reflection from the snow glimmered in our chamber, then I saw
Shirley's heart."

"Her heart's core? Do you think she showed you that?"

"Her heart's core."

"And how was it?"

"Like a shrine, for it was holy; like snow, for it was pure; like
flame, for it was warm; like death, for it was strong."

"Can she love? tell me that."

"What think you?"

"She has loved none that have loved her yet."

"Who are those that have loved her?"

He named a list of gentlemen, closing with Sir Philip Nunnely.

"She has loved none of these."

"Yet some of them were worthy of a woman's affection."

"Of some women's, but not of Shirley's."

"Is she better than others of her sex?"

"She is peculiar, and more dangerous to take as a wife - rashly."

"I can imagine that."

"She spoke of you - - "

"Oh, she did! I thought you denied it."

"She did not speak in the way you fancy; but I asked her, and I would
make her tell me what she thought of you, or rather how she felt towards
you. I wanted to know; I had long wanted to know."

"So had I; but let us hear. She thinks meanly, she feels contemptuously,
doubtless?"

"She thinks of you almost as highly as a woman can think of a man. You
know she can be eloquent. I yet feel in fancy the glow of the language
in which her opinion was conveyed."

"But how does she feel?"

"Till you shocked her  she said you had shocked her, but she would not
tell me how  she felt as a sister feels towards a brother of whom she is
at once fond and proud."

"I'll shock her no more, Cary, for the shock rebounded on myself till I
staggered again. But that comparison about sister and brother is all
nonsense. She is too rich and proud to entertain fraternal sentiments
for me."

"You don't  know her, Robert; and, somehow, I fancy now  I had other
ideas formerly  that you cannot know her. You and she are not so
constructed as to be able thoroughly to understand each other."

"It may be so. I esteem her, I admire her; and yet my impressions
concerning her are harsh - perhaps uncharitable. I believe, for instance,
that she is incapable of love - - "

"Shirley incapable of love!"

"That she will never marry. I imagine her jealous of compromising her
pride, of relinquishing her power, of sharing her property."

"Shirley has hurt your amour propre ."

"She did hurt it; though I had not an emotion of tenderness, nor a spark
of passion for her."

"Then, Robert, it was very wicked in you to want to marry her."

"And very mean, my little pastor, my pretty priestess. I never wanted to
kiss Miss Keeldar in my life, though she has fine lips, scarlet and
round as ripe cherries; or, if I did wish it, it was the mere desire of
the eye."

"I doubt, now, whether you are speaking the truth. The grapes or the
cherries are sour - 'hung too high.'"

"She has a pretty figure, a pretty face, beautiful hair. I acknowledge
all her charms and feel none of them, or only feel them in a way she
would disdain. I suppose I was truly tempted by the mere gilding of the
bait. Caroline, what a noble fellow your Robert is - great, good,
disinterested, and then so pure!"

"But not perfect. He made a great blunder once, and we will hear no more
about it."

"And shall we think no more about it, Cary? Shall we not despise him in
our heart - gentle but just, compassionate but upright?"

"Never! We will remember that with what measure we mete it shall be
measured unto us, and so we will give no scorn, only affection."

"Which won't  satisfy, I warn you of that. Something besides
affection - something far stronger, sweeter, warmer - will be demanded one
day. Is it there to give?"

Caroline was moved, much moved.

"Be calm, Lina," said Moore soothingly. "I have no intention, because I
have no right, to perturb your mind now, nor for months to come. Don't 
look as if you would leave me. We will make no more agitating allusions;
we will resume our gossip. Do not tremble; look me in the face. See what
a poor, pale, grim phantom I am - more pitiable than formidable."

She looked shyly. "There is something formidable still, pale as you
are," she said, as her eye fell under his.

"To return to Shirley," pursued Moore: "is it your opinion that she is
ever likely to marry?"

"She loves."

"Platonically - theoretically - all humbug!"

"She loves what I call sincerely."

"Did she say so?"

"I cannot affirm that she said so. No such confession as 'I love this
man or that' passed her lips."

"I thought not."

"But the feeling made its way in spite of her, and I saw it. She spoke
of one man in a strain not to be misunderstood. Her voice alone was
sufficient testimony. Having wrung from her an opinion on your
character, I demanded a second opinion of - another person about whom I
had my conjectures, though they were the most tangled and puzzled
conjectures in the world. I would make her speak. I shook her, I chid
her, I pinched her fingers when she tried to put me off with gibes and
jests in her queer provoking way, and at last out it came. The voice, I
say, was enough; hardly raised above a whisper, and yet such a soft
vehemence in its tones. There was no confession, no confidence, in the
matter. To these things she cannot condescend; but I am sure that man's
happiness is dear to her as her own life."

"Who is it?"

"I charged her with the fact. She did not deny, she did not avow, but
looked at me. I saw her eyes by the snow-gleam. It was quite enough. I
triumphed over her mercilessly."

"What right had you to triumph? Do you mean to say you are fancy
free?"

"Whatever I am, Shirley is a bondswoman. Lioness, she has found her
captor. Mistress she may be of all round her, but her own mistress she
is not."

"So you exulted at recognizing a fellow-slave in one so fair and
imperial?"

"I did; Robert, you say right, in one so fair and imperial."

"You confess it - a fellow -slave?"

"I confess nothing; but I say that haughty Shirley is no more free than
was Hagar."

"And who, pray, is the Abraham, the hero of a patriarch who has achieved
such a conquest?"

"You still speak scornfully, and cynically, and sorely; but I will make
you change your note before I have done with you."

"We will see that. Can she marry this Cupidon?"

"Cupidon! he is just about as much a Cupidon as you are a Cyclops."

"Can she marry him?"

"You will see."

"I want to know his name, Cary."

"Guess it."

"Is it any one in this neighbourhood?"

"Yes, in Briarfield parish."

"Then it is some person unworthy of her. I don't  know a soul in
Briarfield parish her equal."

"Guess."

"Impossible. I suppose she is under a delusion, and will plunge into
some absurdity, after all."

Caroline smiled.

"Do you approve the choice?" asked Moore.

"Quite, quite ."

"Then I am puzzled; for the head which owns this bounteous fall of
hazel curls is an excellent little thinking machine, most accurate in
its working. It boasts a correct, steady judgment, inherited from
'mamma,' I suppose."

"And I quite approve, and mamma was charmed."

"'Mamma' charmed - Mrs. Pryor! It can't  be romantic, then?"

"It is romantic, but it is also right."

"Tell me, Cary - tell me out of pity; I am too weak to be tantalized."

"You shall be tantalized - it will do you no harm; you are not so weak as
you pretend."

"I have twice this evening had some thoughts of falling on the floor at
your feet."

"You had better not. I shall decline to help you up."

"And worshipping you downright. My mother was a Roman Catholic. You look
like the loveliest of her pictures of the Virgin. I think I will embrace
her faith and kneel and adore."

"Robert, Robert, sit still; don't  be absurd. I will go to Hortense if
you commit extravagances."

"You have stolen my senses. Just now nothing will come into my mind but
 les litanies de la sainte Vierge. Rose céleste, reine des anges !"

" Tour d'ivoire, maison d'or - is not that the jargon? Well, sit down
quietly, and guess your riddle."

"But 'mamma' charmed - there's the puzzle."

"I'll tell you what mamma said when I told her. 'Depend upon it, my
dear, such a choice will make the happiness of Miss Keeldar's life.'"

"I'll guess once, and no more. It is old Helstone. She is going to be
your aunt."

"I'll tell my uncle; I'll tell Shirley!" cried Caroline, laughing
gleefully. "Guess again, Robert; your blunders are charming."

"It is the parson - Hall."

"Indeed, no; he is mine, if you please."

"Yours! Ay, the whole generation of women in Briarfield seem to have
made an idol of that priest. I wonder why; he is bald, sand-blind,
gray-haired."

"Fanny will be here to fetch me before you have solved the riddle, if
you don't  make haste."

"I'll guess no more - I am tired; and then I don't  care. Miss Keeldar may
marry le grand Turc for me."

"Must I whisper?"

"That you must, and quickly. Here comes Hortense; come near, a little
nearer, my own Lina. I care for the whisper more than the words."

She whispered. Robert gave a start, a flash of the eye, a brief laugh.
Miss Moore entered, and Sarah followed behind, with information that
Fanny was come. The hour of converse was over.

Robert found a moment to exchange a few more whispered sentences. He was
waiting at the foot of the staircase as Caroline descended after putting
on her shawl.

"Must I call Shirley a noble creature now?" he asked.

"If you wish to speak the truth, certainly."

"Must I forgive her?"

"Forgive her? Naughty Robert! Was she in the wrong, or were you?"

"Must I at length love her downright, Cary?"

Caroline looked keenly up, and made a movement towards him, something
between the loving and the petulant.

"Only give the word, and I'll try to obey you."

"Indeed, you must not love her; the bare idea is perverse."

"But then she is handsome, peculiarly handsome. Hers is a beauty that
grows on you. You think her but graceful when you first see her; you
discover her to be beautiful when you have known her for a year."

"It is not you who are to say these things. Now, Robert, be good."

"O Cary, I have no love to give. Were the goddess of beauty to woo me, I
could not meet her advances. There is no heart which I can call mine in
this breast."

"So much the better; you are a great deal safer without. Good-night."

"Why must you always go, Lina, at the very instant when I most want you
to stay?"

"Because you most wish to retain when you are most certain to lose."

"Listen; one other word. Take care of your own heart - do you hear me?"

"There is no danger."

"I am not convinced of that. The Platonic parson, for instance."

"Who - Malone?"

"Cyril Hall. I owe more than one twinge of jealousy to that quarter."

"As to you, you have been flirting with Miss Mann. She showed me the
other day a plant you had given her. - Fanny, I am ready."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

WRITTEN IN THE SCHOOLROOM.


Louis Moore's doubts respecting the immediate evacuation of Fieldhead by
Mr. Sympson turned out to be perfectly well founded. The very next day
after the grand quarrel about Sir Philip Nunnely a sort of
reconciliation was patched up between uncle and niece. Shirley, who
could never find it in her heart to be or to seem inhospitable  except
in the single instance of Mr. Donne , begged the whole party to stay a
little longer. She begged in such earnest it was evident she wished it
for some reason. They took her at her word. Indeed, the uncle could not
bring himself to leave her quite unwatched - at full liberty to marry
Robert Moore as soon as that gentleman should be able  Mr. Sympson
piously prayed this might never be the case  to reassert his supposed
pretensions to her hand. They all stayed.

In his first rage against all the house of Moore, Mr. Sympson had so
conducted himself towards Mr. Louis that that gentleman - patient of
labour or suffering, but intolerant of coarse insolence - had promptly
resigned his post, and could now be induced to resume and retain it only
till such time as the family should quit Yorkshire. Mrs. Sympson's
entreaties prevailed with him thus far; his own attachment to his pupil
constituted an additional motive for concession; and probably he had a
third motive, stronger than either of the other two. Probably he would
have found it very hard indeed to leave Fieldhead just now.

Things went on for some time pretty smoothly. Miss Keeldar's health was
re-established; her spirits resumed their flow. Moore had found means to
relieve her from every nervous apprehension; and, indeed, from the
moment of giving him her confidence, every fear seemed to have taken
wing. Her heart became as lightsome, her manner as careless, as those of
a little child, that, thoughtless of its own life or death, trusts all
responsibility to its parents. He and William Farren - through whose
medium he made inquiries concerning the state of Phobe - agreed in
asserting that the dog was not mad, that it was only ill-usage which had
driven her from home; for it was proved that her master was in the
frequent habit of chastising her violently. Their assertion might or
might not be true. The groom and gamekeeper affirmed to the
contrary - both asserting that, if hers was not a clear case of
hydrophobia, there was no such disease. But to this evidence Louis Moore
turned an incredulous ear. He reported to Shirley only what was
encouraging. She believed him; and, right or wrong, it is certain that
in her case the bite proved innocuous.

November passed; December came. The Sympsons were now really departing.
It was incumbent on them to be at home by Christmas. Their packages were
preparing; they were to leave in a few days. One winter evening, during
the last week of their stay, Louis Moore again took out his little blank
book, and discoursed with it as follows: - 

          

"She is lovelier than ever. Since that little cloud was dispelled all
the temporary waste and wanness have vanished. It was marvellous to see
how soon the magical energy of youth raised her elastic and revived her
blooming.

"After breakfast this morning, when I had seen her, and listened to her,
and, so to speak, felt her, in every sentient atom of my frame, I passed
from her sunny presence into the chill drawing-room. Taking up a little
gilt volume, I found it to contain a selection of lyrics. I read a poem
or two; whether the spell was in me or in the verse I know not, but my
heart filled genially, my pulse rose. I glowed, notwithstanding the
frost air. I, too, am young as yet. Though she said she never considered
me young, I am barely thirty. There are moments when life, for no other
reason than my own youth, beams with sweet hues upon me.

"It was time to go to the schoolroom. I went. That same schoolroom is
rather pleasant in a morning. The sun then shines through the low
lattice; the books are in order; there are no papers strewn about; the
fire is clear and clean; no cinders have fallen, no ashes accumulated. I
found Henry there, and he had brought with him Miss Keeldar. They were
together.

"I said she was lovelier than ever. She is. A fine rose, not deep but
delicate, opens on her cheek. Her eye, always dark, clear, and speaking,
utters now a language I cannot render; it is the utterance, seen not
heard, through which angels must have communed when there was 'silence
in heaven.' Her hair was always dusk as night and fine as silk, her neck
was always fair, flexible, polished; but both have now a new charm. The
tresses are soft as shadow, the shoulders they fall on wear a goddess
grace. Once I only saw her beauty, now I feel it.

"Henry was repeating his lesson to her before bringing it to me. One of
her hands was occupied with the book; he held the other. That boy gets
more than his share of privileges; he dares caress and is caressed. What
indulgence and compassion she shows him! Too much. If this went on,
Henry in a few years, when his soul was formed, would offer it on her
altar, as I have offered mine.

"I saw her eyelid flitter when I came in, but she did not look up; now 
she hardly ever gives me a glance. She seems to grow silent too; to me 
she rarely speaks, and when I am present, she says little to others. In
my gloomy moments I attribute this change to indifference, aversion,
what not? In my sunny intervals I give it another meaning. I say, were I
her equal, I could find in this shyness coyness, and in that coyness
love. As it is, dare I look for it? What could I do with it if found?

"This morning I dared at least contrive an hour's communion for her and
me; I dared not only wish but will an interview with her. I dared
summon solitude to guard us. Very decidedly I called Henry to the door.
Without hesitation I said, 'Go where you will, my boy; but, till I call
you, return not here.'

"Henry, I could see, did not like his dismissal. That boy is young, but
a thinker; his meditative eye shines on me strangely sometimes. He half
feels what links me to Shirley; he half guesses that there is a dearer
delight in the reserve with which I am treated than in all the
endearments he is allowed. The young, lame, half-grown lion would growl
at me now and then, because I have tamed his lioness and am her keeper,
did not the habit of discipline and the instinct of affection hold him
subdued. Go, Henry; you must learn to take your share of the bitter of
life with all of Adam's race that have gone before or will come after
you. Your destiny can be no exception to the common lot; be grateful
that your love is overlooked thus early, before it can claim any
affinity to passion. An hour's fret, a pang of envy, suffice to express
what you feel. Jealousy hot as the sun above the line, rage destructive
as the tropic storm, the clime of your sensations ignores - as yet.

"I took my usual seat at the desk, quite in my usual way. I am blessed
in that power to cover all inward ebullition with outward calm. No one
who looks at my slow face can guess the vortex sometimes whirling in my
heart, and engulfing thought and wrecking prudence. Pleasant is it to
have the gift to proceed peacefully and powerfully in your course
without alarming by one eccentric movement. It was not my present
intention to utter one word of love to her, or to reveal one glimpse of
the fire in which I wasted. Presumptuous I never have been; presumptuous
I never will be. Rather than even seem selfish and interested, I would
resolutely rise, gird my loins, part and leave her, and seek, on the
other side of the globe, a new life, cold and barren as the rock the
salt tide daily washes. My design this morning was to take of her a near
scrutiny - to read a line in the page of her heart. Before I left I
determined to know what I was leaving.

"I had some quills to make into pens. Most men's hands would have
trembled when their hearts were so stirred; mine went to work steadily,
and my voice, when I called it into exercise, was firm.

"'This day week you will be alone at Fieldhead, Miss Keeldar.'

"'Yes: I rather think my uncle's intention to go is a settled one now.'

"'He leaves you dissatisfied.'

"'He is not pleased with me.'

"'He departs as he came - no better for his journey. This is mortifying.'

"'I trust the failure of his plans will take from him all inclination to
lay new ones.'

"'In his way Mr. Sympson honestly wished you well. All he has done or
intended to do he believed to be for the best.'

"'You are kind to undertake the defence of a man who has permitted
himself to treat you with so much insolence.'

"'I never feel shocked at, or bear malice for, what is spoken in
character; and most perfectly in character was that vulgar and violent
onset against me, when he had quitted you worsted.'

"'You cease now to be Henry's tutor?'

"'I shall be parted from Henry for a while  if he and I live we shall
meet again somehow, for we love each other  and be ousted from the bosom
of the Sympson family for ever. Happily this change does not leave me
stranded; it but hurries into premature execution designs long formed.'

"'No change finds you off your guard. I was sure, in your calm way, you
would be prepared for sudden mutation. I always think you stand in the
world like a solitary but watchful, thoughtful archer in a wood. And the
quiver on your shoulder holds more arrows than one; your bow is provided
with a second string. Such too is your brother's wont. You two might go
forth homeless hunters to the loneliest western wilds; all would be well
with you. The hewn tree would make you a hut, the cleared forest yield
you fields from its stripped bosom, the buffalo would feel your
rifle-shot, and with lowered horns and hump pay homage at your feet.'

"'And any Indian tribe of Blackfeet or Flatheads would afford us a
bride, perhaps?'

"'No'  hesitating , 'I think not. The savage is sordid. I think - that
is, I hope - you would neither of you share your hearth with that to
which you could not give your heart.'

"'What suggested the wild West to your mind, Miss Keeldar? Have you been
with me in spirit when I did not see you? Have you entered into my
day-dreams, and beheld my brain labouring at its scheme of a future?'

"She had separated a slip of paper for lighting tapers - a spill, as it
is called - into fragments. She threw morsel by morsel into the fire, and
stood pensively watching them consume. She did not speak.

"'How did you learn what you seem to know about my intentions?'

"'I know nothing. I am only discovering them now. I spoke at hazard.'

"'Your hazard sounds like divination. A tutor I will never be again;
never take a pupil after Henry and yourself; not again will I sit
habitually at another man's table - no more be the appendage of a family.
I am now a man of thirty; I have never been free since I was a boy of
ten. I have such a thirst for freedom, such a deep passion to know her
and call her mine, such a day-desire and night-longing to win her and
possess her, I will not refuse to cross the Atlantic for her sake; her I
will follow deep into virgin woods. Mine it shall not be to accept a
savage girl as a slave - she could not be a wife. I know no white woman
whom I love that would accompany me; but I am certain Liberty will await
me, sitting under a pine. When I call her she will come to my loghouse,
and she shall fill my arms.'

"She could not hear me speak so unmoved, and she was moved. It was
right - I meant to move her. She could not answer me, nor could she look
at me. I should have been sorry if she could have done either. Her cheek
glowed as if a crimson flower through whose petals the sun shone had
cast its light upon it. On the white lid and dark lashes of her downcast
eye trembled all that is graceful in the sense of half-painful,
half-pleasing shame.

"Soon she controlled her emotion, and took all her feelings under
command. I saw she had felt insurrection, and was waking to empire. She
sat down. There was that in her face which I could read. It said, I see
the line which is my limit; nothing shall make me pass it. I feel - I
know how far I may reveal my feelings, and when I must clasp the volume.
I have advanced to a certain distance, as far as the true and sovereign
and undegraded nature of my kind permits; now here I stand rooted. My
heart may break if it is baffled; let it break. It shall never dishonour
me; it shall never dishonour my sisterhood in me. Suffering before
degradation! death before treachery!

"I, for my part, said, 'If she were poor, I would be at her feet; if she
were lowly, I would take her in my arms. Her gold and her station are
two griffins that guard her on each side. Love looks and longs, and
dares not; Passion hovers round, and is kept at bay; Truth and Devotion
are scared. There is nothing to lose in winning her, no sacrifice to
make. It is all clear gain, and therefore unimaginably difficult.'

"Difficult or not, something must be done, something must be said. I
could not, and would not, sit silent with all that beauty modestly mute
in my presence. I spoke thus, and still I spoke with calm. Quiet as my
words were, I could hear they fell in a tone distinct, round, and deep.

"'Still, I know I shall be strangely placed with that mountain nymph
Liberty. She is, I suspect, akin to that Solitude which I once wooed,
and from which I now seek a divorce. These Oreads are peculiar. They
come upon you with an unearthly charm, like some starlight evening; they
inspire a wild but not warm delight; their beauty is the beauty of
spirits; their grace is not the grace of life, but of seasons or scenes
in nature. Theirs is the dewy bloom of morning, the languid flush of
evening, the peace of the moon, the changefulness of clouds. I want and
will have something different. This elfish splendour looks chill to my
vision, and feels frozen to my touch. I am not a poet; I cannot live
with abstractions. You, Miss Keeldar, have sometimes, in your laughing
satire, called me a material philosopher, and implied that I live
sufficiently for the substantial. Certainly I feel material from head to
foot; and glorious as Nature is, and deeply as I worship her with the
solid powers of a solid heart, I would rather behold her through the
soft human eyes of a loved and lovely wife than through the wild orbs of
the highest goddess of Olympus.'

"'Juno could not cook a buffalo steak as you like it,' said she.

"'She could not; but I will tell you who could - some young, penniless,
friendless orphan girl. I wish I could find such a one - pretty enough
for me to love, with something of the mind and heart suited to my taste;
not uneducated - honest and modest. I care nothing for attainments, but I
would fain have the germ of those sweet natural powers which nothing
acquired can rival; any temper Fate wills - I can manage the hottest. To
such a creature as this I should like to be first tutor and then
husband. I would teach her my language, my habits and my principles, and
then I would reward her with my love.'

"' Reward her, lord of the creation - reward her!'" ejaculated she,
with a curled lip.

"'And be repaid a thousandfold.'

"'If she willed it, monseigneur.'

"'And she should will it.'

"'You have stipulated for any temper Fate wills. Compulsion is flint and
a blow to the metal of some souls.'

"'And love the spark it elicits.'

"'Who cares for the love that is but a spark - seen, flown upward, and
gone?'

"'I must find my orphan girl. Tell me how, Miss Keeldar.'

"'Advertise; and be sure you add, when you describe the qualifications,
she must be a good plain cook.'

"'I must find her; and when I do find her I shall marry her.'

"'Not you!' and her voice took a sudden accent of peculiar scorn.

"I liked this. I had roused her from the pensive mood in which I had
first found her. I would stir her further.

"'Why doubt it?'

"' You marry!'

"'Yes, of course; nothing more evident than that I can and shall.'

"'The contrary is evident, Mr. Moore.'

"She charmed me in this mood - waxing disdainful, half insulting; pride,
temper, derision, blent in her large fine eye, that had just now the
look of a merlin's.

"'Favour me with your reasons for such an opinion, Miss Keeldar.'

"'How will you manage to marry, I wonder?'

"'I shall manage it with ease and speed when I find the proper person.'

"'Accept celibacy!'  and she made a gesture with her hand as if she gave
me something  'take it as your doom!'

"'No; you cannot give what I already have. Celibacy has been mine for
thirty years. If you wish to offer me a gift, a parting present, a
keepsake, you must change the boon.'

"'Take worse, then!'

"'How - what?'

"I now felt, and looked, and spoke eagerly. I was unwise to quit my
sheet-anchor of calm even for an instant; it deprived me of an advantage
and transferred it to her. The little spark of temper dissolved in
sarcasm, and eddied over her countenance in the ripples of a mocking
smile.

"'Take a wife that has paid you court to save your modesty, and thrust
herself upon you to spare your scruples.'

"'Only show me where.'

"'Any stout widow that has had a few husbands already, and can manage
these things.'

"'She must not be rich, then. Oh these riches!'

"'Never would you have gathered the produce of the gold-bearing garden.
You have not courage to confront the sleepless dragon; you have not
craft to borrow the aid of Atlas.'

"'You look hot and haughty.'

"'And you far haughtier. Yours is the monstrous pride which counterfeits
humility.'

"'I am a dependant; I know my place.'

"'I am a woman; I know mine.'

"'I am poor; I must be proud.'

"'I have received ordinances, and own obligations stringent as yours.'

"We had reached a critical point now, and we halted and looked at each
other. She would not give in, I felt. Beyond this I neither felt nor
saw. A few moments yet were mine. The end was coming - I heard its
rush - but not come. I would dally, wait, talk, and when impulse urged I
would act. I am never in a hurry; I never was in a hurry in my whole
life. Hasty people drink the nectar of existence scalding hot; I taste
it cool as dew. I proceeded: 'Apparently, Miss Keeldar, you are as
little likely to marry as myself. I know you have refused three - nay,
four - advantageous offers, and, I believe, a fifth. Have you rejected
Sir Philip Nunnely?'

"I put this question suddenly and promptly.

"'Did you think I should take him?'

"'I thought you might.'

"'On what grounds, may I ask?'

"'Conformity of rank, age, pleasing contrast of temper - for he is mild
and amiable - harmony of intellectual tastes.'

"'A beautiful sentence! Let us take it to pieces. "Conformity of rank."
He is quite above me. Compare my grange with his palace, if you please.
I am disdained by his kith and kin. "Suitability of age." We were born
in the same year; consequently he is still a boy, while I am a
woman - ten years his senior to all intents and purposes. "Contrast of
temper." Mild and amiable, is he; I - what? Tell me.'

"'Sister of the spotted, bright, quick, fiery leopard.'

"'And you would mate me with a kid - the millennium being yet millions of
centuries from mankind; being yet, indeed, an archangel high in the
seventh heaven, uncommissioned to descend? Unjust barbarian! "Harmony of
intellectual tastes." He is fond of poetry, and I hate it - - '

"'Do you? That is news.'

"'I absolutely shudder at the sight of metre or at the sound of rhyme
whenever I am at the priory or Sir Philip at Fieldhead. Harmony,
indeed! When did I whip up syllabub sonnets or string stanzas fragile as
fragments of glass? and when did I betray a belief that those
penny-beads were genuine brilliants?'

"'You might have the satisfaction of leading him to a higher standard,
of improving his tastes.'

"'Leading and improving! teaching and tutoring! bearing and forbearing!
Pah! my husband is not to be my baby. I am not to set him his daily
lesson and see that he learns it, and give him a sugar-plum if he is
good, and a patient, pensive, pathetic lecture if he is bad. But it is
like a tutor to talk of the 'satisfaction of teaching." I suppose you 
think it the finest employment in the world. I don't . I reject it.
Improving a husband! No. I shall insist upon my husband improving me, or
else we part.'

"'God knows it is needed!'

"'What do you mean by that, Mr. Moore?'

"'What I say. Improvement is imperatively needed.'

"'If you were a woman you would school monsieur, votre mari ,
charmingly. It would just suit you; schooling is your vocation.'

"'May I ask whether, in your present just and gentle mood, you mean to
taunt me with being a tutor?'

"'Yes, bitterly; and with anything else you please - any defect of which
you are painfully conscious.'

"'With being poor, for instance?'

"'Of course; that will sting you. You are sore about your poverty; you
brood over that.'

"'With having nothing but a very plain person to offer the woman who may
master my heart?'

"'Exactly. You have a habit of calling yourself plain. You are sensitive
about the cut of your features because they are not quite on an Apollo
pattern. You abase them more than is needful, in the faint hope that
others may say a word in their behalf - which won't  happen. Your face is
nothing to boast of, certainly - not a pretty line nor a pretty tint to
be found therein.'

"'Compare it with your own.'

"'It looks like a god of Egypt - a great sand-buried stone head; or
rather I will compare it to nothing so lofty. It looks like Tartar. You
are my mastiff's cousin. I think you as much like him as a man can be
like a dog.'

"'Tartar is your dear companion. In summer, when you rise early, and
run out into the fields to wet your feet with the dew, and freshen your
cheek and uncurl your hair with the breeze, you always call him to
follow you. You call him sometimes with a whistle that you learned from
me. In the solitude of your wood, when you think nobody but Tartar is
listening, you whistle the very tunes you imitated from my lips, or sing
the very songs you have caught up by ear from my voice. I do not ask
whence flows the feeling which you pour into these songs, for I know it
flows out of your heart, Miss Keeldar. In the winter evenings Tartar
lies at your feet. You suffer him to rest his head on your perfumed lap;
you let him couch on the borders of your satin raiment. His rough hide
is familiar with the contact of your hand. I once saw you kiss him on
that snow-white beauty spot which stars his broad forehead. It is
dangerous to say I am like Tartar; it suggests to me a claim to be
treated like Tartar.'

"'Perhaps, sir, you can extort as much from your penniless and
friendless young orphan girl, when you find her.'

"'Oh could I find her such as I image her! Something to tame first, and
teach afterwards; to break in, and then to fondle. To lift the destitute
proud thing out of poverty; to establish power over and then to be
indulgent to the capricious moods that never were influenced and never
indulged before; to see her alternately irritated and subdued about
twelve times in the twenty-four hours; and perhaps, eventually, when her
training was accomplished, to behold her the exemplary and patient
mother of about a dozen children, only now and then lending little Louis
a cordial cuff by way of paying the interest of the vast debt she owes
his father. Oh'  I went on , 'my orphan girl would give me many a kiss;
she would watch on the threshold for my coming home of an evening; she
would run into my arms; she would keep my hearth as bright as she would
make it warm. God bless the sweet idea! Find her I must.'

"Her eyes emitted an eager flash, her lips opened; but she reclosed
them, and impetuously turned away.

"'Tell me, tell me where she is, Miss Keeldar!'

"Another movement, all haughtiness and fire and impulse.

"'I must know. You can tell me; you shall tell me.'

"'I never will .'

"She turned to leave me. Could I now let her part as she had always
parted from me? No. I had gone too far not to finish; I had come too
near the end not to drive home to it. All the encumbrance of doubt, all
the rubbish of indecision, must be removed at once, and the plain truth
must be ascertained. She must take her part, and tell me what it was; I
must take mine and adhere to it.

"'A minute, madam,' I said, keeping my hand on the door-handle before I
opened it. 'We have had a long conversation this morning, but the last
word has not been spoken yet. It is yours to speak it.'

"'May I pass?'

"'No; I guard the door. I would almost rather die than let you leave me
just now, without speaking the word I demand.'

"'What dare you expect me to say?'

"'What I am dying and perishing to hear; what I must and will hear;
what you dare not now suppress.'

"'Mr. Moore, I hardly know what you mean. You are not like yourself.'

"I suppose I hardly was like my usual self, for I scared her - that I
could see. It was right: she must be scared to be won.

"'You do know what I mean, and for the first time I stand before you
 myself . I have flung off the tutor, and beg to introduce you to the
man. And remember, he is a gentleman.'

"She trembled. She put her hand to mine as if to remove it from the
lock. She might as well have tried to loosen, by her soft touch, metal
welded to metal. She felt she was powerless, and receded; and again she
trembled.

"What change I underwent I cannot explain, but out of her emotion passed
into me a new spirit. I neither was crushed nor elated by her lands and
gold; I thought not of them, cared not for them. They were
nothing - dross that could not dismay me. I saw only herself - her young
beautiful form, the grace, the majesty, the modesty of her girlhood.

"'My pupil,' I said.

"'My master,' was the low answer.

"'I have a thing to tell you.'

"She waited with declined brow and ringlets drooped.

"'I have to tell you that for four years you have been growing into
your tutor's heart, and that you are rooted there now. I have to declare
that you have bewitched me, in spite of sense, and experience, and
difference of station and estate. You have so looked, and spoken, and
moved; so shown me your faults and your virtues - beauties rather, they
are hardly so stern as virtues - that I love you - love you with my life
and strength. It is out now.'

"She sought what to say, but could not find a word. She tried to rally,
but vainly. I passionately repeated that I loved her.

"'Well, Mr. Moore, what then?' was the answer I got, uttered in a tone
that would have been petulant if it had not faltered.

"'Have you nothing to say to me? Have you no love for me?'

"'A little bit.'

"'I am not to be tortured. I will not even play at present.'

"'I don't  want to play; I want to go.'

"'I wonder you dare speak of going at this moment. You go! What! with
my heart in your hand, to lay it on your toilet and pierce it with your
pins? From my presence you do not stir, out of my reach you do not
stray, till I receive a hostage - pledge for pledge - your heart for
mine.'

"'The thing you want is mislaid - lost some time since. Let me go and
seek it.'

"'Declare that it is where your keys often are - in my possession.'

"'You ought to know. And where are my keys, Mr. Moore? Indeed and truly
I have lost them again; and Mrs. Gill wants some money, and I have none,
except this sixpence.'

"She took the coin out of her apron pocket, and showed it in her palm. I
could have trifled with her, but it would not do; life and death were at
stake. Mastering at once the sixpence and the hand that held it, I
demanded, 'Am I to die without you, or am I to live for you?'

"'Do as you please. Far be it from me to dictate your choice.'

"'You shall tell me with your own lips whether you doom me to exile or
call me to hope.'

"'Go; I can bear to be left.'

"'Perhaps I too can bear to leave you. But reply, Shirley, my pupil,
my sovereign - reply.'

"'Die without me if you will; live for me if you dare.'

"'I am not afraid of you, my leopardess. I dare live for and with you,
from this hour till my death. Now, then, I have you. You are mine. I
will never let you go. Wherever my home be, I have chosen my wife. If I
stay in England, in England you will stay; if I cross the Atlantic, you
will cross it also. Our lives are riveted, our lots intertwined.'

"'And are we equal, then, sir? are we equal at last?'

"'You are younger, frailer, feebler, more ignorant than I.'

"'Will you be good to me, and never tyrannize?'

"'Will you let me breathe, and not bewilder me? You must not smile at
present. The world swims and changes round me. The sun is a dizzying
scarlet blaze, the sky a violet vortex whirling over me.'

"I am a strong man, but I staggered as I spoke. All creation was
exaggerated. Colour grew more vivid, motion more rapid, life itself more
vital. I hardly saw her for a moment, but I heard her voice - pitilessly
sweet. She would not subdue one of her charms in compassion. Perhaps she
did not know what I felt.

"'You name me leopardess. Remember, the leopardess is tameless,' said
she.

"'Tame or fierce, wild or subdued, you are mine .'

"'I am glad I know my keeper and am used to him. Only his voice will I
follow; only his hand shall manage me; only at his feet will I repose.'

"I took her back to her seat, and sat down by her side. I wanted to hear
her speak again. I could never have enough of her voice and her words.

"'How much do you love me?' I asked.

"'Ah! you know. I will not gratify you - I will not flatter.'

"'I don't  know half enough; my heart craves to be fed. If you knew how
hungry and ferocious it is, you would hasten to stay it with a kind word
or two.'

"'Poor Tartar!' said she, touching and patting my hand - 'poor fellow,
stalwart friend, Shirley's pet and favourite, lie down!'

"'But I will not lie down till I am fed with one sweet word.'

"And at last she gave it.

"'Dear Louis, be faithful to me; never leave me. I don't  care for life
unless I may pass it at your side.'

"'Something more.'

"She gave me a change; it was not her way to offer the same dish twice.

"'Sir,' she said, starting up, 'at your peril you ever again name such
sordid things as money, or poverty, or inequality. It will be absolutely
dangerous to torment me with these maddening scruples. I defy you to do
it.'

"My face grew hot. I did once more wish I were not so poor or she were
not so rich. She saw the transient misery; and then, indeed, she
caressed me. Blent with torment, I experienced rapture.

"'Mr. Moore,' said she, looking up with a sweet, open, earnest
countenance, 'teach me and help me to be good. I do not ask you to take
off my shoulders all the cares and duties of property, but I ask you to
share the burden, and to show me how to sustain my part well. Your
judgment is well balanced, your heart is kind, your principles are
sound. I know you are wise; I feel you are benevolent; I believe you are
conscientious. Be my companion through life; be my guide where I am
ignorant; be my master where I am faulty; be my friend always!'

"'So help me God, I will!'"

          

Yet again a passage from the blank book if you like, reader; if you
don't  like it, pass it over: - 

"The Sympsons are gone, but not before discovery and explanation. My
manner must have betrayed something, or my looks. I was quiet, but I
forgot to be guarded sometimes. I stayed longer in the room than usual;
I could not bear to be out of her presence; I returned to it, and basked
in it, like Tartar in the sun. If she left the oak parlour,
instinctively I rose and left it too. She chid me for this procedure
more than once. I did it with a vague, blundering idea of getting a word
with her in the hall or elsewhere. Yesterday towards dusk I had her to
myself for five minutes by the hall fire. We stood side by side; she was
railing at me, and I was enjoying the sound of her voice. The young
ladies passed, and looked at us; we did not separate. Ere long they
repassed, and again looked. Mrs. Sympson came; we did not move. Mr.
Sympson opened the dining-room door. Shirley flashed him back full
payment for his spying gaze. She curled her lip and tossed her tresses.
The glance she gave was at once explanatory and defiant. It said: 'I
like Mr. Moore's society, and I dare you to find fault with my taste.'

"I asked, 'Do you mean him to understand how matters are?'

"'I do,' said she; 'but I leave the development to chance. There will be
a scene. I neither invite it nor fear it; only, you must be present, for
I am inexpressibly tired of facing him solus. I don't  like to see him in
a rage. He then puts off all his fine proprieties and conventional
disguises, and the real human being below is what you would call
 commun, plat, bas - vilain et un peu méchant . His ideas are not clean,
Mr. Moore; they want scouring with soft soap and fuller's earth. I
think, if he could add his imagination to the contents of Mrs. Gill's
bucking-basket, and let her boil it in her copper, with rain-water and
bleaching-powder  I hope you think me a tolerable laundress , it would
do him incalculable good.'

"This morning, fancying I heard her descend somewhat early, I was down
instantly. I had not been deceived. There she was, busy at work in the
breakfast-parlour, of which the housemaid was completing the arrangement
and dusting. She had risen betimes to finish some little keepsake she
intended for Henry. I got only a cool reception, which I accepted till
the girl was gone, taking my book to the window-seat very quietly. Even
when we were alone I was slow to disturb her. To sit with her in sight
was happiness, and the proper happiness, for early morning - serene,
incomplete, but progressive. Had I been obtrusive, I knew I should have
encountered rebuff. 'Not at home to suitors' was written on her brow.
Therefore I read on, stole now and then a look, watched her countenance
soften and open as she felt I respected her mood, and enjoyed the gentle
content of the moment.

"The distance between us shrank, and the light hoar-frost thawed
insensibly. Ere an hour elapsed I was at her side, watching her sew,
gathering her sweet smiles and her merry words, which fell for me
abundantly. We sat, as we had a right to sit, side by side; my arm
rested on her chair; I was near enough to count the stitches of her
work, and to discern the eye of her needle. The door suddenly opened.

"I believe, if I had just then started from her, she would have
despised me. Thanks to the phlegm of my nature, I rarely start. When I
am well-off, bien , comfortable, I am not soon stirred. Bien I
was - tres bien - consequently immutable. No muscle moved. I hardly
looked to the door.

"'Good-morning, uncle,' said she, addressing that personage, who paused
on the threshold in a state of petrifaction.

"'Have you been long downstairs, Miss Keeldar, and alone with Mr.
Moore?'

"'Yes, a very long time. We both came down early; it was scarcely
light.'

"'The proceeding is improper - - '

"'It was at first, I was rather cross, and not civil; but you will
perceive that we are now friends.'

"'I perceive more than you would wish me to perceive.'

"'Hardly, sir,' said I; 'we have no disguises. Will you permit me to
intimate that any further observations you have to make may as well be
addressed to me? Henceforward I stand between Miss Keeldar and all
annoyance.'

"' You! What have you to do with Miss Keeldar?'

"'To protect, watch over, serve her.'

"'You, sir - you, the tutor?'

"'Not one word of insult, sir,' interposed she; 'not one syllable of
disrespect to Mr. Moore in this house.'

"'Do you take his part?'

"' His part? oh yes!'

"She turned to me with a sudden fond movement, which I met by circling
her with my arm. She and I both rose.

"'Good Ged!' was the cry from the morning-gown standing quivering at the
door. Ged , I think, must be the cognomen of Mr. Sympson's Lares. When
hard pressed he always invokes this idol.

"'Come forward, uncle; you shall hear all. - Tell him all, Louis.'

"'I dare him to speak - the beggar! the knave! the specious hypocrite!
the vile, insinuating, infamous menial! - Stand apart from my niece, sir.
Let her go!'

"She clung to me with energy. 'I am near my future husband,' she said.
'Who dares touch him or me?'

"'Her husband!' He raised and spread his hands. He dropped into a seat.

"'A while ago you wanted much to know whom I meant to marry. My
intention was then formed, but not mature for communication. Now it is
ripe, sun-mellowed, perfect. Take the crimson peach - take Louis Moore!'

"'But'  savagely  'you shall not have him; he shall not have you.'

"'I would die before I would have another. I would die if I might not
have him.'

"He uttered words with which this page shall never be polluted.

"She turned white as death; she shook all over; she lost her strength. I
laid her down on the sofa; just looked to ascertain that she had not
fainted - of which, with a divine smile, she assured me. I kissed her;
and then, if I were to perish, I cannot give a clear account of what
happened in the course of the next five minutes. She has since - through
tears, laughter, and trembling - told me that I turned terrible, and gave
myself to the demon. She says I left her, made one bound across the
room; that Mr. Sympson vanished through the door as if shot from a
cannon. I also vanished, and she heard Mrs. Gill scream.

"Mrs. Gill was still screaming when I came to my senses. I was then in
another apartment - the oak parlour, I think. I held Sympson before me
crushed into a chair, and my hand was on his cravat. His eyes rolled in
his head; I was strangling him, I think. The housekeeper stood wringing
her hands, entreating me to desist. I desisted that moment, and felt at
once as cool as stone. But I told Mrs. Gill to fetch the Red-House Inn
chaise instantly, and informed Mr. Sympson he must depart from Fieldhead
the instant it came. Though half frightened out of his wits, he declared
he would not. Repeating the former order, I added a commission to fetch
a constable. I said, 'You shall go, by fair means or foul.'

"He threatened prosecution; I cared for nothing. I had stood over him
once before, not quite so fiercely as now, but full as austerely. It was
one night when burglars attempted the house at Sympson Grove, and in his
wretched cowardice he would have given a vain alarm, without daring to
offer defence. I had then been obliged to protect his family and his
abode by mastering himself - and I had succeeded. I now remained with him
till the chaise came. I marshalled him to it, he scolding all the way.
He was terribly bewildered, as well as enraged. He would have resisted
me, but knew not how. He called for his wife and daughters to come. I
said they should follow him as soon as they could prepare. The smoke,
the fume, the fret of his demeanour was inexpressible, but it was a fury
incapable of producing a deed. That man, properly handled, must ever
remain impotent. I know he will never touch me with the law. I know his
wife, over whom he tyrannizes in trifles, guides him in matters of
importance. I have long since earned her undying mother's gratitude by
my devotion to her boy. In some of Henry's ailments I have nursed
him - better, she said, than any woman could nurse. She will never forget
that. She and her daughters quitted me to-day, in mute wrath and
consternation; but she respects me. When Henry clung to my neck as I
lifted him into the carriage and placed him by her side, when I arranged
her own wrapping to make her warm, though she turned her head from me, I
saw the tears start to her eyes. She will but the more zealously
advocate my cause because she has left me in anger. I am glad of
this - not for my own sake, but for that of my life and idol - my
Shirley."

Once again he writes, a week after: - "I am now at Stilbro'. I have taken
up my temporary abode with a friend - a professional man, in whose
business I can be useful. Every day I ride over to Fieldhead. How long
will it be before I can call that place my home, and its mistress mine?
I am not easy, not tranquil; I am tantalized, sometimes tortured. To see
her now, one would think she had never pressed her cheek to my shoulder,
or clung to me with tenderness or trust. I feel unsafe; she renders me
miserable. I am shunned when I visit her; she withdraws from my reach.
Once this day I lifted her face, resolved to get a full look down her
deep, dark eyes. Difficult to describe what I read there! Pantheress!
beautiful forest-born! wily, tameless, peerless nature! She gnaws her
chain; I see the white teeth working at the steel! She has dreams of her
wild woods and pinings after virgin freedom. I wish Sympson would come
again, and oblige her again to entwine her arms about me. I wish there
was danger she should lose me, as there is risk I shall lose her. No;
final loss I do not fear, but long delay - - 

"It is now night - midnight. I have spent the afternoon and evening at
Fieldhead. Some hours ago she passed me, coming down the oak staircase
to the hall. She did not know I was standing in the twilight, near the
staircase window, looking at the frost-bright constellations. How
closely she glided against the banisters! How shyly shone her large eyes
upon me! How evanescent, fugitive, fitful she looked - slim and swift as
a northern streamer!

"I followed her into the drawing-room. Mrs. Pryor and Caroline Helstone
were both there; she has summoned them to bear her company awhile. In
her white evening dress, with her long hair flowing full and wavy, with
her noiseless step, her pale cheek, her eye full of night and lightning,
she looked, I thought, spirit-like - a thing made of an element, the
child of a breeze and a flame, the daughter of ray and raindrop - a thing
never to be overtaken, arrested, fixed. I wished I could avoid following
her with my gaze as she moved here and there, but it was impossible. I
talked with the other ladies as well as I could, but still I looked at
her. She was very silent; I think she never spoke to me - not even when
she offered me tea. It happened that she was called out a minute by Mrs.
Gill. I passed into the moonlit hall, with the design of getting a word
as she returned; nor in this did I fail.

"'Miss Keeldar, stay one instant,' said I, meeting her.

"'Why? the hall is too cold.'

"'It is not cold for me; at my side it should not be cold for you.'

"'But I shiver.'

"'With fear, I believe. What makes you fear me? You are quiet and
distant. Why?'

"'I may well fear what looks like a great dark goblin meeting me in the
moonlight.'

"' Do not - do not pass! Stay with me awhile. Let us exchange a few
quiet words. It is three days since I spoke to you alone. Such changes
are cruel.'

"'I have no wish to be cruel,' she responded, softly enough. Indeed
there was softness in her whole deportment - in her face, in her voice;
but there was also reserve, and an air fleeting, evanishing, intangible.

"'You certainly give me pain,' said I. 'It is hardly a week since you
called me your future husband and treated me as such. Now I am once more
the tutor for you. I am addressed as Mr. Moore and sir. Your lips have
forgotten Louis.'

"'No, Louis, no. It is an easy, liquid name - not soon forgotten.'

"'Be cordial to Louis, then; approach him - let him approach.'

"'I am cordial,' said she, hovering aloof like a white shadow.

"'Your voice is very sweet and very low,' I answered, quietly advancing.
'You seem subdued, but still startled.'

"'No - quite calm, and afraid of nothing,' she assured me.

"'Of nothing but your votary.'

"I bent a knee to the flags at her feet.

"'You see I am in a new world, Mr. Moore. I don't  know myself; I don't 
know you. But rise. When you do so I feel troubled and disturbed.'

"I obeyed. It would not have suited me to retain that attitude long. I
courted serenity and confidence for her, and not vainly. She trusted and
clung to me again.

"'Now, Shirley,' I said, 'you can conceive I am far from happy in my
present uncertain, unsettled state.'

"'Oh yes, you are happy!' she cried hastily. 'You don't  know how happy
you are. Any change will be for the worse.'

"'Happy or not, I cannot bear to go on so much longer. You are too
generous to require it.'

"'Be reasonable, Louis; be patient! I like you because you are patient.'

"'Like me no longer, then; love me instead. Fix our marriage day; think
of it to-night, and decide.'

"She breathed a murmur, inarticulate yet expressive; darted, or melted,
from my arms - and I lost her."




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE WINDING-UP.


Yes, reader, we must settle accounts now. I have only briefly to narrate
the final fates of some of the personages whose acquaintance we have
made in this narrative, and then you and I must shake hands, and for the
present separate.

Let us turn to the curates - to the much-loved, though long-neglected.
Come forward, modest merit! Malone, I see, promptly answers the
invocation. He knows his own description when he hears it.

No, Peter Augustus; we can have nothing to say to you. It won't  do.
Impossible to trust ourselves with the touching tale of your deeds and
destinies. Are you not aware, Peter, that a discriminating public has
its crotchets; that the unvarnished truth does not answer; that plain
facts will not digest? Do you not know that the squeak of the real pig
is no more relished now than it was in days of yore? Were I to give the
catastrophe of your life and conversation, the public would sweep off in
shrieking hysterics, and there would be a wild cry for sal-volatile and
burnt feathers. "Impossible!" would be pronounced here; "untrue!" would
be responded there; "inartistic!" would be solemnly decided. Note well.
Whenever you present the actual, simple truth, it is, somehow, always
denounced as a lie - they disown it, cast it off, throw it on the parish;
whereas the product of your own imagination, the mere figment, the sheer
fiction, is adopted, petted, termed pretty, proper, sweetly natural - the
little, spurious wretch gets all the comfits, the honest, lawful
bantling all the cuffs. Such is the way of the world, Peter; and as you
are the legitimate urchin, rude, unwashed, and naughty, you must stand
down.

Make way for Mr. Sweeting.

Here he comes, with his lady on his arm - the most splendid and the
weightiest woman in Yorkshire - Mrs. Sweeting, formerly Miss Dora Sykes.
They were married under the happiest auspices, Mr. Sweeting having been
just inducted to a comfortable living, and Mr. Sykes being in
circumstances to give Dora a handsome portion. They lived long and
happily together, beloved by their parishioners and by a numerous circle
of friends.

There! I think the varnish has been put on very nicely.

Advance, Mr. Donne.

This gentleman turned out admirably - far better than either you or I
could possibly have expected, reader. He, too, married a most sensible,
quiet, lady-like little woman. The match was the making of him. He
became an exemplary domestic character, and a truly active parish priest
 as a pastor he, to his dying day, conscientiously refused to act . The
outside of the cup and platter he burnished up with the best
polishing-powder; the furniture of the altar and temple he looked after
with the zeal of an upholsterer, the care of a cabinet-maker. His little
school, his little church, his little parsonage, all owed their erection
to him; and they did him credit. Each was a model in its way. If
uniformity and taste in architecture had been the same thing as
consistency and earnestness in religion, what a shepherd of a Christian
flock Mr. Donne would have made! There was one art in the mastery of
which nothing mortal ever surpassed Mr. Donne: it was that of begging.
By his own unassisted efforts he begged all the money for all his
erections. In this matter he had a grasp of plan, a scope of action
quite unique. He begged of high and low - of the shoeless cottage brat
and the coroneted duke. He sent out begging-letters far and wide - to old
Queen Charlotte, to the princesses her daughters, to her sons the royal
dukes, to the Prince Regent, to Lord Castlereagh, to every member of the
ministry then in office; and, what is more remarkable, he screwed
something out of every one of these personages. It is on record that he
got five pounds from the close-fisted old lady Queen Charlotte, and two
guineas from the royal profligate her eldest son. When Mr. Donne set out
on begging expeditions, he armed himself in a complete suit of brazen
mail. That you had given a hundred pounds yesterday was with him no
reason why you should not give two hundred to-day. He would tell you so
to your face, and, ten to one, get the money out of you. People gave to
get rid of him. After all, he did some good with the cash. He was
useful in his day and generation.

Perhaps I ought to remark that on the premature and sudden vanishing of
Mr. Malone from the stage of Briarfield parish  you cannot know how it
happened, reader; your curiosity must be robbed to pay your elegant love
of the pretty and pleasing , there came as his successor another Irish
curate, Mr. Macarthey. I am happy to be able to inform you, with
truth , that this gentleman did as much credit to his country as Malone
had done it discredit. He proved himself as decent, decorous, and
conscientious as Peter was rampant, boisterous, and - - This last
epithet I choose to suppress, because it would let the cat out of the
bag. He laboured faithfully in the parish. The schools, both Sunday and
day schools, flourished under his sway like green bay trees. Being
human, of course he had his faults. These, however, were proper,
steady-going, clerical faults - what many would call virtues. The
circumstance of finding himself invited to tea with a Dissenter would
unhinge him for a week. The spectacle of a Quaker wearing his hat in the
church, the thought of an unbaptized fellow-creature being interred with
Christian rites - these things could make strange havoc in Mr.
Macarthey's physical and mental economy. Otherwise he was sane and
rational, diligent and charitable.

I doubt not a justice-loving public will have remarked, ere this, that I
have thus far shown a criminal remissness in pursuing, catching, and
bringing to condign punishment the would-be assassin of Mr. Robert
Moore. Here was a fine opening to lead my willing readers a dance, at
once decorous and exciting - a dance of law and gospel, of the dungeon,
the dock, and the "dead-thraw." You might have liked it, reader, but I 
should not. I and my subject would presently have quarrelled, and then I
should have broken down. I was happy to find that facts perfectly
exonerated me from the attempt. The murderer was never punished, for the
good reason that he was never caught - the result of the further
circumstance that he was never pursued. The magistrates made a
shuffling, as if they were going to rise and do valiant things; but
since Moore himself, instead of urging and leading them as heretofore,
lay still on his little cottage-couch, laughing in his sleeve, and
sneering with every feature of his pale, foreign face, they considered
better of it, and after fulfilling certain indispensable forms,
prudently resolved to let the matter quietly drop, which they did.

Mr. Moore knew who had shot him, and all Briarfield knew. It was no
other than Michael Hartley, the half-crazed weaver once before alluded
to, a frantic Antinomian in religion, and a mad leveller in politics.
The poor soul died of delirium tremens a year after the attempt on
Moore, and Robert gave his wretched widow a guinea to bury him.

          

The winter is over and gone; spring has followed with beamy and shadowy,
with flowery and showery flight. We are now in the heart of summer - in
mid-June - the June of 1812.

It is burning weather. The air is deep azure and red gold. It fits the
time; it fits the age; it fits the present spirit of the nations. The
nineteenth century wantons in its giant adolescence; the Titan boy
uproots mountains in his game, and hurls rocks in his wild sport. This
summer Bonaparte is in the saddle; he and his host scour Russian
deserts. He has with him Frenchmen and Poles, Italians and children of
the Rhine, six hundred thousand strong. He marches on old Moscow. Under
old Moscow's walls the rude Cossack waits him. Barbarian stoic! he waits
without fear of the boundless ruin rolling on. He puts his trust in a
snow-cloud; the wilderness, the wind, and the hail-storm are his refuge;
his allies are the elements - air, fire, water. And what are these? Three
terrible archangels ever stationed before the throne of Jehovah. They
stand clothed in white, girdled with golden girdles; they uplift vials,
brimming with the wrath of God. Their time is the day of vengeance;
their signal, the word of the Lord of hosts, "thundering with the voice
of His excellency."

"Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou seen the
treasures of the hail, which I have reserved against the time of
trouble, against the day of battle and war?

"Go your ways. Pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth."

It is done. The earth is scorched with fire; the sea becomes "as the
blood of a dead man;" the islands flee away; the mountains are not
found.

In this year, Lord Wellington assumed the reins in Spain. They made him
generalissimo, for their own salvation's sake. In this year he took
Badajos, he fought the field of Vittoria, he captured Pampeluna, he
stormed San Sebastian; in this year he won Salamanca.

Men of Manchester, I beg your pardon for this slight résumé of warlike
facts, but it is of no consequence. Lord Wellington is, for you, only a
decayed old gentleman now. I rather think some of you have called him a
"dotard;" you have taunted him with his age and the loss of his physical
vigour. What fine heroes you are yourselves! Men like you have a right
to trample on what is mortal in a demigod. Scoff at your ease; your
scorn can never break his grand old heart.

But come, friends, whether Quakers or cotton-printers, let us hold a
peace-congress, and let out our venom quietly. We have been talking with
unseemly zeal about bloody battles and butchering generals; we arrive
now at a triumph in your line. On the 18th of June 1812 the Orders in
Council were repealed, and the blockaded ports thrown open. You know
very well - such of you as are old enough to remember - you made Yorkshire
and Lancashire shake with your shout on that occasion. The ringers
cracked a bell in Briarfield belfry; it is dissonant to this day. The
Association of Merchants and Manufacturers dined together at Stilbro',
and one and all went home in such a plight as their wives would never
wish to witness more. Liverpool started and snorted like a river-horse
roused amongst his reeds by thunder. Some of the American merchants felt
threatenings of apoplexy, and had themselves bled - all, like wise men,
at this first moment of prosperity, prepared to rush into the bowels of
speculation, and to delve new difficulties, in whose depths they might
lose themselves at some future day. Stocks which had been accumulating
for years now went off in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.
Warehouses were lightened, ships were laden; work abounded, wages rose;
the good time seemed come. These prospects might be delusive, but they
were brilliant - to some they were even true. At that epoch, in that
single month of June, many a solid fortune was realized.

          

When a whole province rejoices, the humblest of its inhabitants tastes a
festal feeling; the sound of public bells rouses the most secluded
abode, as if with a call to be gay. And so Caroline Helstone thought,
when she dressed herself more carefully than usual on the day of this
trading triumph, and went, attired in her neatest muslin, to spend the
afternoon at Fieldhead, there to superintend certain millinery
preparations for a great event, the last appeal in these matters being
reserved for her unimpeachable taste. She decided on the wreath, the
veil, the dress to be worn at the altar. She chose various robes and
fashions for more ordinary occasions, without much reference to the
bride's opinion - that lady, indeed, being in a somewhat impracticable
mood.

Louis had presaged difficulties, and he had found them - in fact, his
mistress had shown herself exquisitely provoking, putting off her
marriage day by day, week by week, month by month, at first coaxing him
with soft pretences of procrastination, and in the end rousing his whole
deliberate but determined nature to revolt against her tyranny, at once
so sweet and so intolerable.

It had needed a sort of tempest-shock to bring her to the point; but
there she was at last, fettered to a fixed day. There she lay, conquered
by love, and bound with a vow.

Thus vanquished and restricted, she pined, like any other chained
denizen of deserts. Her captor alone could cheer her; his society only
could make amends for the lost privilege of liberty. In his absence she
sat or wandered alone, spoke little, and ate less.

She furthered no preparations for her nuptials; Louis was himself
obliged to direct all arrangements. He was virtually master of Fieldhead
weeks before he became so nominally - the least presumptuous, the kindest
master that ever was, but with his lady absolute. She abdicated without
a word or a struggle. "Go to Mr. Moore, ask Mr. Moore," was her answer
when applied to for orders. Never was wooer of wealthy bride so
thoroughly absolved from the subaltern part, so inevitably compelled to
assume a paramount character.

In all this Miss Keeldar partly yielded to her disposition; but a remark
she made a year afterwards proved that she partly also acted on system.
"Louis," she said, "would never have learned to rule if she had not
ceased to govern. The incapacity of the sovereign had developed the
powers of the premier."

It had been intended that Miss Helstone should act as bridesmaid at the
approaching nuptials, but Fortune had destined her another part.

She came home in time to water her plants. She had performed this little
task. The last flower attended to was a rose-tree, which bloomed in a
quiet green nook at the back of the house. This plant had received the
refreshing shower; she was now resting a minute. Near the wall stood a
fragment of sculptured stone - a monkish relic - once, perhaps, the base
of a cross. She mounted it, that she might better command the view. She
had still the watering pot in one hand; with the other her pretty dress
was held lightly aside, to avoid trickling drops. She gazed over the
wall, along some lonely fields; beyond three dusk trees, rising side by
side against the sky; beyond a solitary thorn at the head of a solitary
lane far off. She surveyed the dusk moors, where bonfires were kindling.
The summer evening was warm; the bell-music was joyous; the blue smoke
of the fires looked soft, their red flame bright. Above them, in the sky
whence the sun had vanished, twinkled a silver point - the star of love.

Caroline was not unhappy that evening - far otherwise; but as she gazed
she sighed, and as she sighed a hand circled her, and rested quietly on
her waist. Caroline thought she knew who had drawn near; she received
the touch unstartled.

"I am looking at Venus, mamma. See, she is beautiful. How white her
lustre is, compared with the deep red of the bonfires!"

The answer was a closer caress; and Caroline turned, and looked, not
into Mrs. Pryor's matron face, but up at a dark manly visage. She
dropped her watering-pot and stepped down from the pedestal.

"I have been sitting with 'mamma' an hour," said the intruder. "I have
had a long conversation with her. Where, meantime, have you been?"

"To Fieldhead. Shirley is as naughty as ever, Robert. She will neither
say Yes nor No to any question put. She sits alone. I cannot tell
whether she is melancholy or nonchalant. If you rouse her or scold her,
she gives you a look, half wistful, half reckless, which sends you away
as queer and crazed as herself. What Louis will make of her, I cannot
tell. For my part, if I were a gentleman, I think I would not dare
undertake her."

"Never mind them. They were cut out for each other. Louis, strange to
say, likes her all the better for these freaks. He will manage her, if
any one can. She tries him, however. He has had a stormy courtship for
such a calm character; but you see it all ends in victory for him.
Caroline, I have sought you to ask an audience. Why are those bells
ringing?"

"For the repeal of your terrible law - the Orders you hate so much. You
are pleased, are you not?"

"Yesterday evening at this time I was packing some books for a
sea-voyage. They were the only possessions, except some clothes, seeds,
roots, and tools, which I felt free to take with me to Canada. I was
going to leave you."

"To leave me? To leave me ?"

Her little fingers fastened on his arm; she spoke and looked affrighted.

"Not now - not now. Examine my face - yes, look at me well. Is the despair
of parting legible thereon?"

She looked into an illuminated countenance, whose characters were all
beaming, though the page itself was dusk. This face, potent in the
majesty of its traits, shed down on her hope, fondness, delight.

"Will the repeal do you good - much good, immediate good?" she
inquired.

"The repeal of the Orders in Council saves me. Now I shall not turn
bankrupt; now I shall not give up business; now I shall not leave
England; now I shall be no longer poor; now I can pay my debts; now all
the cloth I have in my warehouses will be taken off my hands, and
commissions given me for much more. This day lays for my fortunes a
broad, firm foundation, on which, for the first time in my life, I can
securely build."

Caroline devoured his words; she held his hand in hers; she drew a long
breath.

"You are saved? Your heavy difficulties are lifted?"

"They are lifted. I breathe. I can act."

"At last! Oh, Providence is kind! Thank Him, Robert."

"I do thank Providence."

"And I also, for your sake!" She looked up devoutly.

"Now I can take more workmen, give better wages, lay wiser and more
liberal plans, do some good, be less selfish. Now , Caroline, I can
have a house - a home which I can truly call mine - and now - - "

He paused, for his deep voice was checked.

"And now ," he resumed - "now I can think of marriage, now I can seek
a wife."

This was no moment for her to speak. She did not speak.

"Will Caroline, who meekly hopes to be forgiven as she forgives - will
she pardon all I have made her suffer, all that long pain I have
wickedly caused her, all that sickness of body and mind she owed to me?
Will she forget what she knows of my poor ambition, my sordid schemes?
Will she let me expiate these things? Will she suffer me to prove that,
as I once deserted cruelly, trifled wantonly, injured basely, I can now
love faithfully, cherish fondly, treasure tenderly?"

His hand was in Caroline's still; a gentle pressure answered him.

"Is Caroline mine?"

"Caroline is yours."

"I will prize her. The sense of her value is here, in my heart; the
necessity for her society is blended with my life. Not more jealous
shall I be of the blood whose flow moves my pulses than of her happiness
and well-being."

"I love you, too, Robert, and will take faithful care of you."

"Will you take faithful care of me? Faithful care! As if that rose
should promise to shelter from tempest this hard gray stone! But she
 will care for me, in her way. These hands will be the gentle
ministrants of every comfort I can taste. I know the being I seek to
entwine with my own will bring me a solace, a charity, a purity, to
which, of myself, I am a stranger."

Suddenly Caroline was troubled; her lip quivered.

"What flutters my dove?" asked Moore, as she nestled to and then
uneasily shrank from him.

"Poor mamma! I am all mamma has. Must I leave her?"

"Do you know, I thought of that difficulty. I and 'mamma' have discussed
it."

"Tell me what you wish, what you would like, and I will consider if it
is possible to consent. But I cannot desert her, even for you. I cannot
break her heart, even for your sake."

"She was faithful when I was false - was she not? I never came near your
sick-bed, and she watched it ceaselessly."

"What must I do? Anything but leave her."

"At my wish you never shall leave her."

"She may live very near us?"

"With us - only she will have her own rooms and servant. For this she
stipulates herself."

"You know she has an income, that, with her habits, makes her quite
independent?"

"She told me that, with a gentle pride that reminded me of somebody
else."

"She is not at all interfering, and incapable of gossip."

"I know her, Cary. But if, instead of being the personification of
reserve and discretion, she were something quite opposite, I should not
fear her."

"Yet she will be your mother-in-law?" The speaker gave an arch little
nod. Moore smiled.

"Louis and I are not of the order of men who fear their mothers-in-law,
Cary. Our foes never have been, nor will be, those of our own household.
I doubt not my mother-in-law will make much of me."

"That she will - in her quiet way, you know. She is not demonstrative;
and when you see her silent, or even cool, you must not fancy her
displeased; it is only a manner she has. Be sure to let me interpret for
her whenever she puzzles you; always believe my account of the matter,
Robert."

"Oh, implicitly! Jesting apart, I feel that she and I will suit - on ne
peut mieux . Hortense, you know, is exquisitely susceptible - in our
French sense of the word - and not, perhaps, always reasonable in her
requirements; yet, dear, honest girl, I never painfully wounded her
feelings or had a serious quarrel with her in my life."

"No; you are most generously considerate, indeed, most tenderly
indulgent to her; and you will be considerate with mamma. You are a
gentleman all through, Robert, to the bone, and nowhere so perfect a
gentleman as at your own fireside."

"A eulogium I like; it is very sweet. I am well pleased my Caroline
should view me in this light."

"Mamma just thinks of you as I do."

"Not quite, I hope?"

"She does not want to marry you - don't  be vain; but she said to me the
other day, 'My dear, Mr. Moore has pleasing manners; he is one of the
few gentlemen I have seen who combine politeness with an air of
sincerity.'"

"'Mamma' is rather a misanthropist, is she not? Not the best opinion of
the sterner sex?"

"She forbears to judge them as a whole, but she has her exceptions whom
she admires - Louis and Mr. Hall, and, of late, yourself. She did not
like you once; I knew that, because she would never speak of you. But,
Robert - - "

"Well, what now? What is the new thought?"

"You have not seen my uncle yet?"

"I have. 'Mamma' called him into the room. He consents conditionally. If
I prove that I can keep a wife, I may have her; and I can keep her
better than he thinks - better than I choose to boast."

"If you get rich you will do good with your money, Robert?"

"I will do good; you shall tell me how. Indeed, I have some schemes of
my own, which you and I will talk about on our own hearth one day. I
have seen the necessity of doing good; I have learned the downright
folly of being selfish. Caroline, I foresee what I will now foretell.
This war must ere long draw to a close. Trade is likely to prosper for
some years to come. There may be a brief misunderstanding between
England and America, but that will not last. What would you think if,
one day - perhaps ere another ten years elapse - Louis and I divide
Briarfield parish betwixt us? Louis, at any rate, is certain of power
and property. He will not bury his talents. He is a benevolent fellow,
and has, besides, an intellect of his own of no trifling calibre. His
mind is slow but strong. It must work. It may work deliberately, but it
will work well. He will be made magistrate of the district - Shirley says
he shall. She would proceed impetuously and prematurely to obtain for
him this dignity, if he would let her, but he will not. As usual, he
will be in no haste. Ere he has been master of Fieldhead a year all the
district will feel his quiet influence, and acknowledge his unassuming
superiority. A magistrate is wanted; they will, in time, invest him with
the office voluntarily and unreluctantly. Everybody admires his future
wife, and everybody will, in time, like him. He is of the pâte 
generally approved, bon comme le pain - daily bread for the most
fastidious, good for the infant and the aged, nourishing for the poor,
wholesome for the rich. Shirley, in spite of her whims and oddities, her
dodges and delays, has an infatuated fondness for him. She will one day
see him as universally beloved as even she could wish. He will also be
universally esteemed, considered, consulted, depended on - too much so.
His advice will be always judicious, his help always good-natured. Ere
long both will be in inconvenient request. He will have to impose
restrictions. As for me, if I succeed as I intend to do, my success will
add to his and Shirley's income. I can double the value of their mill
property. I can line yonder barren Hollow with lines of cottages and
rows of cottage-gardens - - "

"Robert! And root up the copse?"

"The copse shall be firewood ere five years elapse. The beautiful wild
ravine shall be a smooth descent; the green natural terrace shall be a
paved street. There shall be cottages in the dark ravine, and cottages
on the lonely slopes. The rough pebbled track shall be an even, firm,
broad, black, sooty road, bedded with the cinders from my mill; and my
mill, Caroline - my mill shall fill its present yard."

"Horrible! You will change our blue hill-country air into the Stilbro'
smoke atmosphere."

"I will pour the waters of Pactolus through the valley of Briarfield."

"I like the beck a thousand times better."

"I will get an Act for enclosing Nunnely Common, and parcelling it out
into farms."

"Stilbro' Moor, however, defies you, thank Heaven! What can you grow in
Bilberry Moss? What will flourish on Rushedge?"

"Caroline, the houseless, the starving, the unemployed shall come to
Hollow's Mill from far and near; and Joe Scott shall give them work, and
Louis Moore, Esq., shall let them a tenement, and Mrs. Gill shall mete
them a portion till the first pay-day."

She smiled up in his face.

"Such a Sunday school as you will have, Cary! such collections as you
will get! such a day school as you and Shirley and Miss Ainley will have
to manage between you! The mill shall find salaries for a master and
mistress, and the squire or the clothier shall give a treat once a
quarter."

She mutely offered a kiss - an offer taken unfair advantage of, to the
extortion of about a hundred kisses.

"Extravagant day-dreams," said Moore, with a sigh and smile, "yet
perhaps we may realize some of them. Meantime, the dew is falling. Mrs.
Moore, I shall take you in."

          

It is August. The bells clash out again, not only through Yorkshire, but
through England. From Spain the voice of a trumpet has sounded long; it
now waxes louder and louder; it proclaims Salamanca won. This night is
Briarfield to be illuminated. On this day the Fieldhead tenantry dine
together; the Hollow's Mill workpeople will be assembled for a like
festal purpose; the schools have a grand treat. This morning there were
two marriages solemnized in Briarfield church - Louis Gérard Moore, Esq.,
late of Antwerp, to Shirley, daughter of the late Charles Cave Keeldar,
Esq., of Fieldhead; Robert Gérard Moore, Esq., of Hollow's Mill, to
Caroline, niece of the Rev. Matthewson Helstone, M.A., rector of
Briarfield.

The ceremony, in the first instance, was performed by Mr. Helstone,
Hiram Yorke, Esq., of Briarmains, giving the bride away. In the second
instance, Mr. Hall, vicar of Nunnely, officiated. Amongst the bridal
train the two most noticeable personages were the youthful bridesmen,
Henry Sympson and Martin Yorke.

I suppose Robert Moore's prophecies were, partially at least, fulfilled.
The other day I passed up the Hollow, which tradition says was once
green, and lone, and wild; and there I saw the manufacturer's day-dreams
embodied in substantial stone and brick and ashes - the cinder-black
highway, the cottages, and the cottage gardens; there I saw a mighty
mill, and a chimney ambitious as the tower of Babel. I told my old
housekeeper when I came home where I had been.

"Ay," said she, "this world has queer changes. I can remember the old
mill being built - the very first it was in all the district; and then I
can remember it being pulled down, and going with my lake-lasses
 companions  to see the foundation-stone of the new one laid. The two
Mr. Moores made a great stir about it. They were there, and a deal of
fine folk besides, and both their ladies; very bonny and grand they
looked. But Mrs. Louis was the grandest; she always wore such handsome
dresses. Mrs. Robert was quieter like. Mrs. Louis smiled when she
talked. She had a real, happy, glad, good-natured look; but she had een
that pierced a body through. There is no such ladies nowadays."

"What was the Hollow like then, Martha?"

"Different to what it is now; but I can tell of it clean different
again, when there was neither mill, nor cot, nor hall, except Fieldhead,
within two miles of it. I can tell, one summer evening, fifty years
syne, my mother coming running in just at the edge of dark, almost
fleyed out of her wits, saying she had seen a fairish  fairy  in
Fieldhead Hollow; and that was the last fairish that ever was seen on
this countryside  though they've  been heard within these forty years . A
lonesome spot it was, and a bonny spot, full of oak trees and nut trees.
It is altered now."

The story is told. I think I now see the judicious reader putting on his
spectacles to look for the moral. It would be an insult to his sagacity
to offer directions. I only say, God speed him in the quest!


THE END.
