After entering at break of day the inner roadstead of the Port of 
Toulon, exchanging several loud hails with one of the guardboats of the 
Fleet, which directed him where he was to take up his berth, 
Master-Gunner Peyrol let go the anchor of the sea-worn and battered ship 
in his charge, between the arsenal and the town, in full view of the 
principal quay. The course of his life, which in the opinion of any 
ordinary person might have been regarded as full of marvellous incidents 
 only he himself had never marvelled at them , had rendered him 
undemonstrative to such a degree that he did not even let out a sigh of 
relief at the rumble of the cable. And yet it ended a most anxious six 
months of knocking about at sea with valuable merchandise in a damaged 
hull, most of the time on short rations, always on the lookout for 
English cruisers, once or twice on the verge of shipwreck and more than 
once on the verge of capture. But as to that, old Peyrol had made up his 
mind from the first to blow up his valuable charge - unemotionally, for 
such was his character, formed under the sun of the Indian Seas in 
lawless contests with his kind for a little loot that vanished as soon 
as grasped, but mainly for bare life almost as precarious to hold 
through its ups and downs, and which now had lasted for fifty-eight years. 
 
While his crew of half-starved scarecrows, hard as nails and ravenous as 
so many wolves for the delights of the shore, swarmed aloft to furl the 
sails nearly as thin and as patched as the grimy shirts on their backs, 
Peyrol took a survey of the quay. Groups were forming along its whole 
stretch to gaze at the new arrival. Peyrol noted particularly a good 
many men in red caps and said to himself - "Here they are." Amongst 
the crews of ships that had brought the tricolour into the seas of the 
East, there were hundreds professing sans-culotte principles; boastful 
and declamatory beggars he had thought them. But now he was beholding 
the shore breed. Those who had made the Revolution safe. The real thing. 
Peyrol, after taking a good long look, went below into his cabin to make 
himself ready to go ashore. 
 
He shaved his big cheeks with a real English razor, looted years ago 
from an officer's cabin in an English East Indiaman captured by a ship 
he was serving in then. He put on a white shirt, a short blue jacket 
with metal buttons and a high roll-collar, a pair of white trousers 
which he fastened with a red bandana handkerchief by way of a belt. With 
a black, shiny low-crowned hat on his head he made a very creditable 
prize-master. He beckoned from the poop to a boatman and got himself 
rowed to the quay. 
 
By that time the crowd had grown to a large size. Peyrol's eyes ranged 
over it with no great apparent interest, though it was a fact that he 
had never in all his man's life seen so many idle white people massed 
together to stare at a sailor. He had been a rover of the outer seas; he 
had grown into a stranger to his native country. During the few minutes 
it took the boatman to row him to the step, he felt like a navigator 
about to land on a newly discovered shore. 
 
On putting his foot on it he was mobbed. The arrival of a prize made by 
a squadron of the Republic in distant seas was not an everyday 
occurrence in Toulon. The wildest rumours had been already set flying. 
Peyrol elbowed himself through the crowd somehow, but it continued to 
move after him. A voice cried out, "Where do you come from, citoyen?" 
 - "From the other side of the world," Peyrol boomed out. 
 
He did not get rid of his followers till the door of the Port Office. 
There he reported himself to the proper officials as master of a prize 
taken off the Cape by Citoyen Renaud, Commander-in-Chief of the 
Republican Squadron in the Indian Seas. He had been ordered to make for 
Dunkerque but, said he, having been chased by the sacrs Anglais three 
times in a fortnight between Cape Verde and Cape Spartel, he had made up 
his mind to run into the Mediterranean where, he had understood from a 
Danish brig he had met at sea, there were no English men-of-war just 
then. And here he was; and there were his ship's papers and his own 
papers and everything in order. He mentioned also that he was tired of 
rolling about the seas, and that he longed for a period of repose on 
shore. But till all the legal business was settled he remained in Toulon 
roaming about the streets at a deliberate gait, enjoying general 
consideration as Citizen Peyrol, and looking everybody coldly in the eye. 
 
His reticence about his past was of that kind which starts a lot of 
mysterious stories about a man. No doubt the maritime authorities of 
Toulon had a less cloudy idea of Peyrol's past, though it need not 
necessarily have been more exact. In the various offices connected with 
the sea where his duties took him, the wretched scribes, and even some 
of the chiefs, looked very hard at him as he went in and out, dressed 
very neatly, and always with his cudgel, which he used to leave outside 
the door of private offices when called in for an interview with one or 
another of the "gold-laced lot." Having, however, cut off his queue 
and got in touch with some prominent patriots of the Jacobin type, 
Peyrol cared little for people's stares and whispers. The person that 
came nearest to trying his composure was a certain naval captain with a 
patch over one eye and a very threadbare uniform coat who was doing some 
administrative work at the Port Office. That officer, looking up from 
some papers, remarked brusquely, "As a matter of fact you have been the 
best part of your life skimming the seas, if the truth were known. You 
must have been a deserter from the Navy at one time, whatever you may 
call yourself now." 
 
There was not a quiver on the large cheeks of the gunner Peyrol. 
 
"If there was anything of the sort it was in the time of kings and 
aristocrats," he said steadily. "And now I have brought in a prize, 
and a service letter from Citizen Renaud, commanding in the Indian Seas. 
I can also give you the names of good republicans in this town who know 
my sentiments. Nobody can say I was ever anti-revolutionary in my life. 
I knocked about the Eastern seas for forty-five years - that's true. 
But let me observe that it was the seamen who stayed at home that let 
the English into the Port of Toulon." He paused a moment and then 
added: "When one thinks of that, citoyen Commandant, any little slips I 
and fellows of my kind may have made five thousand leagues from here and 
twenty years ago cannot have much importance in these times of equality 
and fraternity." 
 
"As to fraternity," remarked the post-captain in the shabby coat, 
"the only one you are familiar with is the Brotherhood of the Coast, I 
should say." 
 
"Everybody in the Indian Ocean except milksops and youngsters had to 
be," said the untroubled Citizen Peyrol. "And we practised republican 
principles long before a republic was thought of; for the Brothers of 
the Coast were all equal and elected their own chiefs." 
 
"They were an abominable lot of lawless ruffians," remarked the 
officer venomously, leaning back in his chair. "You will not dare to 
deny that." 
 
Citizen Peyrol refused to take up a defensive attitude. He merely 
mentioned in a neutral tone that he had delivered his trust to the Port 
Office all right, and as to his character he had a certificate of civism 
from his section. He was a patriot and entitled to his discharge. After 
being dismissed by a nod he took up his cudgel outside the door and 
walked out of the building with the calmness of rectitude. His large 
face of the Roman type betrayed nothing to the wretched quill-drivers, 
who whispered on his passage. As he went along the streets he looked as 
usual everybody in the eye; but that very same evening he vanished from 
Toulon. It wasn't  that he was afraid of anything. His mind was as calm 
as the natural set of his florid face. Nobody could know what his forty 
years or more of sea-life had been, unless he told them himself. And of 
that he didn't  mean to tell more than what he had told the inquisitive 
captain with the patch over one eye. But he didn't  want any bother for 
certain other reasons; and more than anything else he didn't  want to be 
sent perhaps to serve in the fleet now fitting out in Toulon. So at dusk 
he passed through the gate on the road to Frjus in a high two-wheeled 
cart belonging to a well-known farmer whose habitation lay that way. His 
personal belongings were brought down and piled up on the tailboard of 
the cart by some ragamuffin patriots whom he engaged in the street for 
that purpose. The only indiscretion he committed was to pay them for 
their trouble with a large handful of assignats. From such a prosperous 
seaman, however, this generosity was not so very compromising. He 
himself got into the cart over the wheel, with such slow and ponderous 
movements, that the friendly farmer felt called upon to remark: "Ah, we 
are not so young as we used to be - you and I." - "I have also an 
awkward wound," said Citizen Peyrol, sitting down heavily. 
 
And so from farmer's cart to farmer's cart, getting lifts all along, 
jogging in a cloud of dust between stone walls and through little 
villages well known to him from his boyhood's days, in a landscape of 
stony hills, pale rocks, and dusty green of olive trees, Citizen Peyrol 
went on unmolested till he got down clumsily in the yard of an inn on 
the outskirts of the town of Hyres. The sun was setting to his right. 
Near a clump of dark pines with blood-red trunks in the sunset, Peyrol 
perceived a rutty track branching off in the direction of the sea. 
 
At that spot Citizen Peyrol had made up his mind to leave the high road. 
Every feature of the country with the darkly wooded rises, the barren 
flat expanse of stones and sombre bushes to his left, appealed to him 
with a sort of strange familiarity, because they had remained unchanged 
since the days of his boyhood. The very cartwheel tracks scored deep 
into the stony ground had kept their physiognomy; and far away, like a 
blue thread, there was the sea of the Hyres roadstead with a lumpy 
indigo swelling still beyond - which was the island of Porquerolles, but 
he really did not know. The notion of a father was absent from his 
mentality. What he remembered of his parents was a tall, lean, brown 
woman in rags, who was his mother. But then they were working together 
at a farm which was on the mainland. He had fragmentary memories of her 
shaking down olives, picking stones out of a field, or handling a manure 
fork like a man, tireless and fierce, with wisps of greyish hair flying 
about her bony face; and of himself running barefooted in connection 
with a flock of turkeys, with hardly any clothes on his back. At night, 
by the farmer's favour, they were permitted to sleep in a sort of 
ruinous byre built of stones and with only half a roof on it, lying side 
by side on some old straw on the ground. And it was on a bundle of straw 
that his mother had tossed ill for two days and had died in the night. 
In the darkness, her silence, her cold face had given him an awful 
scare. He supposed they had buried her but he didn't  know, because he 
had rushed out terror-struck, and never stopped till he got as far as a 
little place by the sea called Almanarre, where he hid himself on board 
a tartane that was lying there with no one on board. He went into the 
hold because he was afraid of some dogs on shore. He found down there a 
heap of empty sacks, which made a luxurious couch, and being exhausted 
went to sleep like a stone. Some time during the night the crew came on 
board and the tartane sailed for Marseilles. That was another awful 
scare - being hauled out by the scruff of the neck on the deck and being 
asked who the devil he was and what he was doing there. Only from that 
one he could not run away. There was water all around him and the whole 
world, including the coast not very far away, wobbled in a most alarming 
manner. Three bearded men stood about him and he tried to explain to 
them that he had been working at Peyrol's. Peyrol was the farmer's name. 
The boy didn't  know that he had one of his own. Moreover, he didn't  know 
very well how to talk to people, and they must have misunderstood him. 
Thus the name of Peyrol stuck to him for life. 
 
There the memories of his native country stopped, overlaid by other 
memories, with a multitude of impressions of endless oceans, of the 
Mozambique Channel, of Arabs and negroes, of Madagascar, of the coast of 
India, of islands and channels and reefs; of fights at sea, rows on 
shore, desperate slaughter and desperate thirst, of all sorts of ships 
one after another: merchant ships and frigates and privateers; of 
reckless men and enormous sprees. In the course of years he had learned 
to speak intelligibly and think connectedly and even to read and write 
after a fashion. The name of the farmer Peyrol, attached to his person 
on account of his inability to give a clear account of himself, acquired 
a sort of reputation, both openly, in the ports of the East and, 
secretly, amongst the Brothers of the Coast, that strange fraternity 
with something masonic and not a little piratical in its constitution. 
Round the Cape of Storms, which is also the Cape of Good Hope, the words 
Republic, Nation, Tyranny, Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, and the 
cult of the Supreme Being came floating on board ships from home, new 
cries and new ideas which did not upset the slowly developed 
intelligence of the gunner Peyrol. They seemed the invention of 
landsmen, of whom the seaman Peyrol knew very little - nothing, so to 
speak. Now, after nearly fifty years of lawful and lawless sea-life, 
Citizen Peyrol, at the yard gate of the roadside inn, looked at the late 
scene of his childhood. He looked at it without any animosity, but a 
little puzzled as to his bearings amongst the features of the land. 
"Yes, it must be somewhere in that direction," he thought vaguely. 
Decidedly he would go no further along the high road. . . . A few yards 
away the woman of the inn stood looking at him, impressed by the good 
clothes, the great shaven cheeks, the well-to-do air of that seaman; and 
suddenly Peyrol noticed her. With her anxious brown face, her grey 
locks, and her rustic appearance she might have been his mother, as he 
remembered her, only she wasn't  in rags. 
 
"H! La mre," hailed Peyrol. "Have you got a man to lend a hand with 
my chest into the house?" 
 
He looked so prosperous and so authoritative that she piped without 
hesitation in a thin voice, "Mais oui, citoyen. He will be here in a 
moment." 
 
In the dusk the clump of pines across the road looked very black against 
the quiet clear sky; and Citizen Peyrol gazed at the scene of his young 
misery with the greatest possible placidity. Here he was after nearly 
fifty years, and to look at things it seemed like yesterday. He felt for 
all this neither love nor resentment. He felt a little funny as it were, 
and the funniest thing was the thought which crossed his mind that he 
could indulge his fancy  if he had a mind to it  to buy up all this land 
to the furthermost field, away over there where the track lost itself 
sinking into the flats bordering the sea where the small rise at the end 
of the Giens peninsula had assumed the appearance of a black cloud. 
 
"Tell me, my friend," he said in his magisterial way to the farmhand 
with a tousled head of hair who was awaiting his good pleasure, 
"doesn't  this track lead to Almanarre?" 
 
"Yes," said the labourer, and Peyrol nodded. The man continued, 
mouthing his words slowly as if unused to speech. "To Almanarre and 
further too, beyond the great pond right out to the end of the land, to 
Cape Esterel." 
 
Peyrol was lending his big flat hairy ear. "If I had stayed in this 
country," he thought, "I would be talking like this fellow." And 
aloud he asked: 
 
"Are there any houses there, at the end of the land?" 
 
"Why, a hamlet, a hole, just a few houses round a church and a farm 
where at one time they would give you a glass of wine." 
 
 
Citizen Peyrol stayed at the inn-yard gate till the night had swallowed 
up all those features of the land to which his eyes had clung as long as 
the last gleams of daylight. And even after the last gleams had gone he 
had remained for some time staring into the darkness in which all he 
could distinguish was the white road at his feet and the black heads of 
pines where the cart track dipped towards the coast. He did not go 
indoors till some carters who had been refreshing themselves had 
departed with their big two-wheeled carts piled up high with empty 
wine-casks, in the direction of Frjus. The fact that they did not remain 
for the night pleased Peyrol. He ate his bit of supper alone, in 
silence, and with a gravity which intimidated the old woman who had 
aroused in him the memory of his mother. Having finished his pipe and 
obtained a bit of candle in a tin candle-stick, Citizen Peyrol went 
heavily upstairs to rejoin his luggage. The crazy staircase shook and 
groaned under his feet as though he had been carrying a burden. The 
first thing he did was to close the shutters most carefully as though he 
had been afraid of a breath of night air. Next he bolted the door of the 
room. Then sitting on the floor, with the candlestick standing before 
him between his widely straddled legs, he began to undress, flinging off 
his coat and dragging his shirt hastily over his head. The secret of his 
heavy movements was disclosed then in the fact that he had been wearing 
next his bare skin - like a pious penitent his hair-shirt - a sort of 
waistcoat made of two thicknesses of old sail-cloth and stitched all 
over in the manner of a quilt with tarred twine. Three horn buttons 
closed it in front. He undid them, and after he had slipped off the two 
shoulder-straps which prevented this strange garment from sagging down 
on his hips he started rolling it up. Notwithstanding all his care there 
were during this operation several faint chinks of some metal which 
could not have been lead. 
 
His bare torso thrown backwards and sustained by his rigid big arms 
heavily tattooed on the white skin above the elbows, Peyrol drew a long 
breath into his broad chest with a pepper-and-salt pelt down the 
breastbone. And not only was the breast of Citizen Peyrol relieved to 
the fullest of its athletic capacity, but a change had also come over 
his large physiognomy on which the expression of severe stolidity had 
been simply the result of physical discomfort. It isn't  a trifle to have 
to carry girt about your ribs and hung from your shoulders a mass of 
mixed foreign coins equal to sixty or seventy thousand francs in hard 
cash; while as to the paper money of the Republic, Peyrol had had 
already enough experience of it to estimate the equivalent in cartloads. 
A thousand of them. Perhaps two thousand. Enough in any case to justify 
his flight of fancy, while looking at the countryside in the light of 
the sunset, that what he had on him would buy all that soil from which 
he had sprung: houses, woods, vines, olives, vegetable gardens, rocks 
and salt lagoons - in fact, the whole landscape, including the animals 
in it. But Peyrol did not care for the land at all. He did not want to 
own any part of the solid earth for which he had no love. All he wanted 
from it was a quiet nook, an obscure corner out of men's sight where he 
could dig a hole unobserved. 
 
That would have to be done pretty soon, he thought. One could not live 
for an indefinite number of days with a treasure strapped round one's 
chest. Meantime, an utter stranger in his native country the landing on 
which was perhaps the biggest adventure in his adventurous life, he 
threw his jacket over the rolled-up waistcoat and laid his head down on 
it after extinguishing the candle. The night was warm. The floor of the 
room happened to be of planks, not of tiles. He was no stranger to that 
sort of couch. With his cudgel laid ready at his hand Peyrol slept 
soundly till the noises and the voices about the house and on the road 
woke him up shortly after sunrise. He threw open the, shutter, welcoming 
the morning light and the morning breeze in the full enjoyment of 
idleness which, to a seaman of his kind, is inseparable from the fact of 
being on shore. There was nothing to trouble his thoughts; and though 
his physiognomy was far from being vacant, it did not wear the aspect of 
profound meditation. 
 
It had been by the merest accident that he had discovered during the 
passage, in a secret recess within one of the lockers of his prize, two 
bags of mixed coins: gold mohurs, Dutch ducats, Spanish pieces, English 
guineas. After making that discovery he had suffered from no doubts 
whatever. Loot big or little was a natural fact of his freebooter's 
life. And now when by the force of things he had become a master-gunner 
of the Navy he was not going to give up his find to confounded landsmen, 
mere sharks, hungry quill-drivers, who would put it in their own 
pockets. As to imparting the intelligence to his crew  all bad 
characters , he was much too wise to do anything of the kind. They would 
not have been above cutting his throat. An old fighting sea-dog, a 
Brother of the Coast, had more right to such plunder than anybody on 
earth. So at odd times, while at sea, he had busied himself within the 
privacy of his cabin in constructing the ingenious canvas waistcoat in 
which he could take his treasure ashore secretly. It was bulky, but his 
garments were of an ample cut, and no wretched customs-guard would dare 
to lay hands on a successful prize-master going to the Port Admiral's 
offices to make his report. The scheme had worked perfectly. He found, 
however, that this secret garment, which was worth precisely its weight 
in gold, tried his endurance more than he had expected. It wearied his 
body and even depressed his spirits somewhat. It made him less active 
and also less communicative. It reminded him all the time that he must 
not get into trouble of any sort - keep clear of rows, of intimacies, 
of promiscuous jollities. This was one of the reasons why he had been 
anxious to get away from the town. Once, however, his head was laid on 
his treasure he could sleep the sleep of the just. 
 
Nevertheless in the morning he shrank from putting it on again. With a 
mixture of sailor's carelessness and of old-standing belief in his own 
luck he simply stuffed the precious waistcoat up the flue of the empty 
fireplace. Then he dressed and had his breakfast. An hour later, mounted 
on a hired mule, he started down the track as calmly as though setting 
out to explore the mysteries of a desert island. 
 
His aim was the end of the peninsula which, advancing like a colossal 
jetty into the sea, divides the picturesque roadstead of Hyres from the 
headlands and curves of the coast forming the approaches of the Port of 
Toulon. The path along which the sure-footed mule took him  for Peyrol, 
once he had put its head the right way, made no attempt at steering  
descended rapidly to a plain of and aspect, with the white gleams of the 
Salins in the distance, bounded by bluish hills of no great elevation. 
Soon all traces of human habitations disappeared from before his roaming 
eyes. This part of his native country was more foreign to him than the 
shores of the Mozambique Channel, the coral strands of India, the 
forests of Madagascar. Before long he found himself on the neck of the 
Giens peninsula, impregnated with salt and containing a blue lagoon, 
particularly blue, darker and even more still than the expanses of the 
sea to the right and left of it from which it was separated by narrow 
strips of land not a hundred yards wide in places. The track ran 
indistinct, presenting no wheel-ruts, and with patches of efflorescent 
salt as white as snow between the tufts of wiry grass and the 
particularly dead-looking bushes. The whole neck of land was so low that 
it seemed to have no more thickness than a sheet of paper laid on the 
sea. Citizen Peyrol saw on the level of his eye, as if from a mere raft, 
sails of various craft, some white and some brown, while before him his 
native island of Porquerolles rose dull and solid beyond a wide strip of 
water. The mule, which knew rather better than Citizen Peyrol where it 
was going to, took him presently amongst the gentle rises at the end of 
the peninsula. The slopes were covered with scanty grass; crooked 
boundary walls of dry stones ran across the fields, and above them, here 
and there, peeped a low roof of red tiles shaded by the heads of 
delicate acacias. At a turn of the ravine appeared a village with its 
few houses, mostly with their blind walls to the path, and, at first, no 
living soul in sight. Three tall platanes, very ragged as to their bark 
and very poor as to foliage, stood in a group in an open space; and 
Citizen Peyrol was cheered by the sight of a dog sleeping in the shade. 
The mule swerved with great determination towards a massive stone trough 
under the village fountain. Peyrol, looking round from the saddle while 
the mule drank, could see no signs of an inn. Then, examining the ground 
nearer to him, he perceived a ragged man sitting on a stone. He had a 
broad leathern belt and his legs were bare to the knee. He was 
contemplating the stranger on the mule with stony surprise. His dark 
nut-brown face contrasted strongly with his grey shock of hair. At a 
sign from Peyrol he showed no reluctance and approached him readily 
without changing the stony character of his stare. 
 
The thought that if he had remained at home he would have probably 
looked like that man crossed unbidden the mind of Peyrol. With that 
gravity from which he seldom departed he inquired if there were any 
inhabitants besides himself in the village. Then, to Peyrol's surprise, 
that destitute idler smiled pleasantly and said that the people were out 
looking after their bits of land. 
 
There was enough of the peasant-born in Peyrol, still, to remark that he 
had seen no man, woman, or child, or four-footed beast for hours, and 
that he would hardly have thought that there was any land worth looking 
after anywhere around. But the other insisted. Well, they were working 
on it all the same, at least those that had any. 
 
At the sound of the voices the dog got up with a strange air of being 
all backbone, and, approaching in dismal fidelity, stood with his nose 
close to his master's calves. 
 
"And you," said Peyrol, "you have no land then?" 
 
The man took his time to answer. "I have a boat." 
 
Peyrol became interested when the man explained that his boat was on the 
salt pond, the large, deserted and opaque sheet of water lying dead 
between the two great bays of the living sea. Peyrol wondered aloud why 
any one should want a boat on it. 
 
"There is fish there," said the man. 
 
"And is the boat all your worldly goods?" asked Peyrol. 
 
The flies buzzed, the mule hung its head, moving its ears and flapping 
its thin tail languidly. 
 
"I have a sort of hut down by the lagoon and a net or two," the man 
confessed, as it were. Peyrol, looking down, completed the list by 
saying: "And this dog." 
 
The man again took his time to say: 
 
"He is company." 
 
Peyrol sat as serious as a judge. "You haven't  much to make a living 
of," he delivered himself at last. "However! . . . Is there no inn, 
caf, or some place where one could put up for a day? I have heard up 
inland that there was some such place." 
 
"I will show it to you," said the man, who then went back to where he 
had been sitting and picked up a large empty basket before he led the 
way. His dog followed with his head and tail low, and then came Peyrol 
dangling his heels against the sides of the intelligent mule, which 
seemed to know before-hand all that was going to happen. At the corner 
where the houses ended there stood an old wooden cross stuck into a 
square block of stone. The lonely boatman of the Lagoon of Pesquiers 
pointed in the direction of a branching path where the rises terminating 
the peninsula sank into a shallow pass. There were leaning pines on the 
skyline, and in the pass itself dull silvery green patches of olive 
orchards below a long yellow wall backed by dark cypresses, and the red 
roofs of buildings which seemed to belong to a farm. 
 
"Will they lodge me there" asked Peyrol. 
 
"I don't  know. They will have plenty of room, that's certain. There are 
no travellers here. But as for a place of refreshment, it used to be 
that. You have only got to walk in. If he isn't  there, the mistress is 
sure to be there to serve you. She belongs to the place. She was born on 
it. We know all about her." 
 
"What sort of woman is she?" asked Citizen Peyrol, who was very 
favourably impressed by the aspect of the place. 
 
"Well, you are going there. You shall soon see. She is young." 
 
"And the husband?" asked Peyrol, who, looking down into the other's 
steady upward stare, detected a flicker in the brown, slightly faded 
eyes. "Why are you staring at me like this? I haven't  got a black skin, 
have I?" 
 
The other smiled, showing in the thick pepper-and-salt growth on his 
face as sound a set of teeth as Citizen Peyrol himself. There was in his 
bearing something embarrassed, but not unfriendly, and, he uttered a 
phrase from which Peyrol discovered that the man before him, the lonely, 
hirsute, sunburnt and barelegged human being at his stirrup, nourished 
patriotic suspicions as to his character. And this seemed to him 
outrageous. He wanted to know in a severe voice whether he looked like a 
confounded landsman of any kind. He swore also without, however, losing 
any of the dignity of expression inherent in his type of features and in 
the very modelling of his flesh. 
 
"For an aristocrat you don't  look like one, but neither do you look 
like a farmer or a pedlar or a patriot. You don't  look like anything 
that has been seen here for years and years and years. You look like 
one, I dare hardly say what. You might be a priest." 
 
Astonishment kept Peyrol perfectly quiet on his mule. "Do I dream?" he 
asked himself mentally. "You aren't  mad?" he asked aloud. "Do you 
know what you are talking about? Aren't  you ashamed of yourself?" 
 
"All the same," persisted the other innocently, "it is much less than 
ten years ago since I saw one of them of the sort they call bishops, who 
had a face exactly like yours." 
 
Instinctively Peyrol passed his hand over his face. What could there be 
in it? Peyrol could not remember ever having seen a bishop in his life. 
The fellow stuck to his point, for he puckered his brow and murmured: 
 
"Others too. . . . I remember perfectly. . . . It isn't  so many years 
ago. Some of them skulk amongst the villages yet, for all the chasing 
they got from the patriots." 
 
The sun blazed on the boulders and stones and bushes in the perfect 
stillness of the air. The mule, disregarding with republican austerity 
the neighbourhood of a stable within less than a hundred and twenty 
yards, dropped its head, and even its ears, and dozed as if in the 
middle of a desert. The dog, apparently changed into stone at his 
master's heels, seemed to be dozing too with his nose near the ground. 
Peyrol had fallen into a deep meditation, and the boatman of the lagoon 
awaited the solution of his doubts without eagerness and with something 
like a grin within his thick beard. Peyrol's face cleared. He had solved 
the problem, but there was a shade of vexation in his tone. 
 
"Well, it can't  be helped," he said. "I learned to shave from the 
English. I suppose that's what's the matter." 
 
At the name of the English the boatman pricked up his ears. 
 
"One can't  tell where they are all gone to," he murmured. "Only three 
years ago they swarmed about this coast in their big ships. You saw 
nothing but them, and they were fighting all round Toulon on land. Then 
in a week or two, crac! - nobody! Cleared out devil knows where. But 
perhaps you would know." 
 
"Oh, yes," said Peyrol, "I know all about the English, don't  you 
worry your head." 
 
"I am not troubling my head. It is for you to think about what's best 
to say when you speak with him up there. I mean the master of the farm." 
 
"He can't  be a better patriot than I am, for all my shaven face," said 
Peyrol. "That would only seem strange to a savage like you." 
 
With an unexpected sigh the man sat down at the foot of the cross, and, 
immediately, his dog went off a little way and curled himself up amongst 
the tufts of grass. 
 
"We are all savages here," said the forlorn fisherman from the lagoon. 
"But the master up there is a real patriot from the town. If you were 
ever to go to Toulon and ask people about him they would tell you. He 
first became busy purveying the guillotine when they were purifying the 
town from all aristocrats. That was even before the English came in. 
After the English got driven out there was more of that work than the 
guillotine could do. They had to kill traitors in the streets, in 
cellars, in their beds. The corpses of men and women were lying in heaps 
along the quays. There were a good many of his sort that got the name of 
drinkers of blood. Well, he was one of the best of them. I am only just 
telling you." 
 
Peyrol nodded. "That will do me all right," he said. And before he 
could pick up the reins and hit it with his heels the mule, as though it 
had just waited for his words, started off along the path. 
 
In less than five minutes Peyrol was dismounting in front of a low, long 
addition to a tall farmhouse with very few windows, and flanked by walls 
of stones enclosing not only the yard but apparently a field or two 
also. A gateway stood open to the left, but Peyrol dismounted at the 
door, through which he entered a bare room, with rough whitewashed walls 
and a few wooden chairs and tables, which might have been a rustic caf. 
He tapped with his knuckles on the table. A young woman with a fichu 
round her neck and a striped white and red skirt, with black hair and a 
red mouth, appeared in an inner doorway. 
 
"Bonjour, citoyenne," said Peyrol. She was so startled by the unusual 
aspect of this stranger that she answered him only by a murmured 
"bonjour," but in a moment she came forward and waited expectantly. 
The perfect oval of her face, the colour of her smooth cheeks, and the 
whiteness of her throat forced from the Citizen Peyrol a slight hiss 
through his clenched teeth. 
 
"I am thirsty, of course," he said, "but what I really want is to 
know whether I can stay here." 
 
The sound of a mule's hoofs outside caused Peyrol to start, but the 
woman arrested him. 
 
"She is only going to the shed. She knows the way. As to what you said, 
the master will be here directly. Nobody ever comes here. And how long 
would you want to stay?" 
 
The old rover of the seas looked at her searchingly. 
 
"To tell you the truth, citoyenne, it may be in a manner of speaking 
for ever." 
 
She smiled in a bright flash of teeth, without gaiety or any change in 
her restless eyes that roamed about the empty room as though Peyrol had 
come in attended by a mob of Shades. 
 
"It's like me," she said. "I lived as a child here." 
 
"You are but little more than that now," said Peyrol, examining her 
with a feeling that was no longer surprise or curiosity, but seemed to 
be lodged in his very breast. 
 
"Are you a patriot?" she asked, still surveying the invisible company 
in the room. 
 
Peyrol, who had thought that he had "done with all that damned 
nonsense," felt angry and also at a loss for an answer. 
 
"I am a Frenchman," he said bluntly. 
 
"Arlette!" called out an aged woman's voice through the open inner door. 
 
"What do you want?" she answered readily. 
 
"There's a saddled mule come into the yard." 
 
"All right. The man is here." Her eyes, which had steadied, began to 
wander again all round and about the motionless Peyrol. She moved a step 
nearer to him and asked in a low confidential tone: "Have you ever 
carried a woman's head on a pike?" 
 
Peyrol, who had seen fights, massacres on land and Sea, towns taken by 
assault by savage warriors, who had killed men in attack and defence, 
found himself at first bereft of speech by this simple question, and 
next moved to speak bitterly. 
 
"No. I have heard men boast of having done so. They were mostly 
braggarts with craven hearts. But what is all this to you?" 
 
She was not listening to him, the edge of her white even teeth pressing 
her lower lip, her eyes never at rest. Peyrol remembered suddenly the 
sans-culotte - the blood-drinker. Her husband. Was it possible? . . . 
Well, perhaps it was possible. He could not tell. He felt his utter 
incompetence. As to catching her glance, you might just as well have 
tried to catch a wild sea-bird with your hands. And altogether she was 
like a sea-bird - not to be grasped. But Peyrol knew how to be patient, 
with that patience that is so often a form of courage. He was known for 
it. It had served him well in dangerous situations. Once it had 
positively saved his life. Nothing but patience. He could well wait now. 
He waited. And suddenly as if tamed by his patience this strange 
creature dropped her eyelids, advanced quite close to him and began to 
finger the lapel of his coat-something that a child might have done. 
Peyrol all but gasped with surprise, but he remained perfectly still. He 
was disposed to hold his breath. He was touched by a soft indefinite 
emotion, and as her eyelids remained lowered till her black lashes 
seemed to lie like a shadow on her pale cheek, there was no need for him 
to force a smile. After the first moment he was not even surprised. It 
was merely the sudden movement, not the nature of the act itself, that 
had startled him. 
 
"Yes. You may stay. I think we shall be friends. I'll tell you about 
the Revolution." 
 
At these words Peyrol, the man of violent deeds, felt something like a 
chill breath at the back of his head. 
 
"What's the good of that?" he said. 
 
"It must be," she said and backed away from him swiftly, and without 
raising her eyes turned round and was gone in a moment, so lightly that 
one would have thought her feet had not touched the ground. Peyrol, 
staring at the open kitchen door, saw after a moment an elderly woman's 
head, with brown thin cheeks and tied up in a coloured handkerchief, 
peeping at him fearfully. 
 
 
 "A bottle of wine, please," he shouted at it. 
 
 
The affectation common to seamen of never being surprised at anything 
that sea or land can produce had become in Peyrol a second nature. 
Having learned from childhood to suppress every sign of wonder before 
all extraordinary sights and events, all strange people, all strange 
customs, and the most alarming phenomena of nature  as manifested, for 
instance, in the violence of volcanoes or the fury of human beings , he 
had really become indifferent - or only perhaps utterly inexpressive. He 
had seen so much that was bizarre or atrocious, and had heard so many 
astounding tales, that his usual mental reaction before a new experience 
was generally formulated in the words, "J'en ai vu bien d'autres." The 
last thing which had touched him with the panic of the supernatural had 
been the death under a heap of rags of that gaunt, fierce woman, his 
mother; and the last thing that had nearly overwhelmed him at the age of 
twelve with another kind of terror was the riot of sound and the 
multitude of mankind on the quays in Marseilles, something perfectly 
inconceivable from which he had instantly taken refuge behind a stack of 
wheat sacks after having been chased ashore from the tartane. He had 
remained there quaking till a man in a cocked hat and with a sabre at 
his side  the boy had never seen either such a hat or such a sabre in 
his life  had seized him by the arm close to the armpit and had hauled 
him out from there; a man who might have been an ogre  only Peyrol had 
never heard of an ogre  but at any rate in his own way was alarming and 
wonderful beyond anything he could have imagined - if the faculty of 
imagination had been developed in him then. No doubt all this was enough 
to make one die of fright, but that possibility never occurred to him. 
Neither did he go mad; but being only a child, he had simply adapted 
himself, by means of passive acquiescence, to the new and inexplicable 
conditions of life in something like twenty-four hours. After that 
initiation the rest of his existence, from flying fishes to whales and 
on to black men and coral reefs, to decks running with blood, and thirst 
in open boats, was comparatively plain sailing. By the time he had heard 
of a Revolution in France and of certain Immortal Principles causing the 
death of many people, from the mouths of seamen and travellers and 
year-old gazettes coming out of Europe, he was ready to appreciate 
contemporary history in his own particular way. Mutiny and throwing 
officers overboard. He had seen that twice and he was on a different 
side each time. As to this upset, he took no side. It was too far - too 
big - also not distinct enough. But he acquired the revolutionary jargon 
quickly enough and used it on occasion, with secret contempt. What he 
had gone through, from a spell of crazy love for a yellow girl to the 
experience of treachery from a bosom friend and shipmate  and both those 
things Peyrol confessed to himself he could never hope to understand , 
with all the graduations of varied experience of men and passions 
between, had put a drop of universal scorn, a wonderful sedative, into 
the strange mixture which might have been called the soul of the 
returned Peyrol. 
 
Therefore he not only showed no surprise but did not feel any when he 
beheld the master, in the right of his wife, of the Escampobar Farm. The 
homeless Peyrol, sitting in the bare salle with a bottle of wine before 
him, was in the act of raising the glass to his lips when the man 
entered, ex-orator in the sections, leader of red-capped mobs, hunter of 
the ci-devants and priests, purveyor of the guillotine, in short a 
blood-drinker. And Citizen Peyrol, who had never been nearer than six 
thousand miles as the crow flies to the realities of the Revolution, put 
down his glass and in his deep unemotional voice said: "Salut." 
 
The other returned a much fainter "Salut," staring at the stranger of 
whom he had heard already. His almond-shaped, soft eyes were noticeably 
shiny and so was to a certain extent the skin on his high but rounded 
cheekbones, coloured red like a mask of which all the rest was but a 
mass of clipped chestnut hair growing so thick and close around the lips 
as to hide altogether the design of the mouth which, for all Citizen 
Peyrol knew, might have been of a quite ferocious character. A careworn 
forehead and a perpendicular nose suggested a certain austerity proper 
to an ardent patriot. He held in his hand a long bright knife which he 
laid down on one of the tables at once. He didn't  seem more than thirty 
years old, a well-made man of medium height, with a lack of resolution 
in his bearing. Something like disillusion was suggested by the set of 
his shoulders. The effect was subtle, but Peyrol became aware of it 
while he explained his case and finished the tale by declaring that he 
was a seaman of the Republic and that he had always done his duty before 
the enemy. 
 
The blood-drinker had listened profoundly. The high arches of his 
eyebrows gave him an astonished look. He came close up to the table and 
spoke in a trembling voice. 
 
"You may have! But you may all the same be corrupt. The seamen of the 
Republic were eaten up with corruption paid for with the gold of the 
tyrants. Who would have guessed it? They all talked like patriots. And 
yet the English entered the harbour and landed in the town without 
opposition. The armies of the Republic drove them out, but treachery 
stalks in the land, it comes up out of the ground, it sits at our 
hearthstones, lurks in the bosom of the representatives of the people, 
of our fathers, of our brothers. There was a time when civic virtue 
flourished, but now it has got to hide its head. And I will tell you 
why: there has not been enough killing. It seems as if there could never 
be enough of it. It's discouraging. Look what we have come to." 
 
His voice died in his throat as though he had suddenly lost confidence 
in himself. 
 
"Bring another glass, citoyen," said Peyrol, after a short pause, 
"and let's drink together. We will drink to the confusion of traitors. 
I detest treachery as much as any man, but . . ." 
 
He waited till the other had returned, then poured out the wine, and 
after they had touched glasses and half emptied them, he put down his 
own and continued: 
 
"But you see I have nothing to do with your politics. I was at the 
other side of the world, therefore you can't  suspect me of being a 
traitor. You showed no mercy, you other sans-culottes, to the enemies of 
the Republic at home, and I killed her enemies abroad, far away. You 
were cutting off heads without much compunction. . . ." 
 
The other most unexpectedly shut his eyes for a moment, then opened them 
very wide. "Yes, yes," he assented very low. "Pity may be a crime." 
 
"Yes. And I knocked the enemies of the Republic on the head whenever I 
had them before me without inquiring about the number. It seems to me 
that you and I ought to get on together." 
 
The master of Escampobar farmhouse murmured, however, that in times like 
these nothing could be taken as proof positive. It behoved every patriot 
to nurse suspicion in his breast. No sign of impatience escaped Peyrol. 
He was rewarded for his self-restraint and the unshaken good-humour with 
which he had conducted the discussion by, carrying his point. Citizen 
Scevola Bron  for that appeared to be the name of the master of the 
farm , an object of fear and dislike to the other inhabitants of the 
Giens peninsula, might have been influenced by a wish to have some one 
with whom he could exchange a few words from time to time. No villagers 
ever came up to the farm, or were likely to, unless perhaps in a body 
and animated with hostile intentions. They resented his presence in 
their part of the world sullenly. 
 
"Where do you come from?" was the last question he asked. 
 
"I left Toulon two days ago." 
 
Citizen Scevola struck the table with his fist, but this manifestation 
of energy was very momentary. 
 
"And that was the town of which by a decree not a stone upon another 
was to be left," he complained, much depressed. 
 
"Most of it is still standing," Peyrol assured him calmly. "I don't  
know whether it deserved the fate you say was decreed for it. I was 
there for the last month or so and I know it contains some good 
patriots. I know because I made friends with them all." Thereupon 
Peyrol mentioned a few names which the retired sans-culotte greeted with 
a bitter smile and an ominous silence, as though the bearers of them had 
been only good for the scaffold and the guillotine. 
 
"Come along and I will show you the place where you will sleep," he 
said with a sigh, and Peyrol was only too ready. They entered the 
kitchen together. Through the open back door a large square of sunshine 
fell on the floor of stone flags. Outside one could see quite a mob of 
expectant chickens, while a yellow hen postured on the very doorstep, 
darting her head right and left with affectation. All old woman holding 
a bowl full of broken food put it down suddenly on a table and stared. 
The vastness and cleanliness of the place impressed Peyrol favourably. 
 
"You will eat with us here," said his guide, and passed without 
stopping into a narrow passage giving access to a steep flight of 
stairs. Above the first landing a narrow spiral staircase led to the 
upper part of the farmhouse; and when the sans-culotte flung open the 
solid plank door at which it ended he disclosed to Peyrol a large low 
room containing a four-poster bedstead piled up high with folded 
blankets and spare pillows. There were also two wooden chairs and a 
large oval table. 
 
"We could arrange this place for you," said the master, "but I don't  
know what the mistress will have to say," he added. 
 
Peyrol, struck by the peculiar expression of his face, turned his head 
and saw the girl standing in the doorway. It was as though she had 
floated up after them, for not the slightest sound of rustle or footfall 
had warned Peyrol of her presence. The pure complexion of her white 
cheeks was set off brilliantly by her coral lips and the bands of 
raven-black hair only partly covered by a muslin cap trimmed with lace. 
She made no sign, uttered no sound, behaved exactly as if there had been 
nobody in the room; and Peyrol suddenly averted his eyes from that mute 
and unconscious face with its roaming eyes. 
 
In some way or other, however, the sans-culotte seemed to have 
ascertained her mind, for he said in a final tone: 
 
"That's all right then," and there was a short silence, during which 
the woman shot her dark glances all round the room again and again, 
while on her lips there was a half-smile, not so much absent-minded as 
totally unmotived, which Peyrol observed with a side glance, but could 
not make anything of. She did not seem to know him at all. 
 
"You have a view of salt water on three sides of you," remarked 
Peyrol's future host. 
 
The farmhouse was a tall building, and this large attic with its three 
windows commanded on one side the view of Hyres roadstead on the first 
plan, with further blue undulations of the coast as far as Frjus; and on 
the other the vast semicircle of barren high hills, broken by the 
entrance to Toulon harbour guarded by forts and batteries, and ending in 
Cape Cpet, a squat mountain, with sombre folds and a base of brown 
rocks, with a white spot gleaming on the very summit of it, a ci-devant 
shrine dedicated to Our Lady, and a ci-devant place of pilgrimage. The 
noonday glare seemed absorbed by the gemlike surface of the sea 
perfectly flawless in the invincible depth of its colour. 
 
"It's like being in a lighthouse," said Peyrol. "Not a bad place for 
a seaman to live in." The sight of the sails dotted about cheered his 
heart. The people of landsmen with their houses and animals and 
activities did not count. What made for him the life of any strange 
shore were the craft that belonged to it: canoes, catamarans, ballahous, 
praus, lorchas, mere dug-outs, or even rafts of tied logs with a bit of 
mat for a sail from which naked brown men fished along stretches of 
white sand crushed under the tropical skyline, sinister in its glare and 
with a thunder-cloud crouching on the horizon. But here he beheld a 
perfect serenity, nothing sombre on the shore, nothing ominous in the 
sunshine. The sky rested lightly on the distant and vaporous outline of 
the hills; and the immobility of all things seemed poised in the air 
like a gay mirage. On this tideless sea several tartanes lay becalmed in 
the Petite Passe between Porquerolles and Cape Esterel, yet theirs was 
not the stillness of death but of light slumber, the immobility of a 
smiling enchantment, of a Mediterranean fair day, breathless sometimes 
but never without life. Whatever enchantment Peyrol had known in his 
wanderings it had never been so remote from all thoughts of strife and 
death, so full of smiling security, making all his past appear to him 
like a chain of lurid days and sultry nights. He thought he would never 
want to get away from it, as though he had obscurely felt that his old 
rover's soul had been always rooted there. Yes, this was the place for 
him; not because expediency dictated, but simply because his instinct of 
rest had found its home at last. 
 
He turned away from the window and found himself face to face with the 
sans-culotte, who had apparently come up to him from behind, perhaps 
with the intention of tapping him on the shoulder, but who now turned 
away his head. The young woman had disappeared. 
 
"Tell me, patron," said Peyrol, "is there anywhere near this house a 
little dent in the shore with a bit of beach in it perhaps where I could 
keep a boat?" 
 
"What do you want a boat for?" 
 
"To go fishing when I have a fancy to," answered Peyrol curtly. 
 
Citizen Bron, suddenly subdued, told him that what he wanted was to be 
found a couple of hundred yards down the hill from the house. The coast, 
of course, was full of indentations, but this was a perfect little pool. 
And the Toulon blood-drinker's almond-shaped eyes became strangely 
sombre as they gazed at the attentive Peyrol. A perfect little pool, he 
repeated, opening from a cove that the English knew well. He paused. 
Peyrol observed without much animosity but in a tone of conviction that 
it was very difficult to keep off the English whenever there was a bit 
of salt water anywhere; but what could have brought English seamen to a 
spot like this he couldn't  imagine. 
 
"It was when their fleet first came here," said the patriot in a 
gloomy voice, "and hung round the coast before the anti-revolutionary 
traitors let them into Toulon, sold the sacred soil of their country for 
a handful of gold. Yes, in the days before the crime was consummated 
English officers used to land in that cove at night and walk up to this 
very house." 
 
"What audacity!" commented Peyrol, who was really surprised. "But 
that's just like what they are." Still, it was hard to believe. But 
wasn't  it only a tale? 
 
The patriot flung one arm up in a strained gesture. "I swore to its 
truth before the tribunal," he said. "It was a dark story," he cried 
shrilly, and paused. "It cost her father his life," he said in a low 
voice . . . "her mother too - but the country was in danger," he added 
still lower. 
 
Peyrol walked away to the western window and looked towards Toulon. In 
the middle of the great sheet of water within Cape Cici a tall 
two-decker lay becalmed and the little dark dots on the water were her 
boats trying to tow her head round the right way. Peyrol watched them 
for a moment, and then walked back to the middle of the room. 
 
"Did you actually drag him from this house to the guillotine?" he 
asked in his unemotional voice. 
 
The patriot shook his head thoughtfully with downcast eyes. "No, he 
came over to Toulon just before the evacuation, this friend of the 
English . . . sailed over in a tartane he owned that is still lying here 
at the Madrague. He had his wife with him. They came over to take home 
their daughter who was living then with some skulking old nuns. The 
victorious Republicans were closing in and the slaves of tyranny had to 
fly." 
 
"Came to fetch their daughter," mused Peyrol. "Strange, that guilty 
people should . . ." 
 
The patriot looked up fiercely. "It was justice," he said loudly. 
"They were anti-revolutionists, and if they had never spoken to an 
Englishman in their life the atrocious crime was on their heads." 
 
"H'm, stayed too long for their daughter," muttered Peyrol. "And so 
it was you who brought her home." 
 
"I did," said the patron. For a moment his eyes evaded Peyrol's 
investigating glance, but in a moment he looked straight into his face. 
"No lessons of base superstition could corrupt her soul," he declared 
with exaltation. "I brought home a patriot." 
 
Peyrol, very calm, gave him a hardly perceptible nod. "Well," he said, 
"all this won't  prevent me sleeping wery well in this room. I always 
thought I would like to live in a lighthouse when I got tired of roving 
about the seas. This is as near a lighthouse lantern as can be. You will 
see me with all my little affairs to-morrow," he added, moving towards 
the stairs. "Salut, citoyen." 
 
There was in Peyrol a fund of self-command amounting to placidity. There 
were men living in the East who had no doubt whatever that Peyrol was a 
calmly terrible man. And they would quote illustrative instances which 
from their own point of view were simply admirable. But all Peyrol had 
ever done was to behave rationally, as it seemed to him in all sorts of 
dangerous circumstances without ever being led astray by the nature, or 
the cruelty, or the danger of any given situation. He adapted himself to 
the character of the event and to the very spirit of it, with a profound 
responsive feeling of a particularly unsentimental kind. Sentiment in 
itself was an artificiality of which he had never heard and if he had 
seen it in action would have appeared to him too puzzling to make 
anything of. That sort of genuineness in acceptance made him a 
satisfactory inmate of the Escampobar Farm. He duly turned up with all 
his cargo, as he called it, and was met at the door of the farmhouse 
itself by the young woman with the pale face and wandering eyes. Nothing 
could hold her attention for long amongst her familiar surroundings. 
Right and left and far away beyond you, she seemed to be looking for 
something while you were talking to her, so that you doubted whether she 
could follow what you said. But as a matter of fact she had all her wits 
about her. In the midst of this strange search for something that was 
not there she had enough detachment to smile at Peyrol. Then, 
withdrawing into the kitchen, she watched, as much as her restless eyes 
could watch anything, Peyrol's cargo and Peyrol himself passing up the 
stairs. 
 
The most valuable part of Peyrol's cargo being strapped to his person, 
the first thing he did after being left alone in that attic room which 
was like the lantern of a lighthouse was to relieve himself of the 
burden and lay it on the foot of the bed. Then he sat down and leaning 
his elbow far on the table he contemplated it with a feeling of complete 
relief. That plunder had never burdened his conscience. It had merely on 
occasion oppressed his body; and if it had at all affected his spirits 
it was not by its secrecy but by its mere weight, which was 
inconvenient, irritating, and towards the end of a day altogether 
insupportable. It made a free-limbed, deep-breathing sailor-man feel 
like a mere overloaded animal, thus extending whatever there was of 
compassion in Peyrol's nature towards the four-footed beasts that carry 
men's burdens on the earth. The necessities of a lawless life had taught 
Peyrol to be ruthless, but he had never been cruel. 
 
Sprawling in the chair, stripped to the waist, robust and grey-haired, 
his head with a Roman profile propped up on a mighty and tattooed 
forearm, he remained at ease, with his eyes fixed on his treasure with 
an air of meditation. Yet Peyrol was not meditating  as a superficial 
observer might have thought  on the best place of concealment. It was 
not that he had not had a great experience of that sort of property 
which had always melted so quickly through his fingers. What made him 
meditative was its character, not of a share of a hard-won booty in 
toil, in risk, in danger, in privation, but of a piece of luck 
personally his own. He knew what plunder was and how soon it went; but 
this lot had come to stay. He had it with him, away from the haunts of 
his lifetime, as if in another world altogether. It couldn't  be drunk 
away, gambled away, squandered away in any sort of familiar 
circumstances, or even given away. In that room, raised a good many feet 
above his revolutionized native land where he was more of a stranger 
than anywhere else in the world, in this roomy garret full of light and 
as it were surrounded by the sea, in a great sense of peace and 
security, Peyrol didn't  see why he should bother his head about it so 
very much. It came to him that he had never really cared for any plunder 
that fell into his hands. No, never for any. And to take particular care 
of this for which no one would seek vengeance or attempt recovery would 
have been absurd. Peyrol got up and opened his big sandalwood chest 
secured with an enormous padlock, part, too, of some old plunder 
gathered in a Chinese town in the Gulf of Tonkin, in company of certain 
Brothers of the Coast, who having boarded at night a Portuguese schooner 
and sent her crew adrift in a boat, had taken a cruise on their own 
account, years and years and years ago. He was young then, very young, 
and the chest fell to his share because nobody else would have anything 
to do with the cumbersome thing, and also for the reason that the metal 
of the curiously wrought thick hoops that strengthened it was not gold 
but mere brass. He, in his innocence, had been rather pleased with the 
article. He had carried it about with him into all sorts of places, and 
also he had left it behind him - once for a whole year in a dark and 
noisome cavern on a certain part of the Madagascar coast. He had left it 
with various native chiefs, with Arabs, with a gambling-hell keeper in 
Pondicherry, with his various friends in short, and even with his 
enemies. Once he had lost it altogether. 
 
That was on the occasion when he had received a wound which laid him 
open and gushing like a slashed wine-skin. A sudden quarrel broke out in 
a company of Brothers over some matter of policy complicated by personal 
jealousies, as to which he was as innocent as a babe unborn. He never 
knew who gave him the slash. Another Brother, a chum of his, an English 
boy, had rushed in and hauled him out of the fray, and then he had 
remembered nothing for days. Even now when he looked at the scar he 
could not understand why he had not died. That occurrence, with the 
wound and the painful convalescence, was the first thing that sobered 
his character somewhat. Many years afterwards, when in consequence of 
his altered views of mere lawlessness he was serving as quartermaster on 
board the Hirondelle, a comparatively respectable privateer, he caught 
sight of that chest again in Port Louis, of all places in the world, in 
a dark little den of a shop kept by a lone Hindoo. The hour was late, 
the side street was empty, and so Peyrol went in there to claim his 
property, all fair, a dollar in one hand and a pistol in the other, and 
was entreated abjectly to take it away. He carried off the empty chest 
on his shoulder, and that same night the privateer went to sea; then 
only he found time to ascertain that he had made no mistake, because, 
soon after he had got it first, he had, in grim wantonness, scratched 
inside the lid, with the point of his knife, the rude outline of a skull 
and cross-bones into which he had rubbed afterwards a little Chinese 
vermilion. And there it was, the whole design, as fresh as ever. 
 
In the garret full of light of the Escampobar farmhouse, the grey-haired 
Peyrol opened the chest, took all the contents out of it, laying them 
neatly on the floor, and spread his treasure - pockets downwards - over 
the bottom, which it filled exactly. Busy on his knees he repacked the 
chest. A jumper or two, a fine cloth jacket, a remnant piece of 
Madapolam muslin, costly stuff for which he had no use in the world - a 
quantity of fine white shirts. Nobody would dare to rummage in his 
chest, he thought, with the assurance of a man who had been feared in 
his time. Then he rose, and looking round the room and stretching his 
powerful arms, he ceased to think of the treasure, of the future and 
even of to-morrow, in the sudden conviction that he could make himself 
very comfortable there. 
 
 
In a tiny bit of a looking-glass hung on the frame of the east window, 
Peyrol, handling the unwearable English blade, was shaving himself - for 
the day was Sunday. The years of political changes ending with the 
proclamation of Napoleon as Consul for life had not touched Peyrol 
except as to his strong thick head of hair, which was nearly all white 
now. After putting the razor away carefully, Peyrol introduced his 
stockinged feet into a pair of sabots of the very best quality and 
clattered downstairs. His brown cloth breeches were untied at the knee 
and the sleeves of his shirt rolled up to his shoulders. That sea-rover 
turned rustic was now perfectly at home in that farm which, like a 
lighthouse, commanded the view of two roadsteads and of the open sea. He 
passed through the kitchen. It was exactly as he had seen it first, 
sunlight on the floor, red copper utensils shining on the walls, the 
table in the middle scrubbed snowy white; and it was only the old woman, 
Aunt Catherine, who seemed to have acquired a sharper profile. The very 
hen manuvring her neck pretentiously on the doorstep, might have been 
standing there for the last eight years. Peyrol shooed her away, and 
going into the yard washed himself lavishly at the pump. When he 
returned from the yard he looked so fresh and hale that old Catherine 
complimented him in a thin voice on his "bonne mine." Manners were 
changing, and she addressed him no longer as citoyen but as Monsieur 
Peyrol. He answered readily that if her heart was free he was ready to 
lead her to the altar that very day. This was such an old joke that 
Catherine took no notice of it whatever, but followed him with her eyes 
as he crossed the kitchen into the salle, which was cool, with its 
tables and benches washed clean, and no living soul in it. Peyrol passed 
through to the front of the house, leaving the outer door open. At the 
clatter of his clogs a young man sitting outside on a bench turned his 
head and greeted him by a careless nod. His face was rather long, 
sunburnt and smooth, with a slightly curved nose and a very well-shaped 
chin. He wore a dark blue naval jacket open on a white shirt and a black 
neckerchief tied in a slip-knot with long ends. White breeches and 
stockings and black shoes with steel buckles completed his costume. A 
brass-hilted sword in a black scabbard worn on a cross-belt was lying on 
the ground at his feet. Peyrol, silver-headed and ruddy, sat down on the 
bench at some little distance. The level piece of rocky ground in front 
of the house was not very extensive, falling away to the sea in a 
declivity framed between the rises of two barren hills. The old rover 
and the young seaman with their arms folded across their chests gazed 
into space, exchanging no words, like close intimates or like distant 
strangers. Neither did they stir when the master of the Escampobar Farm 
appeared out of the yard gate with a manure fork on his shoulder and 
started to cross the piece of level ground. His grimy hands, his 
rolled-up shirt sleeves, the fork over the shoulder, the whole of his 
working-day aspect had somehow an air of being a manifestation; but the 
patriot dragged his dirty clogs low-spiritedly in the fresh light of the 
young morning, in a way no real worker on the land would ever do at the 
end of a day of toil. Yet there were no signs of debility about his 
person. His oval face with rounded cheek-bones remained unwrinkled 
except at the corners of his almond-shaped, shiny, visionary's eyes, 
which had not changed since the day when old Peyrol's gaze had met them 
for the first time. A few white hairs on his tousled head and in the 
thin beard alone had marked the passage of years, and you would have had 
to look for them closely. Amongst the unchangeable rocks at the extreme 
end of the Peninsula, time seemed to have stood still and idle while the 
group of people poised at that southernmost point of France had gone 
about their ceaseless toil, winning bread and wine from a stony-hearted 
earth. 
 
The master of the farm, staring straight before him, passed before the 
two men towards the door of the salle, which Peyrol had left open. He 
leaned his fork against the wall before going in. The sound of a distant 
bell, the bell of the village where years ago the returned rover had 
watered his mule and had listened to the talk of the man with the dog, 
came up faint and abrupt in the great stillness of the upper space. The 
violent slamming of the salle door broke the silence between the two 
gazers on the sea. 
 
"Does that fellow never rest?" asked the young man in a low 
indifferent voice which covered the delicate tinkling of the bell, and 
without moving his head. 
 
"Not on Sunday anyhow," answered the rover in the same detached 
manner. "What can you expect? The church bell is like poison to him. 
That fellow, I verily believe, has been born a sans-culotte. Every 
`dcadi" he puts on his best clothes, sticks a red cap on his head and 
wanders between the buildings like a lost soul in the light of day. A 
Jacobin, if ever there was one." 
 
"Yes. There is hardly a hamlet in France where there isn't  a 
sans-culotte or two. But some of them have managed to change their skins 
if nothing else." 
 
"This one won't  change his skin, and as to his inside he never had 
anything in him that could be moved. Aren't  there some people that 
remember him in Toulon? It isn't  such a long time ago. And yet . . ." 
Peyrol turned slightly towards the young man . . . "And yet to look at 
him . . ." 
 
The officer nodded, and for a moment his face wore a troubled expression 
which did not escape the notice of Peyrol who went on speaking easily: 
 
"Some time ago, when the priests began to come back to the parishes, 
he, that fellow" - Peyrol jerked his head in the direction of the salle 
door - "would you believe it? - started for the village with a sabre 
hanging to his side and his red cap on his head. He made for the church 
door. What he wanted to do there I don't  know. It surely could not have 
been to say the proper kind of prayers. Well, the people were very much 
elated about their reopened church, and as he went along some woman 
spied him out of a window and started the alarm. `Eh, there! look! The 
jacobin, the sans-culotte, the blood-drinker! Look at him." Out rushed 
some of them, and a man or two that were working in their home patches 
vaulted over the low walls. Pretty soon there was a crowd, mostly women, 
each with the first thing she could snatch up - stick, kitchen knife, 
anything. A few men with spades and cudgels joined them by the 
water-trough. He didn't  quite like that. What could he do? He turned and 
bolted up the hill, like a hare. It takes some pluck to face a mob of 
angry women. He ran along the cart track without looking behind him, and 
they after him, yelling: `A mort! A mort le buveur de sang!" He had been 
a horror and an abomination to the people for years, what with one story 
and another, and now they thought it was their chance. The priest over 
in the presbytery hears the noise, comes to the door. One look was 
enough for him. He is a fellow of about forty but a wiry, long-legged 
beggar, and agile - what? He just tucked up his skirts and dashed out, 
taking short cuts over the walls and leaping from boulder to boulder 
like a blessed goat. I was up in my room when the noise reached me 
there. I went to the window and saw the chase in full cry after him. I 
was beginning to think the fool would fetch all those furies along with 
him up here and that they would carry the house by boarding and do for 
the lot of us, when the priest cut in just in the nick of time. He could 
have tripped Scevola as easy as anything, but he lets him pass and 
stands in front of his parishioners with his arms extended. That did it. 
He saved the patron all right. What he could say to quieten them I don't  
know, but these were early days and they were very fond of their new 
priest. He could have turned them round his little finger. I had my head 
and shoulders out of the window - it was interesting enough. They would 
have massacred all the accursed lot, as they used to call us down 
there - and when I drew in, behold there was the patronne standing 
behind me looking on too. You have been here often enough to know how 
she roams about the grounds and about the house, without a sound. A leaf 
doesn't  pose itself lighter on the ground than her feet do. Well, I 
suppose she didn't  know that I was upstairs, and came into the room just 
in her way of always looking for something that isn't  there, and 
noticing me with my head stuck out, naturally came up to see what I was 
looking at. Her face wasn't  any paler than usual, but she was clawing 
the dress over her chest with her ten fingers - like this. I was 
confounded. Before I could find my tongue she just turned round and went 
out with no more sound than a shadow." 
 
When Peyrol ceased, the ringing of the church bell went on faintly and 
then stopped as abruptly as it had begun. 
 
"Talking about her shadow," said the young officer indolently, "I 
know her shadow." 
 
Old Peyrol made a really pronounced movement. "What do you mean?" he 
asked. "Where?" 
 
"I have got only one window in the room where they put me to sleep last 
night and I stood at it looking out. That's what I am here for - to look 
out, am I not? I woke up suddenly, and being awake I went to the window 
and looked out." 
 
"One doesn't  see shadows in the air," growled old Peyrol. 
 
"No, but you see them on the ground, pretty black too when the moon is 
full. It fell across this open space here from the corner of the house." 
 
"The patronne," exclaimed Peyrol in a low voice, "impossible!" 
 
"Does the old woman that lives in the kitchen roam, do the village 
women roam as far as this?" asked the officer composedly. "You ought 
to know the habits of the people. It was a woman's shadow. The moon 
being to the west, it glided slanting from that corner of the house and 
glided back again. I know her shadow when I see it." 
 
"Did you hear anything?" asked Peyrol after a moment of visible 
hesitation. 
 
"The window being open I heard somebody snoring. It couldn't  have been 
you, you are too high. Moreover, from the snoring," he added grimly, 
"it must have been somebody with a good conscience. Not like you, old 
skimmer of the seas, because, you know, that's what you are, for all 
your gunner's warrant." He glanced out of the corner of his eyes at old 
Peyrol. "What makes you look so worried?" 
 
"She roams, that cannot be denied," murmured Peyrol, with an 
uneasiness which he did not attempt to conceal. 
 
"Evidently. I know a shadow when I see it, and when I saw it, it did 
not frighten me, not a quarter as much as the mere tale of it seems to 
have frightened you. However, that sans-culotte friend of yours must be 
a hard sleeper. Those purveyors of the guillotine all have a first-class 
fireproof Republican conscience. I have seen them at work up north when 
I was a boy running barefoot in the gutters. . . ." 
 
"The fellow always sleeps in that room," said Peyrol earnestly. 
 
"But that's neither here nor there," went on the officer, "except 
that it may be convenient for roaming shadows to hear his conscience 
taking its ease." 
 
Peyrol, excited, lowered his voice forcibly. "Lieutenant," he said, 
"if I had not seen from the first what was in your heart I would have 
contrived to get rid of you a long time ago in some way or other." 
 
The lieutenant glanced sideways again and Peyrol let his raised fist 
fall heavily on his thigh. "I am old Peyrol and this place, as lonely 
as a ship at sea, is like a ship to me and all in it are like shipmates. 
Never mind the patron. What I want to know is whether you heard 
anything? Any sound at all? Murmur, footstep?" A bitterly mocking smile 
touched the lips of the young man. 
 
"Not a fairy footstep. Could you hear the fall of a leaf - and with 
that terrorist cur trumpeting right above my head? . . ." Without 
unfolding his arms he turned towards Peyrol, who was looking at him 
anxiously. . . . "You want to know, do you? Well, I will tell you what 
I heard and you can make the best of it. I heard the sound of a stumble. 
It wasn't  a fairy either that stubbed its toe. It was something in a 
heavy shoe. Then a stone went rolling down the ravine in front of us 
interminably, then a silence as of death. I didn't  see anything moving. 
The way the moon was then, the ravine was in black shadow. And I didn't  
try to see." 
 
Peyrol, with his elbow on his knee, leaned his head in the palm of his 
hand. The officer repeated through his clenched teeth: "Make the best 
of it." 
 
Peyrol shook his head slightly. After having spoken, the young officer 
leaned back against the wall, but next moment the report of a piece of 
ordnance reached them as it were from below, travelling around the 
rising ground to the left in the form of a dull thud followed by a 
sighing sound that seemed to seek an issue amongst the stony ridges and 
rocks near by. 
 
"That's the English corvette which has been dodging in and out of Hyres 
Roads for the last week," said the young officer, picking up his sword 
hastily. He stood up and buckled the belt on, while Peyrol rose more 
deliberately from the bench, and said: 
 
"She can't  be where we saw her at anchor last night. That gun was near. 
She must have crossed over. There has been enough wind for that at 
various times during the night. But what could she be firing at down 
there in the Petite Passe? We had better go and see." 
 
He strode off, followed by Peyrol. There was not a human being in sight 
about the farm and not a sound of life except for the lowing of a cow 
coming faintly from behind a wall. Peyrol kept close behind the quickly 
moving officer who followed the footpath marked faintly on the stony 
slope of the hill. 
 
"That gun was not shotted," he observed suddenly in a deep steady voice. 
 
The officer glanced over his shoulder. 
 
"You may be right. You haven't  been a gunner for nothing. Not shotted, 
eh? Then a signal gun. But who to? We have been observing that corvette 
now for days and we know she has no companion." 
 
He moved on, Peyrol following him on the awkward path without losing his 
wind and arguing in a steady voice: "She has no companion but she may 
have seen a friend at daylight this morning." 
 
"Bah!" retorted the officer without checking his pace. "You talk now 
like a child or else you take me for one. How far could she have seen? 
What view could she have had at daylight if she was making her way to 
the Petite Passe where she is now? Why, the islands would have masked 
for her two-thirds of the sea and just in the direction too where the 
English inshore squadron is hovering below the horizon. Funny blockade 
that! You can't  see a single English sail for days and days together, 
and then when you least expect them they come down all in a crowd as if 
ready to eat us alive. No, no! There was no wind to bring her up a 
companion. But tell me, gunner, you who boast of knowing the bark of 
every English piece, what sort of gun was it?" 
 
Peyrol growled in answer: 
 
"Why, a twelve. The heaviest she carries. She is only a corvette." 
 
"Well, then, it was fired as a recall for one of her boats somewhere 
out of sight along the shore. With a coast like this, all points and 
bights, there would be nothing very extraordinary in that, would there?" 
 
"No," said Peyrol, stepping out steadily. "What is extraordinary is 
that she should have had a boat away at all." 
 
"You are right there." The officer stopped suddenly. "Yes, it is 
really remarkable, that she should have sent a boat away. And there is 
no other way to explain that gun." 
 
Peyrol's face expressed no emotion of any sort. 
 
"There is something there worth investigating," continued the officer 
with animation. 
 
"If it is a matter of a boat," Peyrol said without the slightest 
excitement, "there can be nothing very deep in it. What could there be? 
As likely as not they sent her inshore early in the morning with lines 
to try to catch some fish for the captain's breakfast. Why do you open 
your eyes like this? Don't  you know the English? They have enough cheek 
for anything." 
 
After uttering those words with a deliberation made venerable by his 
white hair, Peyrol made the gesture of wiping his brow, which was barely 
moist. 
 
"Let us push on," said the lieutenant abruptly. 
 
"Why hurry like this?" argued Peyrol without moving. "Those heavy 
clogs of mine are not adapted for scrambling on loose stones." 
 
"Aren't  they?" burst out the officer. "Well, then, if you are tired 
you can sit down and fan yourself with your hat. Good-bye." And he 
strode away before Peyrol could utter a word. 
 
The path following the contour of the hill took a turn towards its 
sea-face and very soon the lieutenant passed out of sight with startling 
suddenness. Then his head reappeared for a moment, only his head, and 
that too vanished suddenly. Peyrol remained perplexed. After gazing in 
the direction in which the officer had disappeared, he looked down at 
the farm buildings, now below him but not at a very great distance. He 
could see distinctly the pigeons walking on the roof ridges. Somebody 
was drawing water from the well in the middle of the yard. The patron, 
no doubt; but that man, who at one time had the power to send so many 
luckless persons to their death, did not count for old Peyrol. He had 
even ceased to be an offence to his sight and a disturber of his 
feelings. By himself he was nothing. He had never been anything but a 
creature of the universal blood-lust of the time. The very doubts about 
him had died out by now in old Peyrol's breast. The fellow was so 
insignificant that had Peyrol in a moment of particular attention 
discovered that he cast no shadow, he would not have been surprised. 
Below there he was reduced to the shape of a dwarf lugging a bucket away 
from the well. But where was she? Peyrol asked himself, shading his eyes 
with his hand. He knew that the patronne could not be very far away, 
because he had a sight of her during the morning; but that was before he 
had learned she had taken to roaming at night. His growing uneasiness 
came suddenly to an end when, turning his eyes away from the farm 
buildings, where obviously she was not, he saw her appear, with nothing 
but the sky full of light at her back, coming down round the very turn 
of the path which had taken the lieutenant out of sight. 
 
Peyrol moved briskly towards her. He wasn't  a man to lose time in idle 
wonder, and his sabots did not seem to weigh heavy on his feet. The 
fermire, whom the villagers down there spoke of as Arlette as though she 
had been a little girl, but in a strange tone of shocked awe, walked 
with her head drooping and her feet  as Peyrol used to say  touching the 
ground as lightly as falling leaves. The clatter of the clogs made her 
raise her black, clear eyes that had been smitten on the very verge of 
womanhood by such sights of bloodshed and terror, as to leave in her a 
fear of looking steadily in any direction for long, lest she should see 
coming through the empty air some mutilated vision of the dead. Peyrol 
called it trying not to see something that was not there; and this 
evasive yet frank mobility was so much a part of her being that the 
steadiness with which she met his inquisitive glance surprised old 
Peyrol for a moment. He asked without beating about the bush: 
 
"Did he speak to you?" 
 
She answered with something airy and provoking in her voice, which also 
struck Peyrol as a novelty: "He never stopped. He passed by as though 
he had not seen me" - and then they both looked away from each other. 
 
"Now, what is it you took into your head to watch for at night?" 
 
She did not expect that question. She hung her head and took a pleat of 
her skirt between her fingers, embarrassed like a child. 
 
"Why should I not," she murmured in a low shy note, as if she had two 
voices within her. 
 
"What did Catherine say?" 
 
"She was asleep, or perhaps, only lying on her back with her eyes shut." 
 
"Does she do that?" asked Peyrol with incredulity. 
 
"Yes." Arlette gave Peyrol a queer, meaningless smile with which her 
eyes had nothing to do. "Yes, she often does. I have noticed that 
before. She lies there trembling under her blankets till I come back." 
 
"What drove you out last night?" Peyrol tried to catch her eyes, but 
they eluded him in the usual way. And now her face looked as though it 
couldn't  smile. 
 
"My heart," she said. For a moment Peyrol lost his tongue and even all 
power of motion. The fermire having lowered her eyelids, all her life 
seemed to have gone into her coral lips, vivid and without a quiver in 
the perfection of their design, and Peyrol, giving up the conversation 
with an upward fling of his arm, hurried up the path without looking 
behind him. But once round the turn of the path, he approached the 
lookout at an easier gait. It was a piece of smooth ground below the 
summit of the hill. It had quite a pronounced slope, so that a short and 
robust pine growing true out of the soil yet leaned well over the edge 
of the sheer drop of some fifty feet or so. The first thing that 
Peyrol's eyes took in was the water of the Petite Passe with the 
enormous shadow of the Porquerolles Island darkening more than half of 
its width at this still early hour. He could not see the whole of it, 
but on the part his glance embraced there was no ship of any kind. The 
lieutenant, leaning with his chest along the inclined pine, addressed 
him irritably. 
 
"Squat! Do you think there are no glasses on board the Englishman?" 
 
Peyrol obeyed without a word and for the space of a minute or so 
presented the bizarre sight of a rather bulky peasant with venerable 
white locks crawling on his hands and knees on a hillside for no visible 
reason. When he got to the foot of the pine he raised himself on his 
knees. The lieutenant, flattened against the inclined trunk and with a 
pocket-glass glued to his eye, growled angrily: 
 
"You can see her now, can't  you?" 
 
Peyrol in his kneeling position could see the ship now. She was less 
than a quarter of a mile from him up the coast, almost within hailing 
effort of his powerful voice. His unaided eyes could follow the 
movements of the men on board like dark dots about her decks. She had 
drifted so far within Cape Esterel that the low projecting mass of it 
seemed to be in actual contact with her stern. Her unexpected nearness 
made Peyrol draw a sharp breath through his teeth. The lieutenant 
murmured, still keeping the glass to his eye: 
 
"I can see the very epaulettes of the officers on the quarter-deck." 
 
 
As Peyrol and the lieutenant had surmised from the report of the gun, 
the English ship which the evening before was lying in Hyres Roads had 
got under way after dark. The light airs had taken her as far as the 
Petite Passe in the early part of the night, and then had abandoned her 
to the breathless moonlight in which, bereft of all motion, she looked 
more like a white monument of stone dwarfed by the darkling masses of 
land on either hand than a fabric famed for its swiftness in attack or 
in flight. 
 
Her captain was a man of about forty, with clean-shaven, full cheeks and 
mobile thin lips which he had a trick of compressing mysteriously before 
he spoke and sometimes also at the end of his speeches. He was alert in 
his movements and nocturnal in his habits. 
 
Directly he found that the calm had taken complete possession of the 
night and was going to last for hours, Captain Vincent assumed his 
favourite attitude of leaning over the rail. It was then some time after 
midnight and in the pervading stillness the moon, riding on a speckless 
sky, seemed to pour her enchantment on an uninhabited planet. Captain 
Vincent did not mind the moon very much. Of course it made his ship 
visible from both shores of the Petite Passe. But after nearly a year of 
constant service in command of the extreme lookout ship of Admiral 
Nelson's blockading fleet he knew the emplacement of almost every gun of 
the shore defences. Where the breeze had left him he was safe from the 
biggest gun of the few that were mounted on Porquerolles. On the Giens 
side of the pass he knew for certain there was not even a popgun mounted 
anywhere. His long familiarity with that part of the coast had imbued 
him with the belief that he knew the habits of its population 
thoroughly. The gleams of light in their houses went out very early and 
Captain Vincent felt convinced that they were all in their beds, 
including the gunners of the batteries who belonged to the local 
militia. Their interest in the movements of H.M.'s twenty-two gun sloop 
 Amelia a had grown stale by custom. She never interfered with their 
private affairs, and allowed the small coasting craft to go to and fro 
unmolested. They would have wondered if she had been more than two days 
away. Captain Vincent used to say grimly that the Hyres roadstead had 
become like a second home to him. 
 
For an hour or so Captain Vincent mused a bit on his real home, on 
matters of service and other unrelated things, then getting into motion 
in a very wide-awake manner, he superintended himself the dispatch of 
that boat the existence of which had been acutely surmised by Lieutenant 
Ral and was a matter of no doubt whatever to old Peyrol. As to her 
mission, it had nothing to do with catching fish for the captain's 
breakfast. It was the captain's own gig, a very fast-pulling boat. She 
was already alongside with her crew in her when the officer, who was 
going in charge, was beckoned to by the captain. He had a cutlass at his 
side and a brace of pistols in his belt, and there was a businesslike 
air about him that showed he had been on such service before. 
 
"This calm will last a good many hours," said the captain. "In this 
tideless sea you are certain to find the ship very much where she is 
now, but closer inshore. The attraction of the land - you know." 
 
"Yes, sir. The land does attract." 
 
"Yes. Well, she may be allowed to put her side against any of these 
rocks. There would be no more danger than alongside a quay with a sea 
like this. Just look at the water in the pass, Mr. Bolt. Like the floor 
of a ballroom. Pull close along shore when you return. I'll expect you 
back at dawn." 
 
Captain Vincent paused suddenly. A doubt crossed his mind as to the 
wisdom of this nocturnal expedition. The hammer-head of the peninsula 
with its sea-face invisible from both sides of the coast was an ideal 
spot for a secret landing. Its lonely character appealed to his 
imagination, which in the first instance had been stimulated by a chance 
remark of Mr. Bolt himself. 
 
The fact was that the week before, when the Amelia was cruising off 
the peninsula, Bolt, looking at the coast, mentioned that he knew that 
part of it well; he had actually been ashore there a good many years 
ago, while serving with Lord Howe's fleet. He described the nature of 
the path, the aspect of a little village on the reverse slope, and had 
much to say about a certain farmhouse where he had been more than once, 
and had even stayed for twenty-four hours at a time on more than one 
occasion. 
 
This had aroused Captain Vincent's curiosity. He sent for Bolt and had a 
long conversation with him. He listened with great interest to Bolt's 
story - how one day a man was seen from the deck of the ship in which 
Bolt was serving then, waving a white sheet or table-cloth amongst the 
rocks at the water's edge. It might have been a trap; but, as the man 
seemed alone and the shore was within range of the ship's guns, a boat 
was sent to take him off. 
 
"And that, sir," Bolt pursued impressively, "was, I verily believe, 
the very first communication that Lord Howe had from the royalists in 
Toulon." Afterwards Bolt described to Captain Vincent the meetings of 
the Toulon royalists with the officers of the fleet. From the back of 
the farm he, Bolt himself, had often watched for hours the entrance of 
the Toulon harbour on the lookout for the boat bringing over the 
royalist emissaries. Then he would make an agreed signal to the advanced 
squadron and some English officers would land on their side and meet the 
Frenchmen at the farmhouse. It was as simple as that. The people of the 
farmhouse, husband and wife, were well-to-do, good class altogether, and 
staunch royalists. He had got to know them well. 
 
Captain Vincent wondered whether the same people were still living 
there. Bolt could see no reason why they shouldn't  be. It wasn't  more 
than ten years ago, and they were by no means an old couple. As far as 
he could make out, the farm was their own property. He, Bolt, knew only 
very few French words at that time. It was much later, after he had been 
made a prisoner and kept inland in France till the Peace of Amiens, that 
he had picked up a smattering of the lingo. His captivity had done away 
with his feeble chance of promotion, he could not help remarking. Bolt 
was a master's mate still. 
 
Captain Vincent, in common with a good many officers of all ranks in 
Lord Nelson's fleet, had his misgivings about the system of distant 
blockade from which the Admiral apparently would not depart. Yet one 
could not blame Lord Nelson. Everybody in the fleet understood that what 
was in his mind was the destruction of the enemy; and if the enemy was 
closely blockaded he would never come out to be destroyed. On the other 
hand it was clear that as things were conducted the French had too many 
chances left them to slip out unobserved and vanish from all human 
knowledge for months. Those possibilities were a constant worry to 
Captain Vincent, who had thrown himself with the ardour of passion into 
the special duty with which he was entrusted. Oh, for a pair of eyes 
fastened night and day on the entrance of the harbour of Toulon! Oh, for 
the power to look at the very state of French ships and into the very 
secrets of French minds! 
 
But he said nothing of this to Bolt. He only observed that the character 
of the French Government was changed and that the minds of the royalist 
people in the farmhouse might have changed too, since they had got back 
the exercise of their religion. Bolt's answer was that he had had a lot 
to do with royalists, in his time, on board Lord Howe's fleet, both 
before and after Toulon was evacuated. All sorts, men and women, barbers 
and noblemen, sailors and tradesmen; almost every kind of royalist one 
could think of; and his opinion was that a royalist never changed. As to 
the place itself, he only wished the captain had seen it. It was the 
sort of spot that nothing could change. He made bold to say that it 
would be just the same a hundred years hence. 
 
The earnestness of his officer caused Captain Vincent to look hard at 
him. He was a man of about his own age, but while Vincent was a 
comparatively young captain, Bolt was an old master's mate. Each 
understood the other perfectly. Captain Vincent fidgeted for a while and 
then observed abstractedly that he was not a man to put a noose round a 
dog's neck, let alone a good seaman's. 
 
This cryptic pronouncement caused no wonder to appear in Bolt's 
attentive gaze. He only became a little thoughtful before he said in the 
same abstracted tone that an officer in uniform was not likely to be 
hanged for a spy. The service was risky, of course. It was necessary, 
for its success, that, assuming the same people were there, it should be 
undertaken by a man well known to the inhabitants. Then he added that he 
was certain of being recognized. And while he enlarged on the extremely 
good terms he had been on with the owners of the farm, especially the 
farmer's wife, a comely motherly woman, who had been very kind to him, 
and had all her wits about her, Captain Vincent, looking at the master's 
mate's bushy whiskers, thought that these in themselves were enough to 
insure recognition. This impression was so strong that he asked 
point-blank: "You haven't  altered the growth of the hair on your face, 
Mr. Bolt, since then?" 
 
There was just a touch of indignation in Bolt's negative reply; for he 
was proud of his whiskers. He declared he was ready to take the most 
desperate chances for the service of his king and his country. 
 
Captain Vincent added: "For the sake of Lord Nelson, too." One 
understood well what his Lordship wished to bring about by that blockade 
at sixty leagues off. He was talking to a sailor, and there was no need 
to say any more. Did Bolt think that he could persuade those people to 
conceal him in their house on that lonely shore end of the peninsula for 
some considerable time? Bolt thought it was the easiest thing in the 
world. He would simply go up there and renew the old acquaintance, but 
he did not mean to do that in a reckless manner. It would have to be 
done at night, when of course there would be no one about. He would land 
just where he used to before, wrapped up in a Mediterranean sailor's 
cloak - he had one of his own - over his uniform, and simply go 
straight to the door, at which he would knock. Ten to one the farmer 
himself would come down to open it. He knew enough French by now, he 
hoped, to persuade those people to conceal him in some room having a 
view in the right direction; and there he would stick day after day on 
the watch, taking a little exercise in the middle of the night, ready to 
live on mere bread and water if necessary, so as not to arouse suspicion 
amongst the farmhands. And who knows if, with the farmer's help, he 
could not get some news of what was going on actually within the port. 
Then from time to time he could go down in the dead of night, signal to 
the ship and make his report. Bolt expressed the hope that the Amelia 
would remain as much as possible in sight of the coast. It would cheer 
him up to see her about. Captain Vincent naturally assented. He pointed 
out to Bolt, however, that his post would become most important exactly 
when the ship had been chased away or driven by the weather off her 
station, as could very easily happen. - "You would be then the eyes of 
Lord Nelson's fleet, Mr. Bolt - think of that. The actual eyes of Lord 
Nelson's fleet!" 
 
After dispatching his officer, Captain Vincent spent the night on deck. 
The break of day came at last, much paler than the moonlight which it 
replaced. And still no boat. And again Captain Vincent asked himself if 
he had not acted indiscreetly. Impenetrable, and looking as fresh as if 
he had just come up on deck, he argued the point with himself till the 
rising sun clearing the ridge on Porquerolles Island flashed its level 
rays upon his ship with her dew-darkened sails and dripping rigging. He 
roused himself then to tell his first lieutenant to get the boats out to 
tow the ship away from the shore. The report of the gun he ordered to be 
fired expressed simply his irritation. The Amelia , pointing towards 
the middle of the Passe, was moving at a snail's pace behind her string 
of boats. Minutes passed. And then suddenly Captain Vincent perceived 
his boat pulling back in shore according to orders. When nearly abreast 
of the ship, she darted away, making for her side. Mr. Bolt clambered on 
board, alone, ordering the gig to go ahead and help with the towing. 
Captain Vincent, standing apart on the quarter-deck, received him with a 
grimly questioning look. 
 
Mr. Bolt's first words were to the effect that he believed the 
confounded spot to be bewitched. Then he glanced at the group of 
officers on the other side of the quarter-deck. Captain Vincent led the 
way to his cabin. There he turned and looked at his officer, who, with 
an air of distraction, mumbled: "There are night-walkers there." 
 
"Come, Bolt, what the devil have you seen? Did you get near the house 
at all?" 
 
"I got within twenty yards of the door, sir," said Bolt. And 
encouraged by the captain's much less ferocious - "Well?" began his 
tale. He did not pull up to the path which he knew, but to a little bit 
of beach on which he told his men to haul up the boat and wait for him. 
The beach was concealed by a thick growth of bushes on the landward side 
and by some rocks from the sea. Then he went to what he called the 
ravine, still avoiding the path, so that as a matter of fact he made his 
way up on his hands and knees mostly, very carefully and slowly amongst 
the loose stones, till by holding on to a bush he brought his eyes on a 
level with the piece of flat ground in front of the farmhouse. 
 
The familiar aspect of the buildings, totally unchanged from the time 
when he had played his part in what appeared as a most successful 
operation at the beginning of the war, inspired Bolt with great 
confidence in the success of his present enterprise, vague as it was, 
but the great charm of which lay, no doubt, in mental associations with 
his younger years. Nothing seemed easier than to stride across the forty 
yards of open ground and rouse the farmer whom he remembered so well, 
the well-to-do man, a grave sagacious royalist in his humble way; 
certainly, in Bolt's view, no traitor to his country, and preserving so 
well his dignity in ambiguous circumstances. To Bolt's simple vision 
neither that, man nor his wife could have changed. 
 
In this view of Arlette's parents Bolt was influenced by the 
consciousness of there having been no change in himself. He was the same 
Jack Bolt, and everything around him was the same as if he had left the 
spot only yesterday. Already he saw himself in the kitchen which he knew 
so well, seated by the light of a single candle before a glass of wine 
and talking his best French to that worthy farmer of sound principles. 
The whole thing was as well as done. He imagined himself a secret inmate 
of that building, closely confined indeed, but sustained by the possible 
great results of his watchfulness, in many ways more comfortable than on 
board the Amelia and with the glorious consciousness that he was, in 
Captain Vincent's phrase, the actual physical eyes of the fleet. 
 
He didn't , of course, talk of his private feelings to Captain Vincent. 
All those thoughts and emotions were compressed in the space of not much 
more than a minute or two while, holding on with one hand to his bush 
and having got a good foothold for one of his feet, he indulged in that 
pleasant anticipatory sense of success. In the old days the farmer's 
wife used to be a light sleeper. The farmhands who, he remembered, lived 
in the village or were distributed in stables and outhouses, did not 
give him any concern. He wouldn't  need to knock heavily. He pictured to 
himself the farmer's wife sitting up in bed, listening, then rousing her 
husband, who, as likely as not, would take the gun standing against the 
dresser downstairs and come to the door. 
 
And then everything would be all right. . . . But perhaps . . . Yes! It 
was just as likely the farmer would simply open the window and hold a 
parley. That really was most likely. Naturally. In his place Bolt felt 
he would do that very thing. Yes, that was what a man in a lonely house, 
in the middle of the night, would do most naturally. And he imagined 
himself whispering mysteriously his answers up the wall to the obvious 
questions - Ami - Bolt - Ouvrez-moi - vive le roi - or things of that 
sort. And in sequence to those vivid images it occurred to Bolt that the 
best thing he could do would be to throw small stones against the window 
shutter, the sort of sound most likely to rouse a light sleeper. He 
wasn't  quite sure which window on the floor above the ground floor was 
that of those people's bedroom, but there were anyhow only three of 
them. In a moment he would have sprung up from his foothold on to the 
level if, raising his eyes for another look at the front of the house, 
he had not perceived that one of the windows was already open. How he 
could have failed to notice that before he couldn't  explain. 
 
He confessed to Captain Vincent in the course of his narrative that 
"this open window, sir, checked me dead. In fact, sir, it shook my 
confidence, for you know, sir, that no native of these parts would dream 
of sleeping with his window open. It struck me that there was something 
wrong there; and I remained where I was." 
 
That fascination of repose, of secretive friendliness, which houses 
present at night, was gone. By the power of an open window, a black 
square in the moon-lighted wall, the farmhouse took on the aspect of a 
man-trap. Bolt assured Captain Vincent that the window would not have 
stopped him; he would have gone on all the same, though with an 
uncertain mind. But while he was thinking it out, there glided without a 
sound before his irresolute eyes from somewhere a white vision - a 
woman. He could see her black hair flowing down her back. A woman whom 
anybody would have been excused for taking for a ghost. "I won't  say 
that she froze my blood, sir, but she made me cold all over for a 
moment. Lots of people have seen ghosts, at least they say so, and I 
have an open mind about that. She was a weird thing to look at in the 
moonlight. She did not act like a sleep-walker either. If she had not 
come out of a grave, then she had jumped out of bed. But when she stole 
back and hid herself round the corner of the house I knew she was not a 
ghost. She could not have seen me. There she stood in the black shadow 
watching for something - or waiting for somebody," added Bolt in a grim 
tone. "She looked crazy," he conceded charitably. 
 
One thing was clear to him: there had been changes in that farmhouse 
since his time. Bolt resented them, as if that time had been only last 
week. The woman concealed round the corner remained in his full view, 
watchful, as if only waiting for him to show himself in the open, to run 
off screeching and rouse all the countryside. Bolt came quickly to the 
conclusion that he must withdraw from the slope. On lowering himself 
from his first position he had the misfortune to dislodge a stone. This 
circumstance precipitated his retreat. In a very few minutes he found 
himself by the shore. He paused to listen. Above him, up the ravine and 
all round amongst the rocks, everything was perfectly still. He walked 
along in the direction of his boat. There was nothing for it but to get 
away quietly and perhaps . . . 
 
"Yes, Mr. Bolt, I fear we shall have to give up our plan," interrupted 
Captain Vincent at that point. Bolt's assent came reluctantly, and then 
he braced himself to confess that this was not the worst. Before the 
astonished face of Captain Vincent he hastened to blurt it out. He was 
very sorry, he could in no way account for it, but - he had lost a man. 
 
Captain Vincent seemed unable to believe his ears. "What do you say? 
Lost a man out of my boat's crew!" He was profoundly shocked. Bolt was 
correspondingly distressed. He narrated that, shortly after he had left 
them, the seamen had heard, or imagined they had heard, some faint and 
peculiar noises somewhere within the cove. The coxswain sent one of the 
men, the oldest of the boat's crew, along the shore to ascertain whether 
their boat hauled on the beach could be seen from the other side of the 
cove. The man - it was Symons - departed crawling on his hands and knees 
to make the circuit and, well - he had not returned. This was really 
the reason why the boat was so late in getting back to the ship. Of 
course Bolt did not like to give up the man. It was inconceivable that 
Symons should have deserted. He had left his cutlass behind and was 
completely unarmed, but had he been suddenly pounced upon he surely 
would have been able to let out a yell that could have been heard all 
over the cove. But till daybreak a profound stillness, in which it 
seemed a whisper could have been heard for miles, had reigned over the 
coast. It was as if Symons had been spirited away by some supernatural 
means, without a scuffle, without a cry. For it was inconceivable that 
he should have ventured inland and got captured there. It was equally 
inconceivable that there should have been on that particular night men 
ready to pounce upon Symons and knock him on the head so neatly as not 
to let him give a groan even. 
 
Captain Vincent said: "All this is very fantastical, Mr. Bolt," and 
compressed his lips firmly for a moment before he continued: "But not 
much more than your woman. I suppose you did see something real. . . ." 
 
"I tell you, sir, she stood there in full moonlight for ten minutes 
within a stone's throw of me," protested Bolt with a sort of 
desperation. "She seemed to have jumped out of bed only to look at the 
house. If she had a petticoat over her night-shift, that was all. Her 
back was to me. When she moved away I could not make out her face 
properly. Then she went to stand in the shadow of the house." 
 
"On the watch," suggested Captain Vincent. 
 
"Looked like it, sir," confessed Bolt. 
 
"So there must have been somebody about," concluded Captain Vincent 
with assurance. 
 
Bolt murmured a reluctant, "Must have been." He had expected to get 
into enormous trouble over this affair and was much relieved by the 
captain's quiet attitude. "I hope, sir, you approve of my conduct in 
not attempting to look for Symons at once?" 
 
"Yes. You acted prudently by not advancing inland," said the captain. 
 
"I was afraid of spoiling our chances to carry out your plan, sir, by 
disclosing our presence on shore. And that could not have been avoided. 
Moreover, we were only five in all and not properly armed." 
 
"The plan has gone down before your night-walker, Mr. Bolt," Captain 
Vincent declared dryly. "But we must try to find out what has become of 
our man if it can be done without risking too much." 
 
"By landing a large party this very next night we could surround the 
house," Bolt suggested. "If we find friends there, well and good. If 
enemies, then we could carry off some of them on board for exchange 
perhaps. I am almost sorry I did not go back and kidnap that 
wench - whoever she was," he added recklessly. "Ah! If it had only 
been a man!" 
 
"No doubt there was a man not very far off," said Captain Vincent 
equably. "That will do, Mr. Bolt. You had better go and get some rest 
now." 
 
Bolt was glad to obey, for he was tired and hungry after his dismal 
failure. What vexed him most was its absurdity. Captain Vincent, though 
he too had passed a sleepless night, felt too restless to remain below. 
He followed his officer on deck. 
 
 
By that time the Amelia had been towed half a mile or so away from 
Cape Esterel. This change had brought her nearer to the two watchers on 
the hillside, who would have been plainly visible to the people on her 
deck, but for the head of the pine which concealed their movements. 
Lieutenant Ral, bestriding the rugged trunk as high as he could get, had 
the whole of the English ship's deck open to the range of his 
pocket-glass which he used between the branches. He said to Peyrol suddenly: 
 
"Her captain has just come on deck." 
 
Peyrol, sitting at the foot of the tree, made no answer for a long 
while. A warm drowsiness lay over the land and seemed to press down his 
eyelids. But inwardly the old rover was intensely awake. Under the mask 
of his immobility, with half-shut eyes and idly clasped hands, he heard 
the lieutenant, perched up there near the head of the tree, mutter 
counting something: "One, two, three," and then a loud "Parbleu!" 
after which the lieutenant in his trunk-bestriding attitude began to 
jerk himself backwards. Peyrol got up out of his way, but could not 
restrain himself from asking: "What's the matter now?" 
 
"I will tell you what's the matter," said the other excitedly. As soon 
as he got his footing he walked up to old Peyrol and when quite close to 
him folded his arms across his chest. 
 
"The first thing I did was to count the boats in the water. There was 
not a single one left on board. And now I just counted them again and 
found one more there. That ship had a boat out last night. How I missed 
seeing her pull out from under the land I don't  know. I was watching the 
decks, I suppose, and she seems to have gone straight up to the 
tow-rope. But I was right. That Englishman had a boat out." 
 
He seized Peyrol by both shoulders suddenly. "I believe you knew it all 
the time. You knew it, I tell you." Peyrol, shaken violently by the 
shoulders, raised his eyes to look at the angry face within a few inches 
of his own. In his worn gaze there was no fear or shame, but a troubled 
perplexity and obvious concern. He remained passive, merely 
remonstrating softly: 
 
"Doucement. Doucement." 
 
The lieutenant suddenly desisted with a final jerk which failed to 
stagger old Peyrol, who, directly he had been released, assumed an 
explanatory tone. 
 
"For the ground is slippery here. If I had lost my footing I would not 
have been able to prevent myself from grabbing at you, and we would have 
gone down that cliff together; which would have told those Englishmen 
more than twenty boats could have found out in as many nights." 
 
Secretly Lieutenant Ral was daunted by Peyrol's mildness. It could not 
be shaken. Even physically he had an impression of the utter futility of 
his effort, as though he had tried to shake a rock. He threw himself on 
the ground carelessly saying: 
 
"As for instance?" 
 
Peyrol lowered himself with a deliberation appropriate to his grey 
hairs. "You don't  suppose that out of a hundred and twenty or so pairs 
of eyes on board that ship there wouldn't  be a dozen at least scanning 
the shore. Two men falling down a cliff would have been a startling 
sight. The English would have been interested enough to send a boat 
ashore to go through our pockets, and whether dead or only half dead we 
wouldn't  have been in a state to prevent them. It wouldn't  matter so 
much as to me, and I don't  know what papers you may have in your 
pockets, but there are your shoulder-straps, your uniform coat." 
 
"I carry no papers in my pocket, and . . ." A sudden thought seemed to 
strike the lieutenant, a thought so intense and far-fetched as to give 
his mental effort a momentary aspect of vacancy. He shook it off and 
went on in a changed tone: "The shoulder-straps would not have been 
much of a revelation by themselves." 
 
"No. Not much. But enough to let her captain know that he had been 
watched. For what else could the dead body of a naval officer with a 
spyglass in his pocket mean? Hundreds of eyes may glance carelessly at 
that ship every day from all parts of the coast, though I fancy those 
landsmen hardly take the trouble to look at her now. But that's a very 
different thing from being kept under observation. However I don't  
suppose all this matters much." 
 
The lieutenant was recovering from the spell of that sudden thought. 
"Papers in my pocket," he muttered to himself. "That would be a 
perfect way." His parted lips came together in a slightly sarcastic 
smile with which he met Peyrol's puzzled, sidelong glance provoked by 
the inexplicable character of these words. 
 
"I bet," said the lieutenant, "that ever since I came here first you 
have been more or less worrying your old head about my motives and 
intentions." 
 
Peyrol said simply: "You came here on service at first and afterwards 
you came again because even in the Toulon fleet an officer may get a few 
days' leave. As to your intentions, I won't  say anything about them. 
Especially as regards myself. About ten minutes ago anybody looking on 
would have thought they were not friendly to me." 
 
The lieutenant sat up suddenly. By that time the English sloop, getting 
away from under the land, had become visible even from the spot on which 
they sat. 
 
"Look!" exclaimed Ral. "She seems to be forging ahead in this calm." 
 
Peyrol, startled, raised his eyes and saw the Amelia clear of the edge 
of the cliff and heading across the Passe. All her boats were already 
alongside, and yet, as a minute or two of steady gazing was enough to 
convince Peyrol, she was not stationary. 
 
"She moves! There is no denying that. She moves. Watch the white speck 
of that house on Porquerolles. There! The end of her jib-boom touches it 
now. In a moment her head sails will mask it to us." 
 
"I would never have believed it," muttered the lieutenant, after a 
pause of intent gazing. "And look, Peyrol, look, there is not a wrinkle 
on the water." 
 
Peyrol, who had been shading his eyes from the sun, let his hand fall. 
"Yes," he said, 'she would answer to a child's breath quicker than a 
feather, and the English very soon found it out when they got her. She 
was caught in Genoa only a few months after I came home and got my 
moorings here." 
 
"I didn't  know," murmured the young man. 
 
"Aha, lieutenant," said Peyrol, pressing his finger to his breast, 
"it hurts here, doesn't  it? There is nobody but good Frenchmen here. Do 
you think it is a pleasure to me to watch that flag out there at her 
peak? Look, you can see the whole of her now. Look at her ensign hanging 
down as if there were not a breath of wind under the heavens. . . ." He 
stamped his foot suddenly. "And yet she moves! Those in Toulon that may 
be thinking of catching her dead or alive would have to think hard and 
make long plans and get good men to carry them out." 
 
"There was some talk of it at the Toulon Admiralty," said Ral. 
 
The rover shook his head. "They need not have sent you on the duty," 
he said. "I have been watching her now for a month, her and the man who 
has got her now. I know all his tricks and all his habits and all his 
dodges by this time. The man is a seaman, that must be said for him, but 
I can tell beforehand what he will do in any given case." 
 
Lieutenant Ral lay down on his back again, his clasped hands under his 
head. He thought that this old man was not boasting. He knew a lot about 
the English ship, and if an attempt to capture her was to be made, his 
ideas would be worth having. Nevertheless, in his relations with old 
Peyrol Lieutenant Ral suffered from contradictory feelings. Ral was the 
son of a ci-devant couple - small provincial gentry - who had both lost 
their heads on the scaffold, within the same week. As to their boy, he 
was apprenticed by order of the Delegate of the Revolutionary Committee 
of his town to a poor but pure-minded joiner, who could not provide him 
with shoes to run his errands in, but treated this aristocrat not 
unkindly. Nevertheless, at the end of the year the orphan ran away and 
volunteered as a boy on board one of the ships of the Republic about to 
sail on a distant expedition. At sea he found another standard of 
values. In the course of some eight years, suppressing his faculties of 
love and hatred, he arrived at the rank of an officer by sheer merit, 
and had accustomed himself to look at men sceptically, without much 
scorn or much respect. His principles were purely professional and he 
had never formed a friendship in his life - more unfortunate in that 
respect than old Peyrol, who at least had known the bonds of the lawless 
Brotherhood of the Coast. He was, of course, very self-contained. 
Peyrol, whom he had found unexpectedly settled on the peninsula, was the 
first human being to break through that schooled reserve which the 
precariousness of all things had forced on the orphan of the Revolution. 
Peyrol's striking personality had aroused Ral's interest, a mistrustful 
liking mixed with some contempt of a purely doctrinaire kind. It was 
clear that the fellow had been next thing to a pirate at one time or 
another - a sort of past which could not commend itself to a naval officer. 
 
Still, Peyrol had broken through: and, presently, the peculiarities of 
all those people at the farm, each individual one of them, had entered 
through the breach. 
 
Lieutenant Ral, on his back, closing his eyes to the glare of the sky, 
meditated on old Peyrol, while Peyrol himself, with his white head bare 
in the sunshine, seemed to be sitting by the side of a corpse. What in 
that man impressed Lieutenant Ral was the faculty of shrewd insight. The 
facts of Ral's connection with the farmhouse on the peninsula were much 
as Peyrol had stated. First on specific duty about establishing a signal 
station, then, when that project had been given up, voluntary visits. 
Not belonging to any ship of the fleet but doing shore duty at the 
Arsenal, Lieutenant Ral had spent several periods of short leave at the 
farm, where indeed nobody could tell whether he had come on duty or on 
leave. He personally could not - or perhaps would not - tell even to 
himself why it was that he came there. He had been growing sick of his 
work. He had no place in the world to go to, and no one either. Was it 
Peyrol he was coming to see? A mute, strangely suspicious, defiant 
understanding had established itself imperceptibly between him and that 
lawless old man who might have been suspected to have come there only to 
die, if the whole robust personality of Peyrol with its quiet vitality 
had not been antagonistic to the notion of death. That rover behaved as 
though he had all the time in the world at his command. 
 
Peyrol spoke suddenly, with his eyes fixed in front of him as if he were 
addressing the Island of Porquerolles, eight miles away. 
 
"Yes - I know all her moves, though I must say that this trick of 
dodging close to our peninsula is something new." 
 
"H'm! Fish for the captain's breakfast," mumbled Ral without opening 
his eyes. "Where is she now?" 
 
"In the middle of the Passe, busy hoisting in her boats. And still 
moving! That ship will keep her way as long as the flame of a candle on 
her deck will not stand upright." 
 
"That ship is a marvel." 
 
"She has been built by French shipwrights," said old Peyrol bitterly. 
 
This was the last sound for a long time. Then the lieutenant said in an 
indifferent tone: "You are very positive about that. How do you know?" 
 
"I have been looking at her for a month, whatever name she might have 
had or whatever name the English call her by now. Did you ever see such 
a bow on an English-built ship?" 
 
The lieutenant remained silent, as though he had lost all interest and 
there had been no such thing as an English man-of-war within a mile. But 
all the time he was thinking hard. He had been told confidentially of a 
certain piece of service to be performed on instructions received from 
Paris. Not an operation of war, but service of the greatest importance. 
The risk of it was not so much deadly as particularly odious. A brave 
man might well have shrunk from it; and there are risks  not death  from 
which a resolute man might shrink without shame. 
 
"Have you ever tasted of prison, Peyrol?" he asked suddenly, in an 
affectedly sleepy voice. 
 
It roused Peyrol nearly into a shout. "Heavens! No! Prison! What do you 
mean by prison? . . . I have been a captive to savages," he added, 
calming down, "but that's a very old story. I was young and foolish 
then. Later, when a grown man, I was a slave to the famous Ali-Kassim. I 
spent a fortnight with chains on my legs and arms in the yard of a mud 
fort on the shores of the Persian Gulf. There was nearly a score of us 
Brothers of the Coast in the same predicament in consequence of a 
shipwreck." 
 
"Yes. . . . The lieutenant was very languid indeed. . . . And I daresay 
you all took service with that bloodthirsty old pirate." 
 
"There was not a single one of his thousands of blackamoors that could 
lay a gun properly. But Ali-Kassim made war like a prince. We sailed, a 
regular fleet, across the gulf, took a town on the coast of Arabia 
somewhere, and looted it. Then I and the others managed to get hold of 
an armed dhow, and we fought our way right through the blackamoors' 
fleet. Several of us died of thirst later. All the same, it was a great 
affair. But don't  you talk to me of prisons. A proper man if given a 
chance to fight can always get himself killed. You understand me?" 
 
"Yes, I understand you," drawled the lieutenant. "I think I know you 
pretty well. I suppose an English prison . . ." 
 
"That is a horrible subject of conversation," interrupted Peyrol in a 
loud, emotional tone. "Naturally, any death is better than a prison. 
Any death! What is it you have in your mind, lieutenant?" 
 
"Oh, it isn't  that I want you to die," drawled Ral in an uninterested 
manner. 
 
Peyrol, his entwined fingers clasping his legs, gazed fixedly at the 
English sloop floating idly in the Passe while he gave up all his mind 
to the consideration of these words that had floated out, idly too, into 
the peace and silence of the morning. Then he asked in a low tone: 
 
"Do you want to frighten me?" 
 
The lieutenant laughed harshly. Neither by word, gesture nor glance did 
Peyrol acknowledge the enigmatic and unpleasant sound. But when it 
ceased the silence grew so oppressive between the two men that they got 
up by a common impulse. The lieutenant sprang to his feet lightly. The 
uprising of Peyrol took more time and had more dignity. They stood side 
by side unable to detach their longing eyes from the enemy ship below 
their feet. 
 
"I wonder why he put himself into this curious position," said the 
officer. 
 
"I wonder," growled Peyrol curtly. "If there had been only a couple 
of eighteen-pounders placed on the rocky ledge to the left of us, we 
could have unrigged her in about ten minutes." 
 
"Good old gunner," commented Ral ironically. "And what afterwards? 
Swim off, you and I, with our cutlasses in our teeth and take her by 
boarding, what?" 
 
This sally provoked in Peyrol an austere smile. "No! No!" he protested 
soberly. "But why not let Toulon know? Bring out a frigate or two and 
catch him alive. Many a time have I planned his capture just to ease my 
heart. Often I have stared at night out of my window upstairs across the 
bay to where I knew he was lying at anchor, and thinking of a little 
surprise I could arrange for him if I were not only old Peyrol, the 
gunner." 
 
"Yes. And keeping out of the way at that, with a bad note against his 
name in the books of the Admiralty in Toulon." 
 
"You can't  say I have tried to hide myself from you who are a naval 
officer," struck in Peyrol quickly. "I fear no man. I did not run. I 
simply went away from Toulon. Nobody had given me an order to stay 
there. And you can't  say I ran very far either." 
 
"That was the cleverest move of all. You knew what you were doing." 
 
"Here you go again, hinting at something crooked like that fellow with 
big epaulettes at the Port Office that seemed to be longing to put me 
under arrest just because I brought a prize from the Indian Ocean, eight 
thousand miles, dodging clear of every Englishmen that came in my way, 
which was more perhaps than he could have done. I have my gunner's 
warrant signed by Citizen Renaud, a chef d'escadre. It wasn't  given me 
for twirling my thumbs or hiding in the cable tier when the enemy was 
about. There were on board our ships some patriots that weren't  above 
doing that sort of thing, I can tell you. But republic or no republic, 
that kind wasn't  likely to get a gunner's warrant." 
 
"That's all right," said Ral, with his eyes fixed on the English ship, 
the head of which was swung to the northward now. . . . "Look, she 
seems to have lost her way at last," he remarked parenthetically to 
Peyrol, who also glanced that way and nodded. . . . "That's all right. 
But it's on record that you managed in a very short time to get very 
thick with a lot of patriots ashore. Section leaders. Terrorists. . . ." 
 
"Why, yes. I wanted to hear what they had to say. They talked like a 
drunken crew of scallywags that had stolen a ship. But at any rate it 
wasn't  such as they that had sold the Port to the English. They were a 
lot of bloodthirsty landlubbers. I did get out of town as soon as I 
could. I remembered I was born around here. I knew no other bit of 
France, and I didn't  care to go any further. Nobody came to look for me." 
 
"No, not here. I suppose they thought it was too near. They did look 
for you, a little, but they gave it up. Perhaps if they had persevered 
and made an admiral of you we would not have been beaten at Aboukir." 
 
At the mention of that name Peyrol shook his fist at the serene 
Mediterranean sky. "And yet we were no worse men than the English," he 
cried, "and there are no such ships as ours in the world. You see, 
lieutenant, the republican god of these talkers would never give us 
seamen a chance of fair play." 
 
The lieutenant looked round in surprise. "What do you know about a 
republican god?" he asked. "What on earth do you mean?" 
 
"I have heard of and seen more gods than you could ever dream of in a 
long night's sleep, in every corner of the earth, in the very heart of 
forests, which is an inconceivable thing. Figures, stones, sticks. There 
must be something in the idea. . . . And what I meant," he continued in 
a resentful tone, "is that their republican god, which is neither stick 
nor stone, but seems to be some kind of lubber, has never given us 
seamen a chief like that one the soldiers have got ashore." 
 
Lieutenant Ral looked at Peyrol with unsmiling attention, then remarked 
quietly, "Well, the god of the aristocrats is coming back again and it 
looks as if he were bringing an emperor along with him. You've  heard 
something of that, you people in the farmhouse? Haven't  you?" 
 
"No," said Peyrol. "I have heard no talk of an emperor. But what does 
it matter? Under one name or another a chief can be no more than a 
chief, and that general whom they have been calling consul is a good 
chief - nobody can deny that." 
 
After saying those words in a dogmatic tone, Peyrol looked up at the sun 
and suggested that it was time to go down to the farmhouse "pour manger 
la soupe." With a suddenly gloomy face Ral moved off, followed by 
Peyrol. At the first turn of the path they got the view of the 
Escampobar buildings with the pigeons still walking on the ridges of the 
roofs, of the sunny orchards and yards without a living soul in them. 
Peyrol remarked that everybody no doubt was in the kitchen waiting for 
his and the lieutenant's return. He himself was properly hungry. "And 
you, lieutenant?" 
 
The lieutenant was not hungry. Hearing this declaration made in a 
peevish tone, Peyrol gave a sagacious movement of his head behind the 
lieutenant's back. Well, whatever happened, a man had to eat. He, 
Peyrol, knew what it was to be altogether without food; but even 
half-rations was a poor show, very poor show for anybody who had to work 
or to fight. For himself he couldn't  imagine any conjuncture that would 
prevent him having a meal as long as there was something to eat within 
reach. 
 
His unwonted garrulity provoked no response, but Peyrol continued to 
talk in that strain as though his thoughts were concentrated on food, 
while his eyes roved here and there and his ears were open for the 
slightest sound. When they arrived in front of the house Peyrol stopped 
to glance anxiously down the path to the coast, letting the lieutenant 
enter the caf. The Mediterranean, in that part which could be seen from 
the door of the caf, was as empty of all sail as a yet undiscovered sea. 
The dull tinkle of a cracked bell on the neck of some wandering cow was 
the only sound that reached him, accentuating the Sunday peace of the 
farm. Two goats were lying down on the western slope of the hill. It all 
had a very reassuring effect and the anxious expression on Peyrol's face 
was passing away when suddenly one of the goats leaped to its feet. The 
rover gave a start and became rigid in a pose of tense apprehension. A 
man who is in such a frame of mind that a leaping goat makes him start 
cannot be happy. However, the other goat remained lying down. There was 
really no reason for alarm, and Peyrol, composing his features as near 
as possible to their usual placid expression, followed the lieutenant 
into the house. 
 
 
A single cover having been laid at the end of a long table in the salle 
for the lieutenant, he had his meal there while the others sat down to 
theirs in the kitchen, the usual strangely assorted company served by 
the anxious and silent Catherine. Peyrol, thoughtful and hungry, faced 
Citizen Scevola in his working clothes and very much withdrawn within 
himself. Scevola's aspect was more feverish than usual, with the red 
patches on his cheekbones very marked above the thick beard. From time 
to time the mistress of the farm would get up from her place by the side 
of old Peyrol and go out into the salle to attend to the lieutenant. The 
other three people seemed unconscious of her absences. Towards the end 
of the meal Peyrol leaned back in his wooden chair and let his gaze rest 
on the ex-terrorist who had not finished yet, and was still busy over 
his plate with the air of a man who had done a long morning's work. The 
door leading from the kitchen to the salle stood wide open, but no sound 
of voices ever came from there. 
 
Till lately Peyrol had not concerned himself very much with the mental 
states of the people with whom he lived. Now, however, he wondered to 
himself what could be the thoughts of the ex-terrorist patriot, that 
sanguinary and extremely poor creature occupying the position of master 
of the Escampobar Farm. But when Citizen Scevola raised his head at last 
to take a long drink of wine there was nothing new on that face which in 
its high colour resembled so much a painted mask. Their eyes met. 
 
"Sacrebleu!" exclaimed Peyrol at last. "If you never say anything to 
anybody like this you will forget how to speak at last." 
 
The patriot smiled from the depths of his beard, a smile which Peyrol 
for some reason, mere prejudice perhaps, always thought resembled the 
defensive grin of some small wild animal afraid of being cornered. 
 
"What is there to talk about?" he retorted. "You live with us; you 
haven't  budged from here; I suppose you have counted the bunches of 
grapes in the enclosure and the figs on the fig-tree on the west wall 
many times over. . . ." He paused to lend an ear to the dead silence in 
the salle, and then said with a slight rise of tone, "You and I know 
everything that is going on here." 
 
Peyrol wrinkled the corners of his eyes in a keen, searching glance. 
Catherine clearing the table bore herself as if she had been completely 
deaf. Her face, of a walnut colour, with sunken cheeks and lips, might 
have been a carving in the marvellous immobility of its fine wrinkles. 
Her carriage was upright and her hands swift in their movements. Peyrol 
said: "We don't  want to talk about the farm. Haven't  you heard any news 
lately?" 
 
The patriot shook his head violently. Of public news he had a horror. 
Everything was lost. The country was ruled by perjurers and renegades. 
All the patriotic virtues were dead. He struck the table with his fist 
and then remained listening as though the blow could have roused an echo 
in the silent house. Not the faintest sound came from anywhere. Citizen 
Scevola sighed. It seemed to him that he was the only patriot left, and 
even in his retirement his life was not safe. 
 
"I know," said Peyrol. "I saw the whole affair out of the window. You 
can run like a hare, citizen." 
 
"Was I to allow myself to be sacrificed by those superstitious 
brutes?" argued Citizen Scevola in a high-pitched voice and with 
genuine indignation which Peyrol watched coldly. He could hardly catch 
the mutter of "Perhaps it would have been just as well if I had let 
those reactionary dogs kill me that time." 
 
The old woman washing up at the sink glanced uneasily towards the door 
of the salle. 
 
"No!" shouted the lonely sans-culotte. "It isn't  possible! There must 
be plenty of patriots left in France. The sacred fire is not burnt out 
yet." 
 
For a short time he presented the appearance of a man who is sitting 
with ashes on his head and desolation in his heart. His almond-shaped 
eyes looked dull, extinguished. But after a moment he gave a sidelong 
look at Peyrol as if to watch the effect and began declaiming in a low 
voice and apparently as if rehearsing a speech to himself: "No, it 
isn't  possible. Some day tyranny will stumble and then it will be time 
to pull it down again. We will come out in our thousands and-a ira!" 
 
Those words, and even the passionate energy of the tone, left Peyrol 
unmoved. With his head sustained by his thick brown hand he was thinking 
of something else so obviously as to depress again the feebly struggling 
spirit of terrorism in the lonely breast of Citizen Scevola. The glow of 
reflected sunlight in the kitchen became darkened by the body of the 
fisherman of the lagoon, mumbling a shy greeting to the company from the 
frame of the doorway. Without altering his position Peyrol turned his 
eyes on him curiously. Catherine, wiping her hands on her apron, 
remarked: "You come late for your dinner, Michel." He stepped in then, 
took from the old woman's hand an earthenware pot and a large hunk of 
bread and carried them out at once into the yard. Peyrol and the 
sans-culotte got up from the table. The latter, after hesitating like 
somebody who has lost his way, went brusquely into the passage, while 
Peyrol, avoiding Catherine's anxious stare, made for the back-yard. 
Through the open door of the salle he obtained a glimpse of Arlette 
sitting upright with her hands in her lap gazing at somebody he could 
not see, but who could be no other than Lieutenant Ral. 
 
In the blaze and heat of the yard the chickens, broken up into small 
groups, were having their siesta in patches of shade. But Peyrol cared 
nothing for the sun. Michel, who was eating his dinner under the pent 
roof of the cart shed, put the earthenware pot down on the ground and 
joined his master at the well encircled by a low wall of stones and 
topped by an arch of wrought iron on which a wild fig-tree had twined a 
slender offshoot. After his dog's death the fisherman had abandoned the 
salt lagoon, leaving his rotting punt exposed on the dismal shore and 
his miserable nets shut up in the dark hut. He did not care for another 
dog, and besides, who was there to give him a dog? He was the last of 
men. Somebody must be last. There was no place for him in the life of 
the village. So one fine morning he had walked up to the farm in order 
to see Peyrol. More correctly, perhaps, to let himself be seen by 
Peyrol. That was exactly Michel's only hope. He sat down on a stone 
outside the gate with a small bundle, consisting mainly of an old 
blanket, and a crooked stick lying on the ground near him, and looking 
the most lonely, mild and harmless creature on this earth. Peyrol had 
listened gravely to his confused tale of the dog's death. He, 
personally, would not have made a friend of a dog like Michel's dog, but 
he understood perfectly the sudden breaking up of the establishment on 
the shore of the lagoon. So when Michel had concluded with the words, 
"I thought I would come up here," Peyrol, without waiting for a plain 
request, had said: "Trs bien. You will be my crew," and had pointed 
down the path leading to the seashore. And as Michel, picking up his 
bundle and stick, started off, waiting for no further directions, he had 
shouted after him: "You will find a loaf of bread and a bottle of wine 
in a locker aft, to break your fast on." 
 
These had been the only formalities of Michel's engagement to serve as 
"crew" on board Peyrol's boat. The rover indeed had tried without loss 
of time to carry out his purpose of getting something of his own that 
would float. It was not so easy to find anything worthy. The miserable 
population of Madrague, a tiny fishing hamlet facing towards Toulon, had 
nothing to sell. Moreover, Peyrol looked with contempt on all their 
possessions. He would have as soon bought a catamaran of three logs of 
wood tied together with rattans as one of their boats; but lonely and 
prominent on the beach, lying on her side in weather-beaten melancholy, 
there was a two-masted tartane with her sun-whitened cordage hanging in 
festoons and her dry masts showing long cracks. No man was ever seen 
dozing under the shade of her hull on which the Mediterranean gulls made 
themselves very much at home. She looked a wreck thrown high up on the 
land by a disdainful sea. Peyrol, having surveyed her from a distance, 
saw that the rudder still hung in its place. He ran his eye along her 
body and said to himself that a craft with such lines would sail well. 
She was much bigger than anything he had thought of, but in her size, 
too, there was a fascination. It seemed to bring all the shores of the 
Mediterranean within his reach, Baleares and Corsica, Barbary and Spain. 
Peyrol had sailed over hundreds of leagues of ocean in craft that were 
no bigger. At his back in silent wonder a knot of fishermen's wives, 
bareheaded and lean, with a swarm of ragged children clinging to their 
skirts, watched the first stranger they had seen for years. 
 
Peyrol borrowed a short ladder in the hamlet  he knew better than to 
trust his weight to any of the ropes hanging over the side  and carried 
it down to the beach followed at a respectful distance by the staring 
women and children: a phenomenon and a wonder to the natives, as it had 
happened to him before on more than one island in distant seas. He 
clambered on board the neglected tartane and stood on the decked 
forepart, the centre of all eyes. A gull flew away with an angry scream. 
The bottom of the open hold contained nothing but a little sand, a few 
broken pieces of wood, a rusty hook, and some few stalks of straw which 
the wind must have carried for miles before they found their rest in 
there. The decked after-part had a small skylight and a companion, and 
Peyrol's eyes rested fascinated on an enormous padlock which secured its 
sliding door. It was as if there had been secrets or treasures inside 
 - and yet most probably it was empty. Peyrol turned his head away and 
with the whole strength of his lungs shouted in the direction of the 
fishermen's wives who had been joined by two very old men and a 
hunchbacked cripple swinging between two crutches: 
 
"Is there anybody looking after this tartane, a caretaker?" 
 
At first the only answer was a movement of recoil. Only the hunchback 
held his ground and shouted back in an unexpectedly strong voice: 
 
"You are the first man that has been on board her for years." 
 
The wives of the fishermen admired his boldness, for Peyrol indeed 
appeared to them a very formidable being. 
 
"I might have guessed that," thought Peyrol. "She is in a dreadful 
mess." The disturbed gull had brought some friends as indignant as 
itself and they circled at different levels uttering wild cries over 
Peyrol's head. He shouted again: 
 
"Who does she belong to?" 
 
The being on crutches lifted a finger towards the circling birds and 
answered in a deep tone: 
 
"They are the only ones I know." Then, as Peyrol gazed down at him 
over the side, he went on: "This craft used to belong to Escampobar. 
You know Escampobar ? It's a house in the hollow between the hills there." 
 
"Yes, I know Escampobar," yelled Peyrol, turning away and leaning 
against the mast in a pose which he did not change for a long time. His 
immobility tired out the crowd. They moved slowly in a body towards 
their hovels, the hunchback bringing up the rear with long swings 
between his crutches, and Peyrol remained alone with the angry gulls. He 
lingered on board the tragic craft which had taken Arlette's parents to 
their death in the vengeful massacre of Toulon and had brought the 
youthful Arlette and Citizen Scevola back to Escampobar where old 
Catherine, left alone at that time, had waited for days for somebody's 
return. Days of anguish and prayer, while she listened to the booming of 
guns about Toulon and with an almost greater but different terror to the 
dead silence which ensued. 
 
Peyrol, enjoying the sensation of some sort of craft under his feet, 
indulged in no images of horror connected with that desolate tartane. It 
was late in the evening before he returned to the farm, so that he had 
to have his supper alone. The women had retired, only the sans-culotte, 
smoking a short pipe out of doors, had followed him into the kitchen and 
asked where he had been and whether he had lost his way. This question 
gave Peyrol an opening. He had been to Madrague and had seen a very fine 
tartane lying perishing on the beach. 
 
"They told me down there that she belonged to you, citoyen." 
 
At this the terrorist only blinked. 
 
"What's the matter? Isn't  she the craft you came here in? Won't  you 
sell her to me?" Peyrol waited a little. "What objection can you have?" 
 
It appeared that the patriot had no positive objections. He mumbled 
something about the tartane being very dirty. This caused Peyrol to look 
at him with intense astonishment. 
 
"I am ready to take her off your hands as she stands." 
 
"I will be frank with you, citoyen. You see, when she lay at the quay 
in Toulon a lot of fugitive traitors, men and women, and children too, 
swarmed on board of her, and cut the ropes with a view of escaping, but 
the avengers were not far behind and made short work of them. When we 
discovered her behind the Arsenal, I and another man, we had to throw a 
lot of bodies overboard, out of the hold and the cabin. You will find 
her very dirty all over. We had no time to clear up." Peyrol felt 
inclined to laugh. He had seen decks swimming in blood and had himself 
helped to throw dead bodies overboard after a fight; but he eyed the 
citizen with an unfriendly eye. He thought to himself: "He had a hand 
in that massacre, no doubt," but he made no audible remark. He only 
thought of the enormous padlock securing that emptied charnel house at 
the stern. The terrorist insisted. "We really had not a moment to clean 
her up. The circumstances were such that it was necessary for me to get 
away quickly lest some of the false patriots should do me some 
carmagnole or other. There had been bitter quarrelling in my section. I 
was not alone in getting away, you know." 
 
Peyrol waved his arm to cut short the explanation. But before he and the 
terrorist had parted for the night Peyrol could regard himself as the 
owner of the tragic tartane. 
 
Next day he returned to the hamlet and took up his quarters there for a 
time. The awe he had inspired wore off, though no one cared to come very 
near the tartane. Peyrol did not want any help. He wrenched off the 
enormous padlock himself with a bar of iron and let the light of day 
into the little cabin which did indeed bear the trace's of the massacre 
in the stains of blood on its woodwork, but contained nothing else 
except a wisp of long hair and a woman's earring, a cheap thing which 
Peyrol picked up and looked at for a long time. The associations of such 
finds were not foreign to his past. He could without very strong emotion 
figure to himself the little place choked with corpses. He sat down and 
looked about at the stains and splashes which had been untouched by 
sunlight for years. The cheap little earring lay before him on the 
rough-hewn table between the lockers, and he shook his head at it 
weightily. He, at any rate, had never been a butcher. 
 
Peyrol unassisted did all the cleaning. Then he turned con amore to the 
fitting out of the tartane. The habits of activity still clung to him. 
He welcomed something to do; this congenial task had all the air of 
preparation for a voyage, which was a pleasing dream, and it brought 
every evening the satisfaction of something achieved to that illusory 
end. He rove new gear, scraped the masts himself, did all the sweeping, 
scrubbing and painting single-handed, working steadily and hopefully as 
though he had been preparing his escape from a desert island; and 
directly he had cleaned and renovated the dark little hole of a cabin he 
took to sleeping on board. Once only he went up on a visit to the farm 
for a couple of days, as if to give himself a holiday. He passed them 
mostly in observing Arlette. She was perhaps the first problematic human 
being he had ever been in contact with. Peyrol had no contempt for 
women. He had seen them love, suffer, endure, riot, and even fight for 
their own hand, very much like men. Generally with men and women you had 
to be on your guard, but in some ways women were more to be trusted. As 
a matter of fact, his country-women were to him less known than any 
other kind. From his experience of many different races, however, he had 
a vague idea that women were very much alike everywhere. This one was a 
lovable creature. She produced on him the effect of a child, aroused a 
kind of intimate emotion which he had not known before to exist by 
itself in a man. He was startled by its detached character. "Is it that 
I am getting old?" he asked himself suddenly one evening, as he sat on 
the bench against the wall looking straight before him, after she had 
crossed his line of sight. 
 
He felt himself an object of observation to Catherine, whom he used to 
detect peeping at him round corners or through half-opened doors. On his 
part he would stare at her openly - aware of the impression he produced 
on her: mingled curiosity and awe. He had the idea she did not 
disapprove of his presence at the farm, where, it was plain to him, she 
had a far from easy life. This had no relation to the fact that she did 
all the household work. She was a woman of about his own age, straight 
as a dart but with a wrinkled face. One evening as they were sitting 
alone in the kitchen Peyrol said to her: "You must have been a handsome 
girl in your day, Catherine. It's strange you never got married." 
 
She turned to him under the high mantel of the fireplace and seemed 
struck all of a heap, unbelieving, amazed, so that Peyrol was quite 
provoked. "What's the matter? If the old moke in the yard had spoken 
you could not look more surprised. You can't  deny that you were a 
handsome girl." 
 
She recovered from her scare to say: "I was born here, grew up here, 
and early in my life I made up my mind to die here." 
 
"A strange notion," said Peyrol, "for a young girl to take into her 
head." 
 
"It's not a thing to talk about," said the old woman, stooping to get 
a pot out of the warm ashes. "I did not think, then," she went on, 
with her back to Peyrol, "that I would live long. When I was eighteen I 
fell in love with a priest." 
 
"Ah, bah!" exclaimed Peyrol under his breath. 
 
"That was the time when I prayed for death," she pursued in a quiet 
voice. "I spent nights on my knees upstairs in that room where you 
sleep now. I shunned everybody. People began to say I was crazy. We have 
always been hated by the rabble about here. They have poisonous tongues. 
I got the nickname of `la fiance du prtre." Yes, I was handsome, but who 
would have looked at me if I had wanted to be looked at? My only luck 
was to have a fine man for a brother. He understood. No word passed his 
lips, but sometimes when we were alone and not even his wife was by, he 
would lay his hand on my shoulder gently. From that time to this I have 
not been to church and I never will go. But I have no quarrel with God 
now." 
 
There were no signs of watchfulness and care in her bearing now. She 
stood straight as an arrow before Peyrol and looked at him with a 
confident air. The rover was not yet ready to speak. He only nodded 
twice and Catherine turned away to put the pot to cool in the sink. 
"Yes, I wished to die. But I did not, and now I have got something to 
do," she said, sitting down near the fireplace and taking her chin in 
her hand. "And I daresay you know what that is," she added. 
 
Peyrol got up deliberately. 
 
"Well! bonsoir," he said. "I am off to Madrague. I want to begin work 
again on the tartane at daylight." 
 
"Don't  talk to me about the tartane, She took my brother away for ever. 
I stood on the shore watching her sails growing smaller and smaller. 
Then I came up alone to this farmhouse." 
 
Moving calmly her faded lips which no lover or child had ever kissed, 
old Catherine told Peyrol of the days and nights of waiting, with the 
distant growl of the big guns in her ears. She used to sit outside on 
the bench longing for news, watching the flickers in the sky and 
listening to heavy bursts of gunfire coming over the water. Then came a 
night as if the world were coming to an end. All the sky was lighted up, 
the earth shook to its foundations, and she felt the house rock, so that 
jumping up from the bench she screamed with fear. That night she never 
went to bed. Next morning she saw the sea covered with sails, while a 
black and yellow cloud of smoke hung over Toulon. A man coming up from 
Madrague told her that he believed that the whole town had been blown 
up. She gave him a bottle of wine and he helped her to feed the stock 
that evening. Before going home he expressed the opinion that there 
could not be a soul left alive in Toulon, because the few that survived 
would have gone away in the English ships. Nearly a week later she was 
dozing by the fire when voices outside woke her up, and she beheld 
standing in the middle of the salle, pale like a corpse out of a grave, 
with a blood-soaked blanket over her shoulders and a red cap on her 
head, a ghastly looking young girl in whom she suddenly recognized her 
niece. She screamed in her terror: "Franois, Franois!" This was her 
brother's name, and she thought he was outside. Her scream scared the 
girl, who ran out of the door. All was still outside. Once more she 
screamed "Franois!" and, tottering as far as the door, she saw her 
niece clinging to a strange man in a red cap and with a sabre by his 
side who yelled excitedly: "You won't  see Franois again. Vive la 
Rpublique!" 
 
"I recognized the son Bron," went on Catherine. "I knew his parents. 
When the troubles began he left his home to follow the Revolution. I 
walked straight up to him and took the girl away from his side. She 
didn't  want much coaxing. The child always loved me," she continued, 
getting up from the stool and moving a little closer to Peyrol. "She 
remembered her Aunt Catherine. I tore the horrid blanket off her 
shoulders. Her hair was clotted with blood and her clothes all stained 
with it. I took her upstairs. She was as helpless as a little child. I 
undressed her and examined her all over. She had no hurt anywhere. I was 
sure of that - but of what more could I be sure? I couldn't  make sense 
of the things she babbled at me. Her very voice distracted me. She fell 
asleep directly I had put her into my bed, and I stood there looking 
down at her, nearly going out of my mind with the thought of what that 
child may have been dragged through. When I went downstairs I found that 
good-for-nothing inside the house. He was ranting up and down the salle, 
vapouring and boasting till I thought all this must be an awful dream. 
My head was in a whirl. He laid claim to her, and God knows what. I 
seemed to understand things that made my hair stir on my head. I stood 
there clasping my hands with all the strength I had, for fear I should 
go out of my senses." 
 
"He frightened you," said Peyrol, looking at her steadily. Catherine 
moved a step nearer to him. 
 
"What? The son Bron, frighten me! He was the butt of all the girls, 
mooning about amongst the people outside the church on feast days in the 
time of the king. All the countryside knew about him. No. What I said to 
myself was that I mustn't  let him kill me. There upstairs was the child 
I had just got away from him, and there was I, all alone with that man 
with the sabre and unable to get hold of a kitchen knife even." 
 
"And so he remained," said Peyrol. 
 
"What would you have had me to do?" asked Catherine steadily. "He had 
brought the child back out of those shambles. It was a long time before 
I got an idea of what had happened. I don't  know everything even yet and 
I suppose I will never know. In a very few days my mind was more at case 
about Arlette, but it was a long time before she would speak and then it 
was never anything to the purpose. And what could I have done 
single-handed? There was nobody I would condescend to call to my help. 
We of the Escampobar have never been in favour with the peasants here," 
she said, proudly. "And this is all I can tell you." 
 
Her voice faltered, she sat down on the stool again and took her chin in 
the palm of her hand. As Peyrol left the house to go to the hamlet he 
saw Arlette and the patron come round the corner of the yard wall 
walking side by side but as if unconscious of each other. 
 
That night he slept on board the renovated tartane and the rising sun 
found him at work about the hull. By that time he had ceased to be the 
object of awed contemplation to the inhabitants of the hamlet who still, 
however, kept up a mistrustful attitude. His only intermediary for 
communicating with them was the miserable cripple. He was Peyrol's only 
company, in fact, during his period of work on the tartane. He had more 
activity, audacity, and intelligence, it seemed to Peyrol, than all the 
rest of the inhabitants put together. Early in the morning he could be 
seen making his way on his crutches with a pendulum motion towards the 
hull on which Peyrol would have been already an hour or so at work. 
Peyrol then would throw him over a sound rope's end and the cripple, 
leaning his crutches against the side of the tartane, would pull his 
wretched little carcass, all withered below the waist, up the rope, hand 
over hand, with extreme ease. There, sitting on the small foredeck, with 
his back against the mast and his thin, twisted legs folded in front of 
him, he would keep Peyrol company, talking to him along the whole length 
of the tartane in a strained voice and sharing his midday meal, as of 
right, since it was he generally who brought the provisions slung round 
his neck in a quaint flat basket. Thus were the hours of labour 
shortened for Peyrol by shrewd remarks and bits of local gossip. How the 
cripple got hold of it it was difficult to imagine, and the rover had 
not enough knowledge of European superstitions to suspect him of flying 
through the night on a broomstick like a sort of male witch - for there 
was a manliness in that twisted scrap of humanity which struck Peyrol 
from the first. His very voice was manly and the character of his gossip 
was not feminine. He did indeed mention to Peyrol that people used to 
take him about the neighbourhood in carts for the purpose of playing a 
fiddle at weddings and other festive occasions; but this seemed hardly 
adequate, and even he himself confessed that there was not much of that 
sort of thing going on during the Revolution when people didn't  like to 
attract attention and everything was done in a hole-and-corner manner. 
There were no priests to officiate at weddings, and if there were no 
ceremonies how could there be rejoicings? Of course children were born 
as before, but there were no christenings - and people got to look funny 
somehow or other. Their countenances got changed somehow; the very boys 
and girls seemed to have something on their minds. 
 
Peyrol, busy about one thing and another, listened without appearing to 
pay much attention to the story of the Revolution, as if to the tale of 
an intelligent islander on the other side of the world talking of bloody 
rites and amazing hopes of some religion unknown to the rest of mankind. 
But there was something biting in the speech of that cripple which 
confused his thoughts a little. Sarcasm was a mystery which he could not 
understand. On one occasion he remarked to his friend the cripple as 
they sat together on the foredeck munching the bread and figs of their 
midday meal: 
 
"There must have been something in it. But it doesn't  seem to have done 
much for you people here." 
 
"To be sure," retorted the scrap of man vivaciously, "it hasn't  
straightened my back or given me a pair of legs like yours." 
 
Peyrol, whose trousers were rolled up above the knee because he had been 
washing the hold, looked at his calves complacently. "You could hardly 
have expected that," he remarked with simplicity. 
 
"Ah, but you don't  know what people with properly made bodies expected 
or pretended to," said the cripple. "Everything was going to be 
changed. Everybody was going to tie up his dog with a string of sausages 
for the sake of principles." His long face which, in repose, had an 
expression of suffering peculiar to cripples, was lighted up by an 
enormous grin. "They must feel jolly well sold by this time," he 
added. "And of course that vexes them, but I am not vexed. I was never 
vexed with my father and mother. While the poor things were alive I 
never went hungry - not very hungry. They couldn't  have been very proud 
of me." He paused and seemed to contemplate himself mentally. "I don't  
know what I would have done in their place. Something very different. 
But then, don't  you see, I know what it means to be like I am. Of course 
they couldn't  know, and I don't  suppose the poor people had very much 
sense. A priest from Almanarre - Almanarre is a sort of village up there 
where there is a church. . . ." 
 
Peyrol interrupted him by remarking that he knew all about Almanarre. 
This, on his part, was a simple delusion because in reality he knew much 
less of Almanarre than of Zanzibar or any pirate village from there up 
to Cape Guardafui. And the cripple contemplated him with his brown eyes 
which had an upward cast naturally. 
 
"You know . . .! For me," he went on, in a tone of quiet decision, 
"you are a man fallen from the sky. Well, a priest from Almanarre came 
to bury them. A fine man with a stern face. The finest man I have seen 
from that time till you dropped on us here. There was a story of a girl 
having fallen in love with him some years before. I was old enough then 
to have heard something of it, but that's neither here nor there. 
Moreover, many people wouldn't  believe the tale." 
 
Peyrol, without looking at the cripple, tried to imagine what sort of 
child he might have been - what sort of youth? The rover had seen 
staggering deformities, dreadful mutilations which were the cruel work 
of man; but it was amongst people with dusky skins. And that made a 
great difference. But what he had heard and seen since he had come back 
to his native land, the tales, the facts, and also the faces, reached 
his sensibility with a particular force, because of that feeling that 
came to him so suddenly after a whole lifetime spent amongst Indians, 
Malagashes, Arabs, blackamoors of all sorts, that he belonged there, to 
this land, and had escaped all those things by a mere hair's breadth. 
His companion completed his significant silence, which seemed to have 
been occupied with thoughts very much like his own, by saying: 
 
"All this was in the king's time. They didn't  cut off his head till 
several years afterwards. It didn't  make my life any easier for me, but 
since those Republicans had deposed God and flung Him out of all the 
churches I have forgiven Him all my troubles." 
 
"Spoken like a man," said Peyrol. Only the misshapen character of the 
cripple's back prevented Peyrol from giving him a hearty slap. He got up 
to begin his afternoon's work. It was a bit of inside painting and from 
the foredeck the cripple watched him at it with dreamy eyes and 
something ironic on his lips. 
 
It was not till the sun had travelled over Cape Cici, which could be 
seen across the water like dark mist in the glare, that he opened his 
lips to ask: "And what do you propose to do with this tartane, citoyen?" 
 
Peyrol answered simply that the tartane was fit to go anywhere now, the 
very moment she took the water. 
 
"You could go as far as Genoa and Naples and even further," suggested 
the cripple. 
 
"Much further," said Peyrol. 
 
"And you have been fitting her out like this for a voyage?" 
 
"Certainly," said Peyrol, using his brush steadily. 
 
"Somehow I fancy it will not be a long one." 
 
Peyrol never checked the to-and-fro movement of his brush, but it was 
with an effort. The fact was that he had discovered in himself a 
distinct reluctance to go away from the Escampobar Farm. His desire to 
have something of his own that could float was no longer associated with 
any desire to wander. The cripple was right. The voyage of the renovated 
tartane would not take her very far. What was surprising was the fellow 
being so very positive about it. He seemed able to read people's thoughts. 
 
The dragging of the renovated tartane into the water was a great affair. 
Everybody in the hamlet, including the women, did a full day's work and 
there was never so much coin passed from hand to hand in the hamlet in 
all the days of its obscure history. Swinging between his crutches on a 
low sand-ridge the cripple surveyed the whole of the beach. It was he 
that had persuaded the villagers to lend a hand and had arranged the 
terms for their assistance. It was he also who through a very 
miserable-looking pedlar  the only one who frequented the peninsula  had 
got in touch with some rich persons in Frjus who had changed for Peyrol 
a few of his gold pieces for current money. He had expedited the course 
of the most exciting and interesting experience of his life, and now 
planted on the sand on his two sticks in the manner of a beacon he 
watched the last operation. The rover, as if about to launch himself 
upon a track of a thousand miles, walked up to shake hands with him and 
look once more at the soft eyes and the ironic smile. 
 
"There is no denying it - you are a man." 
 
"Don't  talk like this to me, citoyen," said the cripple in a trembling 
voice. Till then, suspended between his two sticks and with his 
shoulders as high as his ears, he had not looked towards the approaching 
Peyrol. "This is too much of a compliment!" 
 
"I tell you," insisted the rover roughly, and as if the insignificance 
of mortal envelopes had presented itself to him for the first time at 
the end of his roving life, "I tell you that there is that in you which 
would make a chum one would like to have alongside one in a tight place." 
 
As he went away from the cripple towards the tartane, while the whole 
population of the hamlet disposed around her waited for his word, some 
on land and some waist-deep in the water holding ropes in their hands, 
Peyrol had a slight shudder at the thought: "Suppose I had been born 
like that." Ever since he had put his foot on his native land such 
thoughts had haunted him. They would have been impossible anywhere else. 
He could not have been like any blackamoor, good, bad, or indifferent, 
hale or crippled, king or slave; but here, on this Southern shore that 
had called to him irresistibly as he had approached the Straits of 
Gibraltar on what he had felt to be his last voyage, any woman, lean and 
old enough, might have been his mother; he might have been any Frenchman 
of them all, even one of those he pitied, even one of those he despised. 
He felt the grip of his origins from the crown of his head to the soles 
of his feet while he clambered on board the tartane as if for a long and 
distant voyage. As a matter of fact he knew very well that with a bit of 
luck it would be over in about an hour. When the tartane took the water 
the feeling of being afloat plucked at his very heart. Some Madrague 
fishermen had been persuaded by the cripple to help old Peyrol to sail 
the tartane round to the cove below the Escampobar Farm. A glorious sun 
shone upon that short passage and the cove itself was full of sparkling 
light when they arrived. The few Escampobar goats wandering on the 
hillside pretending to feed where no grass was visible to the naked eye 
never even raised their heads. A gentle breeze drove the tartane, as 
fresh as paint could make her, opposite a narrow crack in the cliff 
which gave admittance to a tiny basin, no bigger than a village pond, 
concealed at the foot of the southern hill. It was there that old 
Peyrol, aided by the Madrague men, who had their boat with them, towed 
his ship, the first really that he ever owned. 
 
Once in, the tartane nearly filled the little basin, and the fishermen, 
getting into their boat, rowed away for home. Peyrol, by spending the 
afternoon in dragging ropes ashore and fastening them to various 
boulders and dwarf trees, moored her to his complete satisfaction. She 
was as safe from the tempests there as a house ashore. 
 
After he had made everything fast on board and had furled the sails 
neatly, a matter of some time for one man, Peyrol contemplated his 
arrangements which savoured of rest much more than of wandering, and 
found them good. Though he never meant to abandon his room at the 
farmhouse he felt that his true home was in the tartane, and he rejoiced 
at the idea that it was concealed from all eyes except perhaps the eyes 
of the goats when their arduous feeding took them on the southern slope. 
He lingered on board, he even threw open the sliding door of the little 
cabin, which now smelt of fresh paint, not of stale blood. Before he 
started for the farm the sun had travelled far beyond Spain and all the 
sky to the west was yellow, while on the side of Italy it presented a 
sombre canopy pierced here and there with the light of stars. Catherine 
put a plate on the table, but nobody asked him any questions. 
 
He spent a lot of his time on board, going down early, coming up at 
midday "pour manger la soupe," and sleeping on board almost every 
night. He did not like to leave the tartane alone for so many hours. 
Often, having climbed a little way up to the house, he would turn round 
for a last look at her in the gathering dusk, and actually would go back 
again. After Michel had been enlisted for a crew and had taken his abode 
on board for good, Peyrol found it a much easier matter to spend his 
nights in the lantern-like room at the top of the farmhouse. 
 
Often waking up at night he would get up to look at the starry sky out 
of all his three windows in succession, and think: "Now there is 
nothing in the world to prevent me getting out to sea in less than an 
hour." As a matter of fact it was possible for two men to manage the 
tartane. Thus Peyrol's thought was comfortingly true in every way, for 
he loved to feel himself free, and Michel of the lagoon, after the death 
of his depressed dog, had no tie on earth. It was a fine thought which 
somehow made it quite easy for Peyrol to go back to his four-poster and 
resume his slumbers. 
 
 
Perched sideways on the circular wall bordering the well, in the full 
blaze of the midday sun, the rover of the distant seas and the fisherman 
of the lagoon, sharing between them a most surprising secret, had the 
air of two men conferring in the dark. The first word that Peyrol said 
was, "Well?" 
 
"All quiet," said the other. 
 
"Have you fastened the cabin door properly?" 
 
"You know what the fastenings are like." 
 
Peyrol could not deny that. It was a sufficient answer. It shifted the 
responsibility on to his shoulders and all his life he had been 
accustomed to trust to the work of his own hands, in peace and in war. 
Yet he looked doubtfully at Michel before he remarked: 
 
"Yes, but I know the man too." 
 
There could be no greater contrast than those two faces: Peyrol's clean, 
like a carving of stone, and only very little softened by time, and that 
of the owner of the late dog, hirsute, with many silver threads, with 
something elusive in the features and the vagueness of expression of a 
baby in arms. "Yes, I know the man," repeated Peyrol. Michel's mouth 
fell open at this, a small oval set a little crookedly in the innocent face. 
 
"He will never wake," he suggested timidly. 
 
The possession of a common and momentous secret drawing men together, 
Peyrol condescended to explain. 
 
"You don't  know the thickness of his skull. I do." 
 
He spoke as though he had made it himself. Michel, who in the face of 
that positive statement had forgotten to shut his mouth, had nothing to say. 
 
"He breathes all right?" asked Peyrol. 
 
"Yes. After I got out and locked the door I listened for a bit and I 
thought I heard him snore." 
 
Peyrol looked interested and also slightly anxious. 
 
"I had to come up and show myself this morning as if nothing had 
happened," he said. "The officer has been here for two days and he 
might have taken it into his head to go down to the tartane. I have been 
on the stretch all the morning. A goat jumping up was enough to give me 
a turn. Fancy him running up here with his broken head all bandaged up, 
with you after him." 
 
This seemed to be too much for Michel. He said almost indignantly: 
 
"The man's half killed." 
 
"It takes a lot to even half kill a Brother of the Coast. There are men 
and men. You, for instance," Peyrol continued placidly, "you would 
have been altogether killed if it had been your head that got in the 
way. And there are animals, beasts twice your size, regular monsters, 
that may be killed with nothing more than just a tap on the nose. That's 
well known. I was really afraid he would overcome you in some way or 
other. . . ." 
 
"Come, matre! One isn't  a little child," protested Michel against this 
accumulation of improbabilities. He did it, however, only in a whisper 
and with childlike shyness. Peyrol folded his arms on his breast: 
 
"Go, finish your soup," he commanded in a low voice, "and then go 
down to the tartane. You locked the cabin door properly, you said?" 
 
"Yes, I have," protested Michel, staggered by this display of anxiety. 
"He could sooner burst the deck above his head, as you know." 
 
"All the same, take a small spar and shore up that door against the 
heel of the mast. And then watch outside. Don't  you go in to him on any 
account. Stay on deck and keep a lookout for me. There is a tangle here 
that won't  be easily cleared and I must be very careful. I will try to 
slip away and get down as soon as I get rid of that officer." 
 
The conference in the sunshine being ended, Peyrol walked leisurely out 
of the yard gate, and protruding his head beyond the corner of the 
house, saw Lieutenant Ral sitting on the bench. This he had expected to 
see. But he had not expected to see him there alone. It was just like 
this: wherever Arlette happened to be, there were worrying 
possibilities. But she might have been helping her aunt in the kitchen 
with her sleeves rolled up on such white arms as Peyrol had never seen 
on any woman before. The way she had taken to dressing her hair in a 
plait with a broad black velvet ribbon and an Arlesian cap was very 
becoming. She was wearing now her mother's clothes of which there were 
chestfuls, altered for her of course. The late mistress of the 
Escampobar Farm had been an Arlesienne. Well-to-do, too. Yes, even for 
women's clothes the Escampobar natives could do without intercourse with 
the outer world. It was quite time that this confounded lieutenant went 
back to Toulon. This was the third day. His short leave must be up. 
Peyrol's attitude towards naval officers had been always guarded and 
suspicious. His relations with them had been very mixed. They had been 
his enemies and his superiors. He had been chased by them. He had been 
trusted by them. The Revolution had made a clean cut across the 
consistency of his wild life - Brother of the Coast and gunner in the 
national navy - and yet he was always the same man. It was like that, 
too, with them. Officers of the King, officers of the Republic, it was 
only changing the skin. All alike looked askance at a free rover. Even 
this one could not forget his epaulettes when talking to him. Scorn and 
mistrust of epaulettes were rooted deeply in old Peyrol. Yet he did not 
absolutely hate Lieutenant Ral. Only the fellow's coming to the farm was 
generally a curse and his presence at that particular moment a 
confounded nuisance and to a certain extent even a danger. "I have no 
mind to be hauled to Toulon by the scruff of my neck," Peyrol said to 
himself. There was no trusting those epaulette-wearers. Any one of them 
was capable of jumping on his best friend on account of some 
officer-like notion or other. 
 
Peyrol, stepping round the corner, sat down by the side of Lieutenant 
Ral with the feeling somehow of coming to grips with a slippery 
customer. The lieutenant, as he sat there, unaware of Peyrol's survey of 
his person, gave no notion of slipperiness. On the contrary, he looked 
rather immovably established. Very much at home. Too much at home. Even 
after Peyrol sat down by his side he continued to look immovable - or at 
least difficult to get rid of. In the still noonday heat the faint 
shrilling of cicadas was the only sound of life heard for quite a long 
time. Delicate, evanescent, cheerful, careless sort of life, yet not 
without passion. A sudden gloom seemed to be cast over the joy of the 
cicadas by the lieutenant's voice though the words were the most 
perfunctory possible. 
 
"Tiens! Vous voil." 
 
In the stress of the situation Peyrol at once asked himself: "Now why 
does he say that? Where did he expect me to be?" The lieutenant need 
not have spoken at all. He had known him now for about two years off and 
on, and it had happened many times that they had sat side by side on 
that bench in a sort of "at arm's length" equality without exchanging 
a single word. And why could he not have kept quiet now? That naval 
officer never spoke without an object, but what could one make of words 
like that? Peyrol achieved an insincere yawn and suggested mildly: 
 
"A bit of siesta wouldn't  be amiss. What do you think, lieutenant?" 
 
And to himself he thought: "No fear, he won't  go to his room." He 
would stay there and thereby keep him, Peyrol, from going down to the 
cove. He turned his eyes on that naval officer, and if extreme and 
concentrated desire and mere force of will could have had any effect 
Lieutenant Ral would certainly have been removed suddenly from that 
bench. But he didn't  move. And Peyrol was astonished to see that man 
smile, but what astonished him still more was to hear him say: 
 
"The trouble is that you have never been frank with me, Peyrol." 
 
"Frank with you," repeated the rover. "You want me to be frank with 
you? Well, I have wished you to the devil many times." 
 
"That's better," said Lieutenant Ral. "But why? I never tried to do 
you any harm." 
 
"Me harm," cried Peyrol, "to me?" But he faltered in his indignation 
as if frightened at it and ended in a very quiet tone: "You have been 
nosing in a lot of dirty papers to find something against a man who was 
not doing you any harm and was a seaman before you were born." 
 
"Quite a mistake. There was no nosing amongst papers. I came on them 
quite by accident. I won't  deny I was intrigu finding a man of your sort 
living in this place. But don't  be uneasy. Nobody would trouble his head 
about you. It's a long time since you have been forgotten. Have no fear." 
 
"You! You talk to me of fear . . .? No," cried the rover, "it's 
enough to turn a fellow into a sans-culotte if it weren't  for the sight 
of that specimen sneaking around here." 
 
The lieutenant turned his head sharply, and for a moment the naval 
officer and the free sea-rover looked at each other gloomily. When 
Peyrol spoke again he had changed his mood. 
 
"Why should I fear anybody? I owe nothing to anybody. I have given them 
up the prize ship in order and everything else, except my luck; and for 
that I account to nobody," he added darkly. 
 
"I don't  know what you are driving at," the lieutenant said after a 
moment of thought. "All I know is that you seem to have given up your 
share of the prize money. There is no record of you ever claiming it." 
 
Peyrol did not like the sarcastic tone. "You have a nasty tongue," he 
said, "with your damned trick of talking as if you were made of 
different clay." 
 
"No offence,"  said the lieutenant, grave but a little puzzled. 
"Nobody will drag out that against you. It has been paid years ago to 
the Invalides  fund. All this is buried and forgotten." 
 
Peyrol was grumbling and swearing to himself with such concentration 
that the lieutenant stopped and waited till he had finished. 
 
"And there is no record of desertion or anything like that," he 
continued then. "You stand there as disparu. I believe that after 
searching for you a little they came to the conclusion that you had come 
by your death somehow or other." 
 
"Did they? Well, perhaps old Peyrol is dead. At any rate he has buried 
himself here." The rover suffered from great instability of feelings 
for he passed in a flash from melancholy into fierceness. "And he was 
quiet enough till you came sniffing around this hole. More than once in 
my life I had occasion to wonder how soon the jackals would have a 
chance to dig up my carcass; but to have a naval officer come scratching 
round here was the last thing. . . ." Again a change came over him. 
"What can you want here?" he whispered, suddenly depressed. 
 
The lieutenant fell into the humour of that discourse. "I don't  want to 
disturb the dead," he said, turning full to the rover who after his 
last words had fixed his eyes on the ground. "I want to talk to the 
gunner Peyrol." 
 
Peyrol, without raising his eyes from the ground, growled: "He isn't  
here. He is disparu. Go and look at the papers again. Vanished. Nobody 
here." 
 
"That," said Lieutenant Ral, in a conversational tone, "that is a 
lie. He was talking to me this morning on the hillside as we were 
looking at the English ship. He knows all about her. He told me he spent 
nights making plans for her capture. He seemed to be a fellow with his 
heart in the right place. Un homme de cur. You know him." 
 
Peyrol raised his big head slowly and looked at the lieutenant. 
 
"Humph," he grunted. A heavy, non-committal grunt. His old heart was 
stirred, but the tangle was such that he had to be on his guard with any 
man who wore epaulettes. His profile preserved the immobility of a head 
struck on a medal while he listened to the lieutenant assuring him that 
this time he had come to Escampobar on purpose to speak with the gunner 
Peyrol. That he had not done so before was because it was a very 
confidential matter. At this point the lieutenant stopped and Peyrol 
made no sign. Inwardly he was asking himself what the lieutenant was 
driving at. But the lieutenant seemed to have shifted his ground. His 
tone, too, was slightly different. More practical. 
 
"You say you have made a study of that English ship's movements. Well, 
for instance, suppose a breeze springs up, as it very likely will 
towards the evening, could you tell me where she will be to-night? I 
mean, what her captain is likely to do." 
 
"No, I couldn't ," said Peyrol. 
 
"But you said you have been observing him minutely for weeks. There 
aren't  so many alternatives, and taking the weather and everything into 
consideration, you can judge almost with certainty." 
 
"No," said Peyrol again. "It so happens that I can't ." 
 
"Can't  you? Then you are worse than any of the old admirals that you 
think so little of. Why can't  you?" 
 
"I will tell you why," said Peyrol after a pause and with a face more 
like a carving than ever. "It's because the fellow has never come so 
far this way before. Therefore I don't  know what he has got in his mind, 
and in consequence I can't  guess what he will do next. I may be able to 
tell you some other day but not to-day. Next time when you come . . . to 
see the old gunner." 
 
"No, it must be this time." 
 
"Do vou mean you are going to stay here tonight?" 
 
"Did you think I was here on leave? I tell you I am on service. Don't  
you believe me?" 
 
Peyrol let out a heavy sigh. "Yes, I believe you. And so they are 
thinking of catching her alive. And you are sent on service. Well, that 
doesn't  make it any easier for me to see you here." 
 
"You are a strange man, Peyrol," said the lieutenant. "I believe you 
wish me dead." 
 
"No. Only out of this. But you are right, Peyrol is no friend either to 
your face or to your voice. They have done harm enough already." 
 
They had never attained to such intimate terms before. There was no need 
for them to look at each other. The lieutenant thought: "Ah! He can't  
keep his jealousy in." There was no scorn or malice in that thought. It 
was much more like despair. He said mildly: 
 
"You snarl like an old dog, Peyrol." 
 
"I have felt sometimes as if I could fly at your throat," said Peyrol 
in a sort of calm whisper. "And it amuses you the more." 
 
"Amuses me? Do I look light-hearted?" 
 
Again Peyrol turned his head slowly for a long, steady stare. And again 
the naval officer and the rover gazed at each other with a searching and 
sombre frankness. This new-born intimacy could go no further. 
 
"Listen to me, Peyrol. . . ." 
 
"No," said the other. "If you want to talk, talk to the gunner." 
 
Though he seemed to have adopted the notion of a double personality the 
rover did not seem to be much easier in one character than in the other. 
Furrows of perplexity appeared on his brow, and as the lieutenant did 
not speak at once Peyrol the gunner asked impatiently: 
 
"So they are thinking of catching her alive?" It did not please him to 
hear the lieutenant say that it was not exactly this that the chiefs in 
Toulon had in their minds. Peyrol at once expressed the opinion that of 
all the naval chiefs that ever were, Citizen Renaud was the only one 
that was worth anything. Lieutenant Ral, disregarding the challenging 
tone, kept to the point. 
 
"What they want to know is whether that English corvette interferes 
much with the coast traffic." 
 
"No, she doesn't ," said Peyrol: 'she leaves poor people alone, 
unless, I suppose, some craft acts suspiciously. I have seen her give 
chase to one or two. But even those she did not detain. Michel - you 
know Michel - has heard from the mainland people that she has captured 
several at various times. Of course, strictly speaking, nobody is safe." 
 
"Well, no. I wonder now what that Englishman would call `acting 
suspiciously." " 
 
"Ah, now you are asking something. Don't  you know what an Englishman 
is? One day easy and casual, next day ready to pounce on you like a 
tiger. Hard in the morning, careless in the afternoon, and only reliable 
in a fight, whether with or against you, but for the rest perfectly 
fantastic. You might think a little touched in the head, and there again 
it would not do to trust to that notion either." 
 
The lieutenant lending an attentive ear, Peyrol smoothed his brow and 
discoursed with gusto of Englishmen as if they had been a strange, very 
little-known tribe. "In a manner of speaking," he concluded, "the 
oldest bird of them all can be caught with chaff, but not every day." 
He shook his head, smiling to himself faintly as if remembering a quaint 
passage or two. 
 
"You didn't  get all that knowledge of the English while you were a 
gunner," observed the lieutenant dryly. 
 
"There you go again," said Peyrol. "And what's that to you where I 
learned it all? Suppose I learned it all from a man who is dead now. Put 
it down to that." 
 
"I see. It amounts to this, that one can't  get at the back of their 
minds very easily." 
 
"No," said Peyrol, then added grumpily, "and some Frenchmen are not 
much better. I wish I could get at the back of your mind." 
 
"You would find a service matter there, gunner, that's what you would 
find there, and a matter that seems nothing much at first sight, but 
when you look into it, is about as difficult to manage properly as 
anything you ever undertook in your life. It puzzled all the big-wigs. 
It must have, since I was called in. Of course I work on shore at the 
Admiralty and I was in the way. They showed me the order from Paris and 
I could see at once the difficulty of it. I pointed it out and I was 
told . . ." 
 
"To come here," struck in Peyrol. 
 
"No. To make arrangements to carry it out." 
 
"And you began by coming here. You are always coming here." 
 
"I began by looking for a man," said the naval officer with emphasis. 
 
Peyrol looked at him searchingly. "Do you mean to say that in the whole 
fleet you couldn't  have found a man?" 
 
"I never attempted to look for one there. My chief agreed with me that 
it isn't  a service for navy men." 
 
"Well, it must be something nasty for a naval man to admit that much. 
What is the order? I don't  suppose you came over here without being 
ready to show it to me." 
 
The lieutenant plunged his hand into the inside pocket of his naval 
jacket and then brought it out empty. 
 
"Understand, Peyrol," he said earnestly, "this is not a service of 
fighting. Good men are plentiful for that. The object is to play the 
enemy a trick." 
 
"Trick?" said Peyrol in a judicial tone, "that's all right. I have 
seen in the Indian Seas Monsieur Surcouf play tricks on the English . . 
. seen them with my own eyes, deceptions, disguises, and such-like. . . 
. That's quite sound in war." 
 
"Certainly. The order for this one comes from the First Consul himself, 
for it is no small matter. It's to deceive the English Admiral." 
 
"What - that Nelson? Ah! but he is a cunning one." 
 
After expressing that opinion the old rover pulled out a red bandana 
handkerchief and after rubbing his face with it repeated his opinion 
deliberately: "Celui-l est un malin." 
 
This time the lieutenant really brought out a paper from his pocket and 
saying, "I have copied the order for you to see," handed it to the 
rover, who took it from him with a doubtful air. 
 
Lieutenant Ral watched old Peyrol handling it at arm's length, then with 
his arm bent trying to adjust the distance to his eyesight, and wondered 
whether he had copied it in a hand big enough to be read easily by the 
gunner Peyrol. The order ran like this: "You will make up a packet of 
dispatches and pretended private letters as if from officers, containing 
a clear statement besides hints calculated to convince the enemy that 
the destination of the fleet now fitting in Toulon is for Egypt and 
generally for the East. That packet you will send by sea in some small 
craft to Naples, taking care that the vessel shall fall into the enemy's 
hands." The Prfet Maritime had called Ral, had shown him the paragraph 
of the letter from Paris, had turned the page over and laid his finger 
on the signature, "Bonaparte." Then after giving him a meaning glance, 
the admiral locked up the paper in a drawer and put the key in his 
pocket. Lieutenant Ral had written the passage down from memory directly 
the notion of consulting Peyrol had occurred to him. 
 
The rover, screwing his eyes and pursing his lips, had come to the end 
of it. The lieutenant extended his hand negligently and took the paper 
away: "Well, what do you think?" he asked. "You understand that there 
can be no question of any ship of war being sacrificed to that dodge. 
What do you think of it?" 
 
"Easier said than done," opined Peyrol curtly. 
 
"That's what I told my admiral." 
 
"Is he a lubber, so that you had to explain it to him?" 
 
"No, gunner, he is not. He listened to me, nodding his head." 
 
"And what did he say when you finished?" 
 
"He said: `Parfaitement. Have you got any ideas about it?" And I 
said - listen to me, gunner - I said: `Oui, Amiral, I think I've  got a 
man," and the admiral interrupted me at once: `All right, you don't  want 
to talk to me about him. I put you in charge of that affair and give you 
a week to arrange it. When it's done report to me. Meantime you may just 
as well take this packet." They were already prepared, Peyrol, all those 
faked letters and dispatches. I carried it out of the admiral's room, a 
parcel done up in sail-cloth, properly corded and sealed. I have had it 
in my possession for three days. It's upstairs in my valise." 
 
"That doesn't  advance you very much," growled old Peyrol. 
 
"No," admitted the lieutenant. "I can also dispose of a few thousand 
francs." 
 
"Francs," repeated Peyrol. "Well, you had better get back to Toulon 
and try to bribe some man to put his head into the jaws of the English 
lion." 
 
Ral reflected, then said slowly, "I wouldn't  tell any man that. Of 
course a service of danger, that would be understood." 
 
"It would be. And if you could get a fellow with some sense in his 
caboche, he would naturally try to slip past the English fleet and maybe 
do it, too. And then where's your trick?" 
 
"We could give him a course to steer." 
 
"Yes. And it may happen that your course would just take him clear of 
all Nelson's fleet, for you never can tell what the English are doing. 
They might be watering in Sardinia." 
 
"Some cruisers are sure to be out and pick him up." 
 
"Maybe. But that's not doing the job, that's taking a chance. Do you 
think you are talking to a toothless baby - or what?" 
 
"No, my gunner. It will take a strong man's teeth to undo that knot." 
A moment of silence followed. Then Peyrol assumed a dogmatic tone. 
 
"I will tell you what it is, lieutenant. This seems to me just the sort 
of order that a landlubber would give to good seamen. You daren't  deny 
that." 
 
"I don't  deny it," the lieutenant admitted. "And look at the whole 
difficulty. For supposing even that the tartane blunders right into the 
English fleet, as if it had been indeed arranged, they would just look 
into her hold or perhaps poke their noses here and there but it would 
never occur to them to search for dispatches, would it? Our man, of 
course, would have them well hidden, wouldn't  he? He is not to know. And 
if he were ass enough to leave them lying about the decks the English 
would at once smell a rat there. But what I think he would do would be 
to throw the dispatches overboard." 
 
"Yes - unless he is told the nature of the job," said Peyrol. 
 
"Evidently. But where's the bribe big enough to induce a man to taste 
of the English pontoons?" 
 
"The man will take the bribe all right and then will do his best not to 
be caught; and if he can't  avoid that, he will take jolly good care that 
the English should find nothing on board his tartane. Oh no, lieutenant, 
any damn scallywag that owns a tartane will take a couple of thousand 
francs from your hand as tame as can be; but as to deceiving the English 
Admiral, it's the very devil of an affair. Didn't  you think of all that 
before you spoke to the big epaulettes that gave you the job?" 
 
"I did see it, and I put it all before him," the lieutenant said, 
lowering his voice still more, for their conversation had been carried 
on in undertones though the house behind them was silent and solitude 
reigned round the approaches of Escampobar Farm. It was the hour of 
siesta - for those that could sleep. The lieutenant, edging closer 
towards the old man, almost breathed the words in his ear. 
 
"What I wanted was to hear you say all those things. Do you understand 
now what I meant this morning on the lookout? Don't  you remember what I 
said?" 
 
Peyrol, gazing into space, spoke in a level murmur. 
 
"I remember a naval officer trying to shake old Peyrol off his feet and 
not managing to do it. I may be disparu but I am too solid yet for any 
blancbec that loses his temper, devil only knows why. And it's a good 
thing that you didn't  manage it, else I would have taken you down with 
me, and we would have made our last somersault together for the 
amusement of an English ship's company. A pretty end that!" 
 
"Don't  you remember me saying, when you mentioned that the English 
would have sent a boat to go through our pockets, that this would have 
been the perfect way?" In his stony immobility with the other man 
leaning towards his car, Peyrol seemed a mere insensible receptacle for 
whispers, and the lieutenant went on forcibly: "Well, it was in 
allusion to this affair, for, look here, gunner, what could be more 
convincing, if they had found the packet of dispatches on me! What would 
have been their surprise, their wonder! Not the slightest doubt could 
enter their heads. Could it, gunner? Of course it couldn't . I can 
imagine the captain of that corvette crowding sail on her to get this 
packet into the Admiral's hands. The secret of the Toulon fleet's 
destination found on the body of a dead officer. Wouldn't  they have 
exulted at their enormous piece of luck! But they wouldn't  have called 
it accidental. Oh, no! They would have called it providential. I know 
the English a little too. They like to have God on their side - the 
only ally they never need pay a subsidy to. Come, gunner, would it not 
have been a perfect way?" 
 
Lieutenant Ral threw himself back and Peyrol, still like a carven image 
of grim dreaminess, growled softly: 
 
"Time yet. The English ship is still in the Passe." He waited a little 
in his uncanny living-statue manner before he added viciously: "You 
don't  seem in a hurry to go and take that leap." 
 
"Upon my word, I am almost sick enough of life to do it," the 
lieutenant said in a conversational tone. 
 
"Well, don't  forget to run upstairs and take that packet with you 
before you go," said Peyrol as before. "But don't  wait for me; I am 
not sick of life. I am disparu, and that's good enough. There's no need 
for me to die." 
 
And at last he moved in his seat, swung his head from side to side as if 
to make sure that his neck had not been turned to stone, emitted a short 
laugh, and grumbled: "Disparu! Hein! Well, I am damned!" as if the 
word "vanished" had been a gross insult to enter against a man's name 
in a register. It seemed to rankle, as Lieutenant Ral observed with some 
surprise; or else it was something inarticulate that rankled, 
manifesting itself in that funny way. The lieutenant, too, had a moment 
of anger which flamed and went out at once in the deadly cold 
philosophic reflection: "We are victims of the destiny which has 
brought us together." Then again his resentment flamed. Why should he 
have stumbled against that girl or that woman, he didn't  know how he 
must think of her, and suffer so horribly for it? He who had endeavoured 
almost from a boy to destroy all the softer feelings within himself. His 
changing moods of distaste, of wonder at himself and at the unexpected 
turns of life, wore the aspect of profound abstraction from which he was 
recalled by an outburst of Peyrol's, not loud but fierce enough. 
 
"No," cried Peyrol, "I am too old to break my bones for the sake of a 
lubberly soldier in Paris who fancies he has invented something clever." 
 
"I don't  ask you to," the lieutenant said, with extreme severity, in 
what Peyrol would call an epaulette wearer's voice. "You old 
sea-bandit. And it wouldn't  be for the sake of a soldier anyhow. You and 
I are Frenchmen after all." 
 
"You have discovered that, have you?" 
 
"Yes," said Ral. "This morning, listening to your talk on the 
hillside with that English corvette within one might say a stone's throw." 
 
"Yes," groaned Peyrol. "A French-built ship!" He struck his breast a 
resounding blow. "It hurts one there to see her. It seemed to me I 
could jump down on her deck single-handed." 
 
"Yes, there you and I understood each other," said the lieutenant. 
"But look here, this affair is a much bigger thing than getting back a 
captured corvette. In reality it is much more than merely playing a 
trick on an admiral. It's a part of a deep plan, Peyrol! It's another 
stroke to help us on the way towards a great victory at sea." 
 
"Us!" said Peyrol. "I am a sea-bandit and you are a sea-officer. What 
do you mean by us?" 
 
"I mean all Frenchmen," said the lieutenant. "Or, let us say simply 
France, which you too have served." 
 
Peyrol, whose stone-effigy bearing had become humanized almost against 
his will, gave an appreciative nod, and said: "You've  got something in 
your mind. Now what is it? If you will trust a sea-bandit." 
 
"No, I will trust a gunner of the Republic. It occurred to me that for 
this great affair we could make use of this corvette that you have been 
observing so long. For to count on the capture of any old tartane by the 
fleet in a way that would not arouse suspicion is no use." 
 
"A lubberly notion," assented Peyrol, with more heartiness than he had 
ever displayed towards Lieutenant Ral. 
 
"Yes, but there's that corvette. Couldn't  something be arranged to make 
them swallow the whole thing, somehow, some way? You laugh . . . Why?" 
 
"I laugh because it would be a great joke," said Peyrol, whose 
hilarity was very short-lived. "That fellow on board, he thinks himself 
very clever. I never set my eyes on him, but I used to feel that I knew 
him as if he were my own brother; but now . . ." 
 
He stopped short. Lieutenant Ral, after observing the sudden change on 
his countenance, said in an impressive manner: 
 
"I think you have just had an idea." 
 
"Not the slightest," said Peyrol, turning suddenly into stone as if by 
enchantment. The lieutenant did not feel discouraged and he was not 
surprised to hear the effigy of Peyrol pronounce: "All the same one 
could see." Then very abruptly: "You meant to stay here to-night?" 
 
"Yes. I will only go down to Madrague and leave word with the sailing 
barge which was to come to-day from Toulon to go back without me." 
 
"No, lieutenant. You must return to Toulon to-day. When you get there 
you must turn out some of those damned quill-drivers at the Port Office 
if it were midnight and have papers made out for a tartane - oh, any 
name you like. Some sort of papers. And then you must come back as soon 
as you can. Why not go down to Madrague now and see whether the barge 
isn't  already there? If she is, then by starting at once you may get 
back here some time about midnight." 
 
He got up impetuously and the lieutenant stood up too. Hesitation was 
imprinted on his whole attitude. Peyrol's aspect was not animated, but 
his Roman face with its severe aspect gave him a great air of authority. 
 
"Won't  you tell me something more?" asked the lieutenant. 
 
"No," said the rover. "Not till we meet again. If you return during 
the night don't  you try to get into the house. Wait outside. Don't  rouse 
anybody. I will be about, and if there is anything to say I will say it 
to you then. What are you looking about you for? You don't  want to go up 
for your valise. Your pistols up in your room too? What do you want with 
pistols, only to go to Toulon and back with a naval boat's crew?" He 
actually laid his hand on the lieutenant's shoulder and impelled him 
gently towards the track leading to Madrague. Ral turned his head at the 
touch and their eyes met with the strained closeness of a wrestler's 
hug. It was the lieutenant who gave way before the unflinchingly direct 
stare of the old Brother of the Coast. He gave way under the cover of a 
sarcastic smile and a very airy, "I see you want me out of the way for 
some reason or other," which produced not the slightest effect upon 
Peyrol, who stood with his arm pointing towards Madrague. When the 
lieutenant turned his back on him Peyrol's pointing arm fell down by his 
side; but he watched the lieutenant out of sight before he turned too 
and moved in a contrary direction. 
 
 
On losing sight of the perplexed lieutenant, Peyrol discovered that his 
own mind was a perfect blank. He started to get down to his tartane 
after one side-long look at the face of the house which contained quite 
a different problem. Let that wait. His head feeling strangely empty, he 
felt the pressing necessity of furnishing it with some thought without 
loss of time. He scrambled down steep places, caught at bushes, stepped 
from stone to stone, with the assurance of long practice, with 
mechanical precision and without for a moment relaxing his efforts to 
capture some definite scheme which he could put into his head. To his 
right the cove lay full of pale light, while the rest of the 
Mediterranean extended beyond it in a dark, unruffled blue. Peyrol was 
making for the little basin where his tartane had been hidden for years, 
like a jewel in a casket meant only for the secret rejoicing of his eye, 
of no more practical use than a miser's hoard - and as precious! Coming 
upon a hollow in the ground where grew a few bushes and even a few 
blades of grass, Peyrol sat down to rest. In that position his visible 
world was limited to a stony slope, a few boulders, the bush against 
which he leaned and the vista of a piece of empty sea-horizon. He 
perceived that he detested that lieutenant much more when he didn't  see 
him. There was something in the fellow. Well, at any rate he had got rid 
of him for say eight or ten hours. An uneasiness came over the old 
rover, a sense of the endangered stability of things, which was anything 
but welcome. He wondered at it, and the thought "I am growing old," 
intruded on him again. And yet he was aware of his sturdy body. He could 
still creep stealthily like an Indian and with his trusty cudgel knock a 
man over with a certain aim at the back of his head, and with force 
enough to fell him like a bullock. He had done that thing no further 
back than two o'clock the night before, not twelve hours ago, as easy as 
easy and without an undue sense of exertion. This fact cheered him up. 
But still he could not find an idea for his head. Not what one could 
call a real idea. It wouldn't  come. It was no use sitting there. 
 
He got up and after a few strides came to a stony ridge from which he 
could see the two white blunt mastheads of his tartane. Her hull was 
hidden from him by the formation of the shore, in which the most 
prominent feature was a big flat piece of rock. That was the spot on 
which not twelve hours before Peyrol, unable to rest in his bed and 
coming to seek sleep in his tartane, had seen by moonlight a man 
standing above his vessel and looking down at her, a characteristic 
forked black shape that certainly had no business to be there. Peyrol, 
by a sudden and logical deduction, had said to himself. "Landed from an 
English boat." Why, how, wherefore, he did not stay to consider. He 
acted at once like a man accustomed for many years to meet emergencies 
of the most unexpected kind. The dark figure, lost in a sort of 
attentive amazement, heard nothing, suspected nothing. The impact of the 
thick end of the cudgel came down on its head like a thunderbolt from 
the blue. The sides of the little basin echoed the crash. But he could 
not have heard it. The force of the blow flung the senseless body over 
the edge of the flat rock and down headlong into the open hold of the 
tartane, which received it with the sound of a muffled drum. Peyrol 
could not have done the job better at the age of twenty. No. Not so 
well. There was swiftness, mature judgment - and the sound of the 
muffled drum was followed by a perfect silence, without a sigh, without 
a moan. Peyrol ran round a little promontory to where the shore shelved 
down to the level of the tartanes rail and got on board. And still the 
silence remained perfect in the cold moonlight and amongst the deep 
shadows of the rocks. It remained perfect because Michel, who always 
slept under the half-deck forward, being wakened by the thump which had 
made the whole tartane tremble, had lost the power of speech. With his 
head just protruding from under the half-deck, arrested on all fours and 
shivering violently like a dog that had been washed with hot water, he 
was kept from advancing further by his terror of this bewitched corpse 
that had come on board flying through the air. He would not have touched 
it for anything. 
 
The "You there, Michel," pronounced in an undertone, acted like a 
moral tonic. This then was not the doing of the Evil One; it was no 
sorcery! And even if it had been, now that Peyrol was there, Michel had 
lost all fear. He ventured not a single question while he helped Peyrol 
to turn over the limp body. Its face was covered with blood from the cut 
on the forehead which it had got by striking the sharp edge of the 
keelson. What accounted for the head not being completely smashed and 
for no limbs being broken was the fact that on its way through the air 
the victim of undue curiosity had come in contact with and had snapped 
like a carrot one of the foremast shrouds. Raising his eves casually 
Peyrol noticed the broken rope, and at once put his hand on the man's 
breast. 
 
"His heart beats yet," he murmured. "Go and light the cabin lamp, 
Michel." 
 
"You going to take that thing into the cabin?" 
 
"Yes," said Peyrol. "The cabin is used to that kind of thing," and 
suddenly he felt very bitter. "It has been a death-trap for better 
people than this fellow, whoever he is." 
 
While Michel was away executing that order Peyrol's eyes roamed all over 
the shores of the basin, for he could not divest himself of the idea 
that there must be more Englishmen dodging about. That one of the 
corvette's boats was still in the cove he had not the slightest doubt. 
As to the motive of her coming, it was incomprehensible. Only that 
senseless form lying at his feet could perhaps have told him: but Peyrol 
had little hope that it would ever speak again. If his friends started 
to look for their shipmate there was just a bare chance that they would 
not discover the existence of the basin. Peyrol stooped and felt the 
body all over. He found no weapon of any kind on it. There was only a 
common clasp-knife on a lanyard round its neck. 
 
That soul of obedience, Michel, returning from aft, was directed to 
throw a couple of bucketfuls of salt water upon the bloody head with its 
face upturned to the moon. The lowering of the body down into the cabin 
was a matter of some little difficulty. It was heavy. They laid it full 
length on a locker and after Michel with a strange tidiness had arranged 
its arms along its sides it looked incredibly rigid. The dripping head 
with soaked hair was like the head of a drowned man with a gaping pink 
gash on the forehead. 
 
"Go on deck to keep a lookout," said Peyrol. "We may have to fight 
yet before the night's out." 
 
After Michel left him Peyrol began by flinging off his jacket and, 
without a pause, dragging his shirt off over his head. It was a very 
fine shirt. The Brothers of the Coast in their hours of ease were by no 
means a ragged crowd, and Peyrol the gunner had preserved a taste for 
fine linen. He tore the shirt into long strips, sat down on the locker 
and took the wet head on his knees. He bandaged it with some skill, 
working as calmly as though he had been practising on a dummy. Then the 
experienced Peyrol sought the lifeless hand and felt the pulse. The 
spirit had not fled yet. The rover, stripped to the waist, his powerful 
arms folded on the grizzled pelt of his bare breast, sat gazing down at 
the inert face in his lap with the eyes closed peacefully under the 
white band covering the forehead. He contemplated the heavy jaw combined 
oddly with a certain roundness of cheek, the noticeably broad nose with 
a sharp tip and a faint dent across the bridge, either natural or the 
result of some old injury. A face of brown clay, roughly modelled, with 
a lot of black eyelashes stuck on the closed lids and looking 
artificially youthful on that physiognomy forty years old or more. And 
Peyrol thought of his youth. Not his own youth; that he was never 
anxious to recapture. It was of that man's youth that he thought, of how 
that face had looked twenty years ago. Suddenly he shifted his position, 
and putting his lips to the ear of that inanimate head, yelled with all 
the force of his lungs: 
 
"Hullo! Hullo! Wake up, shipmate!" 
 
It seemed enough to wake up the dead. A faint "Voil! Voil!" was the 
answer from a distance, and presently Michel put his head into the cabin 
with an anxious grin and a gleam in the round eyes. 
 
"You called, matre?" 
 
"Yes," said Peyrol. "Come along and help me to shift him." 
 
"Overboard?" murmured Michel readily. 
 
"No," said Peyrol, "into that bunk. Steady! Don't  bang his head," he 
cried with unexpected tenderness. "Throw a blanket over him. Stay in 
the cabin and keep his bandages wetted with salt water. I don't  think 
anybody will trouble you to-night. I am going to the house." 
 
"The day is not very far off," remarked Michel. 
 
This was one reason the more why Peyrol was in a hurry to get back to 
the house and steal up to his room unseen. He drew on his jacket over 
his bare skin, picked up his cudgel, recommended Michel not to let that 
strange bird get out of the cabin on any account. As Michel was 
convinced that the man would never walk again in his life, he received 
those instructions without particular emotion. 
 
The dawn had broken some time before Peyrol, on his way up to 
Escampobar, happened to look round and had the luck to actually see with 
his own eyes the English man-of-war's boat pulling out of the cove. This 
confirmed his surmises but did not enlighten him a bit as to the causes. 
Puzzled and uneasy, he approached the house through the farmyard - 
Catherine, always the first up, stood at the open kitchen door. She 
moved aside and would have let him pass without remark, if Peyrol 
himself had not asked in a whisper: "Anything new?" She answered him 
in the same tone: "She has taken to roaming at night." Peyrol stole 
silently up to his bedroom, from which he descended an hour later as 
though he had spent all the night in his bed up there. 
 
It was this nocturnal adventure which had affected the character of 
Peyrol's forenoon talk with the lieutenant. What with one thing and 
another he found it very trying. Now that he had got rid of Ral for 
several hours, the rover had to turn his attention to that other invader 
of the strained, questionable, and ominous in its origins, peace of the 
Escampobar Farm. As he sat on the flat rock with his eyes fixed idly on 
the few drops of blood betraying his last night's work to the high 
heaven, and trying to get hold of something definite that he could think 
about, Peyrol became aware of a faint thundering noise. Faint as it was 
it filled the whole basin. He soon guessed its nature, and his face lost 
its perplexity. He picked up his cudgel, got on his feet briskly, 
muttering to himself. "He's anything but dead," and hurried on board 
the tartane. 
 
On the after-deck Michel was keeping a lookout. He had carried out the 
orders he had received by the well. Besides being secured by the very 
obvious padlock, the cabin door was shored up by a spar which made it 
stand as firm as a rock. The thundering noise seemed to issue from its 
immovable substance magically. It ceased for a moment, and a sort of 
distracted continuous growling could be heard. Then the thundering began 
again. Michel reported: "This is the third time he starts this game." 
 
"Not much strength in this," remarked Peyrol gravely. 
 
"That he can do it at all is a miracle," said Michel, showing a 
certain excitement. "He stands on the ladder and beats the door with 
his fists. He is getting better. He began about half an hour after I got 
back on board. He drummed for a bit and then fell off the ladder. I 
heard him. I had my ear against the scuttle. He lay there and talked to 
himself for a long time. Then he went at it again." Peyrol approached 
the scuttle while Michel added his opinion: "He will go on like that 
for ever. You can't  stop him." 
 
"Easy there," said Peyrol in a deep authoritative voice. "Time you 
finish that noise." 
 
These words brought instantly a death-like silence. Michel ceased to 
grin. He wondered at the power of these few words of a foreign language. 
 
Peyrol himself smiled faintly. It was ages since he had uttered a 
sentence of English. He waited complacently until Michel had unbarred 
and unlocked the door of the cabin. After it was thrown open he boomed 
out a warning: "Stand clear!" and, turning about, went down with great 
deliberation, ordering Michel to go forward and keep a lookout. 
 
Down there the man with the bandaged head was hanging on to the table 
and swearing feebly without intermission. Peyrol, after listening for a 
time with an air of interested recognition as one would to a tune heard 
many years ago, stopped it by a deep-voiced: 
 
"That will do." After a short silence he added: "You look bien 
malade, hein? What you call sick," in a tone which if not tender was 
certainly not hostile. "We will remedy that." 
 
"Who are you?" asked the prisoner, looking frightened and throwing his 
arm up quickly to guard his head against the coming blow. But Peyrol's 
uplifted hand fell only on his shoulder in a hearty slap which made him 
sit down suddenly on a locker in a partly collapsed attitude and unable 
to speak. But though very much dazed he was able to watch Peyrol open a 
cupboard and produce from there a small demijohn and two tin cups. He 
took heart to say plaintively: "My throat's like tinder," and then 
suspiciously: "Was it you who broke my head?" 
 
"It was me," admitted Peyrol, sitting down on the opposite side of the 
table and leaning back to look at his prisoner comfortably. 
 
"What the devil did you do that for?" inquired the other with a sort 
of faint fierceness which left Peyrol unmoved. 
 
"Because you put your nose where you no business. Understand? I see you 
there under the moon, pench, eating my tartane with your eyes. You never 
hear me, hein?" 
 
"I believe you walked on air. Did you mean to kill me?" 
 
"Yes, in preference to letting you go and make a story of it on board 
your cursed corvette." 
 
"Well then, now's your chance to finish me. I am as weak as a kitten." 
 
"How did you say that? Kitten? Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Peyrol. "You make 
a nice petit chat." He seized the demijohn by the neck and filled the 
mugs. "There," he went on, pushing one towards the prisoner - "it's 
good drink - that." 
 
Symons' state was as though the blow had robbed him of all power of 
resistance, of all faculty of surprise and generally of all the means by 
which a man may assert himself except bitter resentment. His head was 
aching, it seemed to him enormous, too heavy for his neck and as if full 
of hot smoke. He took a drink under Peyrol's fixed gaze and with 
uncertain movements put down the mug. He looked drowsy for a moment. 
Presently a little colour deepened his bronze; he hitched himself up on 
the locker and said in a strong voice: 
 
"You played a damned dirty trick on me. Call yourself a man, walking on 
air behind a fellow's back and felling him like a bullock?" 
 
Peyrol nodded calmly and sipped from his mug. 
 
"If I had met you anywhere else but looking at my tartane I would have 
done nothing to you. I would have permitted you to go back to your boat. 
Where was your damned boat?" 
 
"How can I tell you? I can't  tell where I am. I've  never been here 
before. How long have I been here?" 
 
"Oh, about fourteen hours," said Peyrol. 
 
"My head feels as if it would fall off if I moved," grumbled the 
other. . . . "You are a damned bungler, that's what you are." 
 
"What for - bungler?" 
 
"For not finishing me off at once." 
 
He seized the mug and emptied it down his throat. Peyrol drank too, 
observing him all the time. He put the mug down with extreme gentleness 
and said slowly: 
 
"How could I know it was you? I hit hard enough to crack the skull of 
any other man." 
 
"What do you mean? What do you know about my skull? What are you 
driving at? I don't  know you, you white-headed villain, going about at 
night knocking people on the head from behind. Did you do for our 
officer, too?" 
 
"Oh yes! Your officer. What was he up to? What trouble did you people 
come to make here, anyhow?" 
 
"Do you think they tell a boat's crew? Go and ask our officer. He went 
up the gully and our coxswain got the jumps. He says to me: `You are 
light-footed, Sam,  says he; `you just creep round the head of the cove 
and see if our boat can be seen across from the other side.  Well, I 
couldn't  see anything. That was all right. But I thought 1 would climb a 
little higher amongst the rocks. . . ." 
 
He paused drowsily. 
 
"That was a silly thing to do," remarked Peyrol in an encouraging voice. 
 
"I would've  sooner expected to see an elephant inland than a craft 
lying in a pool that seemed no bigger than my hand. Could not understand 
how she got there. Couldn't  help going down to find out - and the next 
thing I knew 1 was lying on my back with my head tied up, in a bunk in 
this kennel of a cabin here. Why couldn't  you have given me a hail and 
engaged me properly, yardarm to yardarm? You would have got me all the 
same, because all I had in the way of weapons was the clasp-knife which 
you have looted off me." 
 
"Up on the shelf there," said Peyrol, looking round. "No, my friend, 
I wasn't  going to take the risk of seeing you spread your wings and fly." 
 
"You need not have been afraid for your tartane. Our boat was after no 
tartane. We wouldn't  have taken your tartane for a gift. Why, we see 
them by dozens every day - those tartanes." 
 
Peyrol filled the two mugs again. "Ah," he said, "I daresay you see 
many tartanes, but this one is not like the others. You a sailor - and 
you couldn't  see that she was something extraordinary." 
 
"Hellfire and gunpowder!" cried the other. "How can you expect me to 
have seen anything? I just noticed that her sails were bent before your 
club hit me on the head." He raised his hands to his head and groaned. 
"Oh lord, I feel as though I had been drunk for a month." 
 
Peyrol's prisoner did look somewhat as though he had got his head broken 
in a drunken brawl. But to Peyrol his appearance was not repulsive. The 
rover preserved a tender memory of his freebooter's life with its 
lawless spirit and its spacious scene of action, before the change in 
the state of affairs in the Indian Ocean, the astounding rumours from 
the outer world, made him reflect on its precarious character. It was 
true that he had deserted the French flag when quite a youngster; but at 
that time that flag was white; and now it was a flag of three colours. 
He had known the practice of liberty, equality and fraternity as 
understood in the haunts open or secret of the Brotherhood of the Coast. 
So the change, if one could believe what people talked about, could not 
be very great. The rover had also his own positive notions as to what 
these three words were worth. Liberty - to hold your own in the world if 
you could. Equality - yes! But no body of men ever accomplished anything 
without a chief. All this was worth what it was worth. He regarded 
fraternity somewhat differently. Of course brothers would quarrel 
amongst themselves; it was during a fierce quarrel that flamed up 
suddenly in a company of Brothers that he had received the most 
dangerous wound of his life. But for that Peyrol nursed no grudge 
against anybody. In his view the claim of the Brotherhood was a claim 
for help against the outside world. And here he was sitting opposite a 
Brother whose head he had broken on sufficient grounds. There he was 
across the table looking dishevelled and dazed, uncomprehending and 
aggrieved, and that head of his proved as hard as ages ago when the 
nickname of Testa Dura had been given to him by a Brother of Italian 
origin on some occasion or other, some butting match no doubt; just as 
he, Peyrol himself, was known for a time on both sides of the Mozambique 
Channel as Poigne-de-Fer, after an incident when in the presence of the 
Brothers he played at arm's length with the windpipe of an obstreperous 
negro sorcerer with an enormous girth of chest. The villagers brought 
out food with alacrity, and the sorcerer was never the same man again. 
It had been a great display. 
 
Yes, no doubt it was Testa Dura; the young neophyte of the order  where 
and how picked up Peyrol never heard , strange to the camp, simpleminded 
and much impressed by the swaggering cosmopolitan company in which he 
found himself. He had attached himself to Peyrol in preference to some 
of his own countrymen of whom there were several in that band, and used 
to run after him like a little dog and certainly had acted a good 
shipmate's part on the occasion of that wound which had neither killed 
nor cowed Peyrol but merely had given him an opportunity to reflect at 
leisure on the conduct of his own life. 
 
The first suspicion of that amazing fact had intruded on Peyrol while he 
was bandaging that head by the light of the smoky lamp. Since the fellow 
still lived, it was not in Peyrol to finish him off or let him lie 
unattended like a dog. And then this was a sailor. His being English was 
no obstacle to the development of Peyrol's mixed feelings in which 
hatred certainly had no place. Amongst the members of the Brotherhood it 
was the Englishmen whom he preferred. He had also found amongst them 
that particular and loyal appreciation, which a Frenchman of character 
and ability will receive from Englishmen sooner than from any other 
nation. Peyrol had at times been a leader, without ever trying for it 
very much, for he was not ambitious. The lead used to fall to him mostly 
at a time of crisis of some sort; and when he had got the lead it was on 
the Englishmen that he used to depend most. 
 
And so that youngster had turned into this English man-of-war's man! In 
the fact itself there was nothing impossible. You found Brothers of the 
Coast in all sorts of ships and in all sorts of places. Peyrol had found 
one once in a very ancient and hopeless cripple practising the 
profession of a beggar on the steps of Manila cathedral; and had left 
him the richer by two broad gold pieces to add to his secret hoard. 
There was a tale of a Brother of the Coast having become a mandarin in 
China, and Peyrol believed it. One never knew where and in what position 
one would find a Brother of the Coast. The wonderful thing was that this 
one should have come to seek him out, to put himself in the way of his 
cudgel. Peyrol's greatest concern had been all through that Sunday 
morning to conceal the whole adventure from Lieutenant Ral. As against a 
wearer of epaulettes, mutual protection was the first duty between 
Brothers of the Coast. The unexpectedness of that claim coming to him 
after twenty years invested it with an extraordinary strength. What he 
would do with the fellow he didn't  know. But since that morning the 
situation had changed. Peyrol had received the lieutenant's confidence 
and had got on terms with him in a special way. He fell into profound 
thought. 
 
"Sacre tte dure," he muttered without rousing himself. Peyrol was 
annoyed a little at not having been recognized. He could not conceive 
how difficult it would have been for Symons to identify this portly 
deliberate person with a white head of hair as the object of his 
youthful admiration, the black-ringleted French Brother in the prime of 
life of whom everybody thought so much. Peyrol was roused by hearing the 
other declare suddenly: 
 
"I am an Englishman, I am. I am not going to knuckle under to anybody. 
What are you going to do with me?" 
 
"I will do what I please," said Peyrol, who had been asking himself 
exactly the same question. 
 
"Well, then, be quick about it, whatever it is. I don't  care a damn 
what you do, but - be - quick - about it." 
 
He tried to be emphatic; but as a matter of fact the last words came out 
in a faltering tone. And old Peyrol was touched. He thought that if he 
were to let him drink the mugful standing there, it would make him dead 
drunk. But he took the risk. So he said only: 
 
"Allons. Drink." The other did not wait for a second invitation but 
could not control very well the movements of his arm extended towards 
the mug. Peyrol raised his on high. 
 
"Trinquons, eh?" he proposed. But in his precarious condition the 
Englishman remained unforgiving. 
 
"I'm damned if I do," he said indignantly, but so low that Peyrol had 
to turn his ear to catch the words. "You will have to explain to me 
first what you meant by knocking me on the head." 
 
He drank, staring all the time at Peyrol in a manner which was meant to 
give offence but which struck Peyrol as so childlike that he burst into 
a laugh. 
 
"Sacr imbcile, va! Did I not tell you it was because of the tartane? If 
it hadn't  been for the tartane I would have hidden from you. I would 
have crouched behind a bush like a - what do you call them? - livre." 
 
The other, who was feeling the effect of the d stared with frank 
incredulity. 
 
"You are of no account," continued Peyrol. "Ah! if you had been an 
officer I would have gone for you anywhere. Did you say your officer 
went up the gully?" 
 
Symons sighed deeply and easily. "That's the way he went. We had heard 
on board of a house thereabouts." 
 
"Oh, he went to the house!" said Peyrol. "Well, if he did get there 
he must be very sorry for himself. There is half a company of infantry 
billeted in the farm." 
 
This inspired fib went down easily with the English sailor. Soldiers 
were stationed in many parts of the coast as any seaman of the 
blockading fleet knew very well. To the many expressions which had 
passed over the face of that man recovering from a long period of 
unconsciousness, there was added the shade of dismay. 
 
"What the devil have they stuck soldiers on this piece of rock for?" 
he asked. 
 
"Oh, signalling post and things like that. I am not likely to tell you 
everything. Why! you might escape." 
 
That phrase reached the soberest spot in the whole of Symons' 
individuality. Things were happening, then. Mr. Bolt was a prisoner. But 
the main idea evoked in his confused mind was that he would be given up 
to those soldiers before very long. The prospect of captivity made his 
heart sink and he resolved to give as much trouble as he could. 
 
"You will have to get some of these soldiers to carry me up. I won't  
walk. I won't . Not after having had my brains nearly knocked out from 
behind. I tell you straight! I won't  walk. Not a step. They will have to 
carry me ashore." 
 
Peyrol only shook his head deprecatingly. 
 
"Now you go and get a corporal with a file of men," insisted Symons 
obstinately. "I want to be made a proper prisoner of. Who the devil are 
you? You had no right to interfere. I believe you are a civilian. A 
common marinero, whatever you may call yourself. You look to me a pretty 
fishy marinero at that. Where did you learn English? In prison - eh? You 
ain't  going to keep me in this damned dog-hole, on board your rubbishy 
tartane. Go and get that corporal, I tell you." 
 
He looked suddenly very tired and only murmured: "I am an Englishman, I 
am." 
 
Peyrol's patience was positively angelic. 
 
"Don't  you talk about the tartane," he said impressively, making his 
words as distinct as possible. "I told you she was not like the other 
tartanes. That is because she is a courier boat. Every time she goes to 
sea she makes a pied-de-nez, what you call thumb to the nose, to all 
your English cruisers. I do not mind telling you because you are my 
prisoner. You will soon learn French now." 
 
"Who are you? The caretaker of this thing or what?" asked the 
undaunted Symons. But Peyrol's mysterious silence seemed to intimidate 
him at last. He became dejected and began to curse in a languid tone all 
boat expeditions, the coxswain of the gig and his own infernal luck. 
 
Peyrol sat alert and attentive like a man interested in an experiment, 
while after a moment Symons' face began to look as if he had been hit 
with a club again, but not as hard as before. A film came over his round 
eyes and the words "fishy mariners" made their way out of his lips in 
a sort of death-bed voice. Yet such was the hardness of his head that he 
actually rallied enough to address Peyrol in an ingratiating tone. 
 
"Come, grandfather!" He tried to push the mug across the table and 
upset it. "Come! Let us finish what's in that tiny bottle of yours." 
 
"No," said Peyrol, drawing the demijohn to his side of the table and 
putting the cork in. 
 
"No?" repeated Symons in an unbelieving voice and looking at the 
demijohn fixedly . . . "You must be a tinker" . . . He tried to say 
something more under Peyrol's watchful eyes, failed once or twice, and 
suddenly pronounced the word "cochon" so correctly as to make old 
Peyrol start. After that it was no use looking at him any more. Peyrol 
busied himself in locking up the demijohn and the mugs. When he turned 
round most of his prisoner's body was extended over the table and no 
sound came from it, not even a snore. 
 
When Peyrol got outside, pulling to the door of the cuddy behind him, 
Michel hastened from forward to receive the master's orders. But Peyrol 
stood so long on the after-deck meditating profoundly with his hand over 
his mouth that Michel became fidgety and ventured a cheerful: "It looks 
as if he were not going to die." 
 
"He is dead," said Peyrol with grim jocularity. "Dead drunk. And you 
very likely will not see me till to-morrow sometime." 
 
"But what am I to do?" asked Michel timidly. 
 
"Nothing," said Peyrol. "Of course you must not let him set fire to 
the tartane." 
 
"But suppose," insisted Michel, "he should give signs of escaping." 
 
"If you see him trying to escape," said Peyrol with mock solemnity, 
"then, Michel, it will be a sign for you to get out of his way as 
quickly as you can. A man who would try to escape with a head like this 
on him would just swallow you at one mouthful." 
 
He picked up his cudgel and, stepping ashore, went off without as much 
as a look at his faithful henchman. Michel listened to him scrambling 
amongst the stones, and his habitual amiably vacant face acquired a sort 
of dignity from the utter and absolute blankness that came over it. 
 
 
It was only after reaching the level ground in front of the farmhouse 
that Peyrol took time to pause and resume his contact with the exterior 
world. 
 
While he had been closeted with his prisoner the sky had got covered 
with a thin layer of cloud, in one of those swift changes of weather 
that are not unusual in the Mediterranean. This grey vapour, drifting 
high up, close against the disc of the sun, seemed to enlarge the space 
behind its veil, add to the vastness of a shadowless world no longer 
hard and brilliant but all softened in the contours of its masses and in 
the faint line of the horizon, as if ready to dissolve in the immensity 
of the Infinite. 
 
Familiar and indifferent to his eyes, material and shadowy, the extent 
of the changeable sea had gone pale under the pale sun in a mysterious 
and emotional response. Mysterious too was the great oval patch of dark 
water to the west; and also a broad blue lane traced on the dull silver 
of the waters in a parabolic curve described magistrally by an invisible 
finger for a symbol of endless wandering. The face of the farmhouse 
might have been the face of a house from which all the inhabitants had 
fled suddenly. In the high part of the building the window of the 
lieutenant's room remained open, both glass and shutter. By the door of 
the salle the stable fork leaning against the wall seemed to have been 
forgotten by the sans-culotte. This aspect of abandonment struck Peyrol 
with more force than usual. He had been thinking so hard of all these 
people, that to find no one about seemed unnatural and even depressing. 
He had seen many abandoned places in his life, grass huts, mud forts, 
kings' palaces - temples from which every white-robed soul had fled. 
Temples, however, never looked quite empty. The gods clung to their own. 
Peyrol's eyes rested on the bench against the wall of the salle. In the 
usual course of things it should have been occupied by the lieutenant 
who had the habit of sitting there with hardly a movement, for hours, 
like a spider watching for the coming of a fly. This paralyzing 
comparison held Peyrol motionless with a twisted mouth and a frown on 
his brow, before the evoked vision, coloured and precise, of the man 
more troubling than the reality had ever been. 
 
He came to himself with a start. What sort of occupation was this, "cr 
nom de nom, staring at a silly bench with no one on it? Was he going 
wrong in his head? Or was it that he was getting really old? He had 
noticed old men losing themselves like that. But he had something to do. 
First of all he had to go and see what the English sloop in the Passe 
was doing. 
 
While he was making his way towards the lookout on the hill where the 
inclined pine hung peering over the cliff as if an insatiable curiosity 
were holding it in that precarious position, Peyrol had another view 
from above of the farmyard and of the buildings and was again affected 
by their deserted appearance. Not a soul, not even an animal seemed to 
have been left; only on the roofs the pigeons walked with smart 
elegance. Peyrol hurried on and presently saw the English ship well over 
on the Porquerolles side with her yards braced tip and her head to the 
southward. There was a little wind in the Passe, while the dull silver 
of the open had a darkling rim of rippled water far away to the cast in 
that quarter where, far or near, but mostly out of sight, the British 
Fleet kept its endless watch. Not a shadow of a spar or gleam of sail on 
the horizon betrayed its presence; but Peyrol would not have been 
surprised to see a crowd of ships surge up, people the horizon with 
hostile life, come in running, and dot the sea with their ordered groups 
all about Cape Cici, parading their damned impudence. Then indeed that 
corvette, the big factor of everyday life on that stretch of coast, 
would become very small potatoes indeed; and the man in command of her 
 he had been Peyrol's personal adversary in many imaginary encounters 
fought to a finish in the room upstairs  then indeed that Englishman 
would have to mind his steps. He would be ordered to come within hail of 
the Admiral, be sent here and there, made to run like a little dog and 
as likely as not get called on board the flagship and get a dressing 
down for something or other. 
 
Peyrol thought for a moment that the impudence of this Englishman was 
going to take the form of running along the peninsula and looking into 
the very cove; for the corvette's head was falling off slowly. A fear 
for his tartane clutched Peyrol's heart till he remembered that the 
Englishman did not know of her existence. Of course not. His cudgel had 
been absolutely effective in stopping that bit of information. The only 
Englishman who knew of the existence of the tartane was that fellow with 
the broken head. Peyrol actually laughed at his momentary scare. 
Moreover, it was evident that the Englishman did not mean to parade in 
front of the peninsula. He did not mean to be impudent. The sloop's 
yards were swung right round and she came again to the wind but now 
heading to the northward back from where she came. Peyrol saw at once 
that the Englishman meant to pass to windward of Cape Esterel, probably 
with the intention of anchoring for the night off the long white beach 
which in a regular curve closes the roadstead of Hyres on that side. 
 
Peyrol pictured her to himself, on the clouded night, not so very dark 
since the fall moon was but a day old, lying at anchor within hail of 
the low shore, with her sails furled and looking profoundly asleep, but 
with the watch on deck lying by the guns. He gnashed his teeth. It had 
come to this at last, that the captain of the Amelia could do nothing 
with his ship without putting Peyrol into a rage. Oh, for forty 
Brothers, or sixty, picked ones, he thought, to teach the fellow what it 
might cost him taking liberties along the French coast! Ships had been 
carried by surprise before, on nights when there was just light enough 
to see the whites of each other's eyes in a close tussle. And what would 
be the crew of that Englishman? Something between ninety and a hundred 
altogether, boys and landsman included. ... Peyrol shook his fist for a 
good-bye, just when Cape Esterel shut off the English sloop from his 
sight. But in his heart of hearts that seaman of cosmopolitan 
associations knew very well that no forty or sixty, not any given 
hundred Brothers of the Coast would have been enough to capture that 
corvette making herself at home within ten miles of where he had first 
opened his eyes to the world. 
 
He shook his head dismally at the leaning pine, his only companion. The 
disinherited soul of that rover ranging for so many years a lawless 
ocean with the coasts of two continents for a raiding ground, had come 
back to its crag, circling like a sea-bird in the dusk and longing for a 
great sea victory for its people: that inland multitude of which Peyrol 
knew nothing except the few individuals on that peninsula cut off from 
the rest of the land by the dead water of a salt lagoon; and where only 
a strain of manliness in a miserable cripple and an unaccountable charm 
of a half-crazed woman had found response in his heart. 
 
This scheme of false dispatches was but a detail in a plan for a great, 
a destructive victory. just a detail, but not a trifle all the same. 
Nothing connected with the deception of an admiral could be called 
trifling. And such an admiral too. It was, Peyrol felt vaguely, a scheme 
that only a confounded landsman would invent. It behoved the sailors, 
however, to make a workable thing of it. It would have to be worked 
through that corvette. 
 
And here Peyrol was brought up by the question that all his life had not 
been able to settle for him - and that was whether the English were 
really very stupid or very acute. That difficulty had presented itself 
with every fresh case. The old rover had enough genius in him to have 
arrived at a general conclusion that if they were to be deceived at all 
it could not be done very well by words but rather by deeds; not by mere 
wriggling, but by deep craft concealed under some sort of 
straightforward action. That conviction, however, did not take him 
forward in this case, which was one in which much thinking would be 
necessary. 
 
The Amelia had disappeared behind Cape Esterel, and Peyrol wondered 
with a certain anxiety whether this meant that the Englishman had given 
up his man for good. "If he has," said Peyrol to himself, "I am bound 
to see him pass out again from beyond Cape Esterel before it gets 
dark." If, however, he did not see the ship again within the next hour 
or two, then she would be anchored off the beach, to wait for the night 
before making some attempt to discover what had become of her man. This 
could be done only by sending out one or two boats to explore the coast, 
and no doubt to enter the cove - perhaps even to land a small search party. 
 
After coming to this conclusion Peyrol began deliberately to charge his 
pipe. Had he spared a moment for a glance inland he might have caught a 
whisk of a black skirt, the gleam of a white fichu - Arlette running 
down the faint track leading from Escampobar to the village in the 
hollow; the same track in fact up which Citizen Scevola, while indulging 
in the strange freak to visit the church, had been chased by the 
incensed faithful. But Peyrol, while charging and lighting his pipe, had 
kept his eyes fastened on Cape Esterel. Then, throwing his arm 
affectionately over the trunk of the pine, he had settled himself to 
watch. Far below him the roadstead, with its play of grey and bright 
gleams, looked like a plaque of mother-of-pearl in a frame of yellow 
rocks and dark green ravines set off inland by the masses of the hills 
displaying the tint of the finest purple; while above his head the sun, 
behind a cloud-veil, hung like a silver disc. 
 
That afternoon, after waiting in vain for Lieutenant Ral to appear 
outside in the usual way, Arlette, the mistress of Escampobar, had gone 
unwillingly into the kitchen where Catherine sat upright in a heavy 
capacious wooden armchair, the back of which rose above the top of her 
white muslin cap. Even in her old age, even in her hours of ease, 
Catherine preserved the upright carriage of the family that had held 
Escampobar for so many generations. It would have been easy to believe 
that, like some characters famous in the world, Catherine would have 
wished to die standing up and with unbowed shoulders. 
 
With her sense of hearing undecayed she detected the light footsteps in 
the salle long before Arlette entered the kitchen. That woman, who had 
faced alone and unaided  except for her brother's comprehending silence  
the anguish of passion in a forbidden love, and of terrors comparable to 
those of the judgment Day, neither turned her face, quiet without 
serenity, nor her eyes, fearless but without fire, in the direction of 
her niece. 
 
Arlette glanced on all sides, even at the walls, even at the mound of 
ashes under the big overmantel, nursing in its heart a spark of fire, 
before she sat down and leaned her elbow on the table. 
 
"You wander about like a soul in pain," said her aunt, sitting by the 
hearth like an old queen on her throne. 
 
"And you sit here eating your heart out." 
 
"Formerly," remarked Catherine, "old women like me could always go 
over their prayers, but now . . ." 
 
"I believe you have not been to church for years. I remember Scevola 
telling me that a long time ago. Was it because you didn't  like people's 
eyes? I have fancied sometimes that most people in the world must have 
been massacred long ago." 
 
Catherine turned her face away. Arlette rested her head on her 
half-closed hand, and her eyes, losing their steadiness, began to 
tremble amongst cruel visions. She got up suddenly and caressed the 
thin, half-averted, withered cheek with the tips of her fingers, and in 
a low voice, with that marvellous cadence that plucked at one's 
heart-strings, she said coaxingly: 
 
"Those were dreams, weren't  they?" 
 
In her immobilitv the old woman called with all the might of her will 
for the presence of Peyrol. She had never been able to shake off a 
superstitious fear of that niece restored to her from the terrors of a 
Judgment Day in which the world had been given over to the devils. She 
was always afraid that this girl, wandering about with restless eyes and 
a dim smile on her silent lips, would suddenly say something atrocious, 
unfit to be heard, calling for vengeance from heaven, unless Peyrol were 
by. That stranger come from "par dela les mers" was out of it 
altogether, cared probably for no one in the world but had struck her 
imagination by his massive aspect, his deliberation suggesting a mighty 
force like the reposeful attitude of a lion. Arlette desisted from 
caressing the irresponsive cheek, exclaimed petulantly: "I am awake 
now!" and went out of the kitchen without having asked her aunt the 
question she had meant to ask, which was whether she knew what had 
become of the lieutenant. 
 
Her heart had failed her. She let herself drop on the bench outside the 
door of the salle. "What is the matter with them all?" she thought. 
"I can't  make them out. What wonder is it that I have not been able to 
sleep?" Even Peyrol, so different from all mankind, who from the first 
moment when he stood before her had the power to soothe her aimless 
unrest, even Peyrol would now sit for hours with the lieutenant on the 
bench, gazing into the air and keeping him in talk about things without 
sense, as if on purpose to prevent him from thinking of her. Well, he 
could not do that. But the enormous change implied in the fact that 
every day had a to-morrow now, and that all the people around her had 
ceased to be mere phantoms for her wandering glances to glide over 
without concern, made her feel the need of support from somebody, from 
somewhere. She could have cried aloud for it. 
 
She sprang up and walked along the whole front of the farm building. At 
the end of the wall enclosing the orchard she called out in a modulated 
undertone: "Eugne," not because she hoped that the lieutenant was 
anywhere within earshot, but for the pleasure of hearing the sound of 
the name uttered for once above a whisper. She turned about and at the 
end of the wall on the yard side she repeated her call, drinking in the 
sound that came from her lips, "Eugne, Eugne," with a sort of 
half-exulting despair. It was in such dizzy moments that she wanted a 
steadying support. But all was still. She heard no friendly murmur, not 
even a sigh. Above her head under the thin grey sky a big mulberry tree 
stirred no leaf. Step by step, as if unconsciously, she began to move 
down the track. At the end of fifty yards she opened the inland view, 
the roofs of the village between the green tops of the platanes 
overshadowing the fountain, and just beyond the flat blue-grey level of 
the salt lagoon, smooth and dull like a slab of lead. But what drew her 
on was the church-tower, where, in a round arch, she could see the black 
speck of the bell which escaping the requisitions of the Republican 
wars, and dwelling mute above the locked-up empty church, had only 
lately recovered its voice. She ran on, but when she had come near 
enough to make out the figures moving about the village fountain, she 
checked herself, hesitated a moment and then took the footpath leading 
to the presbytery. 
 
She pushed open the little gate with the broken latch. The humble 
building of rough stones, from between which much mortar had crumbled 
out, looked as though it had been sinking slowly into the ground. The 
beds of the plot in front were choked with weeds, because the abb had no 
taste for gardening. When the heiress of Escampobar opened the door, he 
was walking up and down the largest room which was his bedroom and 
sitting room and where he also took his meals. He was a gaunt man with a 
long, as if convulsed, face. In his young days he had been tutor to the 
sons of a great noble, but he did not emigrate with his employer. 
Neither did he submit to the Republic. He had lived in his native land 
like a hunted wild beast, and there had been many tales of his 
activities, warlike and others. When the hierarchy was re-established he 
found no favour in the eyes of his superiors. He had remained too much 
of a Royalist. He had accepted, without a word, the charge of this 
miserable parish, where he had acquired influence quickly enough. His 
sacerdotalism lay in him like a cold passion. Though accessible enough, 
he never walked abroad without his breviary, acknowledging the solemnly 
bared heads by a curt nod. He was not exactly feared, but some of the 
oldest inhabitants who remembered the previous incumbent, an old man who 
died in the garden after having been dragged out of bed by some patriots 
anxious to take him to prison in Hyres, jerked their heads sideways in a 
knowing manner when their cur was mentioned. 
 
On seeing this apparition in an Arlesian cap and silk skirt, a white 
fichu, and otherwise as completely different as any princess could be 
from the rustics with whom he was in daily contact, his face expressed 
the blankest astonishment. Then - for he knew enough of the gossip of 
his community - his straight, thick eyebrows came together inimically. 
This was no doubt the woman of whom he had heard his parishioners talk 
with bated breath as having given herself and her property up to a 
Jacobin, a Toulon sans-culotte who had either delivered her parents to 
execution or had murdered them himself during the first three days of 
massacres. No one was very sure which it was, but the rest was current 
knowledge. The abb, though persuaded that any amount of moral turpitude 
was possible in a godless country, had not accepted all that tale 
literally. No doubt those people were republican and impious, and the 
state of affairs up there was scandalous and horrible. He struggled with 
his feelings of repulsion and managed to smooth his brow and waited. He 
could not imagine what that woman with mature form and a youthful face 
could want at the presbytery. Suddenly it occurred to him that perhaps 
she wanted to thank him - it was a very old occurrence - for interposing 
between the fury of the villagers and that man. He couldn't  call him, 
even in his thoughts, her husband, for apart from all other 
circumstances, that connection could not imply any kind of marriage to a 
priest, even had there been legal form observed. His visitor was 
apparently disconcerted by the expression of his face, the austere 
aloofness of his attitude, and only a low murmur escaped her lips. He 
bent his head and was not very certain what he had heard. 
 
"You come to seek my aid?" he asked in a doubting tone. 
 
She nodded slightly, and the abb went to the door she had left half open 
and looked out. There was not a soul in sight between the presbytery and 
the village, or between the presbytery and the church. He went back to 
face her, saying: 
 
"We are as alone as we can well be. The old woman in the kitchen is as 
deaf as a post." 
 
Now that he had been looking at Arlette closer the abb felt a sort of 
dread. The carmine of those lips, the pellucid, unstained, unfathomable 
blackness of those eyes, the pallor of her cheeks, suggested to him 
something provokingly pagan, something distastefully different from the 
common sinners of this earth. And now she was ready to speak. He 
arrested her with a raised hand. 
 
"Wait," he said. "I have never seen you before. I don't  even know 
properly who you are. None of you belong to my flock - for you are from 
Escampobar. are you not?" Sombre under their bony arches, his eyes 
fastened on her face, noticed the delicacy of features, the naive 
pertinacity of her stare. She said: 
 
"I am the daughter." 
 
"The daughter! . . . Oh! I see . . . Much evil is spoken of you." 
 
She said a little impatiently: "By that rabble?" and the priest 
remained mute for a moment. "What do they say? In my father's time they 
wouldn't  have dared to say anything. The only thing I saw of them for 
years and years was when they were yelping like curs on the heels of 
Scevola." 
 
The absence of scorn in her tone was perfectly annihilating. Gentle 
sounds flowed from her lips and a disturbing charm from her strange 
equanimity. The abb frowned heavily at these fascinations, which seemed 
to have in them something diabolic. 
 
"They are simple souls, neglected, fallen back into darkness. It isn't  
their fault. They have natural feelings of humanity which were outraged. 
I saved him from their indignation. There are things that must be left 
to divine justice." 
 
He was exasperated by the unconsciousness of that fair face. 
 
"That man whose name you have just pronounced and which I have heard 
coupled with the epithet of `blood-drinker' is regarded as the master of 
Escampobar Farm. He has been living there for years. How is that?" 
 
"Yes, it is a long time ago since he brought me back to the house. 
Years ago. Catherine let him stay." 
 
"Who is Catherine?" the abb asked harshly. 
 
"She is my father's sister who was left at home to wait. She had given 
up all hope of seeing any of us again, when one morning Scevola came 
with me to the door. Then she let him stay. He is a poor creature. What 
else could Catherine have done? And what is it to us up there how the 
people in the village regard him?" She dropped her eyes and seemed to 
fall into deep thought, then added, "It was only later that I 
discovered that he was a poor creature, even quite lately. They call him 
 blood-drinker,  do they? What of that? All the time he was afraid of 
his own shadow." 
 
She ceased but did not raise her eyes. 
 
"You are no longer a child," began the abb in a severe voice, frowning 
at her downcast eyes, and he heard a murmur: "Not very long." He 
disregarded it and continued: "I ask you, is this all that you have to 
tell me about that man? I hope that at least you are no hypocrite." 
 
"Monsieur l'Abb," she said, raising her eyes fearlessly, "what more 
am I to tell you about him? I can tell you things that will make your 
hair stand on end, but it wouldn't  be about him." 
 
For all answer the abb made a weary gesture and turned away to walk up 
and down the room. His face expressed neither curiosity nor pity, but a 
sort of repugnance which he made an effort to overcome. He dropped into 
a deep and shabby old armchair, the only object of luxury in the room, 
and pointed to a wooden straight-backed stool. Arlette sat down on it 
and began to speak. The abb listened, but looking far away; his big bony 
hands rested on the arms of the chair. After the first words he 
interrupted her: "This is your own story you are telling me." 
 
"Yes," said Arlette. 
 
"Is it necessary that I should know?" 
 
"Yes, Monsieur l'Abb." 
 
"But why?" 
 
He bent his head a little, without, however, ceasing to look far away. 
Her voice now was very low. Suddenly the abb threw himself back. 
 
"You want to tell me your story because you have fallen in love with a 
man?" 
 
"No, because that has brought me back to myself. Nothing else could 
have done it." 
 
He turned his head to look at her grimly, but he said nothing and looked 
away again. He listened. At the beginning he muttered once or twice, 
"Yes, I have heard that," and then kept silent, not looking at her at 
all. Once he interrupted her by a question: "You were confirmed before 
the convent was forcibly entered and the nuns dispersed?" 
 
"Yes," she said, "a year before that or more." 
 
"And then two of those ladies took you with them towards Toulon." 
 
"Yes, the other girls had their relations near by. They took me with 
them thinking to communicate with my parents, but it was difficult. Then 
the English came and my parents sailed over to try and get some news of 
me. It was safe for my father to be in Toulon then. Perhaps you think 
that he was a traitor to his country?" she asked, and waited with 
parted lips. With an impassible face the abb murmured: "He was a good 
Royalist," in a tone of bitter fatalism, which seemed to absolve that 
man and all the other men of whose actions and errors he had ever heard. 
 
For a long time, Arlette continued, her father could not discover the 
house where the nuns had taken refuge. He only obtained some information 
on the very day before the English evacuated Toulon. Late in the day he 
appeared before her and took her away. The town was full of retreating 
foreign troops. Her father left her with her mother and went out again 
to make preparations for sailing home that very night; but the tartane 
was no longer in the place where he had left her lying. The two Madrague 
men that he had for a crew had disappeared also. Thus the family was 
trapped in that town full of tumult and confusion. Ships and houses were 
bursting into flames. Appalling explosions of gunpowder shook the earth. 
She spent that night on her knees with her face hidden in her mother's 
lap, while her father kept watch by the barricaded door with a pistol in 
each hand. 
 
In the morning the house was filled with savage yells. People were heard 
rushing up the stairs, and the door was burst in. She jumped up at the 
crash and flung herself down on her knees in a corner with her face to 
the wall. There was a murderous uproar, she heard two shots fired, then 
somebody seized her by the arm and pulled her up to her feet. It was 
Scevola. He dragged her to the door. The bodies of her father and mother 
were lying across the doorway. The room was full of gunpowder smoke. She 
wanted to fling herself on the bodies and cling to them, but Scevola 
took her under the arms and lifted her over them. He seized her hand and 
made her run with him, or rather dragged her downstairs. Outside on the 
pavement some dreadful men and many fierce women with knives joined 
them. They ran along the streets brandishing pikes and sabres, pursuing 
other groups of unarmed people, who fled round corners with loud shrieks. 
 
"I ran in the midst of them, Monsieur l'Abb," Arlette went on in a 
breathless murmur. "Whenever I saw any water I wanted to throw myself 
into it, but I was surrounded on all sides, I was jostled and pushed and 
most of the time Scevola held my hand very tight. When they stopped at a 
wine shop, they would offer me some wine. My tongue stuck to the roof of 
my mouth and I drank. The wine, the pavements, the arms and faces, 
everything was red. I had red splashes all over me. I had to run with 
them all day, and all the time I felt as if I were falling down, and 
down, and down. The houses were nodding at me. The sun would go out at 
times. And suddenly I heard myself yelling exactly like the others. Do 
you understand, Monsieur I'Abb? The very same words!" 
 
The eyes of the priest in their deep orbits glided towards her and then 
resumed their far-away fixity. Between his fatalism and his faith he was 
not very far from the belief of Satan taking possession of rebellious 
mankind, exposing the nakedness of hearts like flint and of the 
homicidal souls of the Revolution. 
 
"I have heard something of that," he whispered stealthily. 
 
She affirmed with quiet earnestness: "Yet at that time I resisted with 
all my might." 
 
That night Scevola put her under the care of a woman called Perose. She 
was young and pretty and was a native of Arles, her mother's country. 
She kept an inn. That woman locked her up in her own room, which was 
next to the room where the patriots kept on shouting, singing and making 
speeches far into the night. Several times the woman would look in for a 
moment, make a hopeless gesture at her with both arms, and vanish again. 
Later, on many other nights when all the band lay asleep on benches and 
on the floor, Perose would steal into the room, fall on her knees by the 
bed on which Arlette sat upright, open-eyed, and raving silently to 
herself, embrace her feet and cry herself to sleep. But in the morning 
she would jump up briskly and say: "Come. The great affair is to keep 
our life in our bodies. Come along to help in the work of justice"; and 
they would join the band that was making ready for another day of 
traitor hunting. But after a time the victims, of which the streets were 
full at first, had to be sought for in back-yards, ferreted out of their 
hiding-places, dragged up out of the cellars, or down from the garrets 
of the houses, which would be entered by the band with howls of death 
and vengeance. 
 
"Then, Monsieur l'Abb,"  said Arlette, "I let myself go at last. I 
could resist no longer. I said to myself. `If it is so then it must be 
right.  But most of the time I was like a person half asleep and 
dreaming things that it is impossible to believe. About that time, I 
don't  know why, the woman Perose hinted to me that Scevola was a poor 
creature. Next night while all the band lay fast asleep in the big room 
Perose and Scevola helped me out of the window into the street and led 
me to the quay behind the arsenal. Scevola had found our tartane lying 
at the pontoon and one of the Madrague men with her. The other had 
disappeared. Perose fell on my neck and cried a little. She gave me a 
kiss and said: "My time will come soon. You, Scevola, don't  you show 
yourself in Toulon, because nobody believes in you any more. Adieu, 
Arlette. Vive la Nation!" and she vanished in the night. I waited on 
the pontoon shivering in my torn clothes, listening to Scevola and the 
man throwing dead bodies overboard out of the tartane. Splash, splash, 
splash. And suddenly I felt I must run away, but they were after me in a 
moment, dragged me back and threw me down into that cabin which smelt of 
blood. But when I got back to the farm all feeling had left me. I did 
not feel myself exist. I saw things round me here and there, but I 
couldn't  look at anything for long. Something was gone out of me. 1 know 
now that it was not my heart, but then I didn't  mind what it was. I felt 
light and empty, and a little cold all the time, but I could smile at 
people. Nothing could matter. Nothing could mean anything. I cared for 
no one. I wanted nothing. I wasn't  alive at all, Monsieur l'Abb. People 
seemed to see me and would talk to me, and it seemed funny - till one 
day I felt my heart beat." 
 
"Why precisely did you come to me with this tale?" asked the abb in a 
low voice. 
 
"Because you are a priest. Have you forgotten that I have been brought 
up in a convent? I have not forgotten how to pray. But I am afraid of 
the world now. What must I do?" 
 
"Repent!" thundered the abb, getting up. He saw her candid gaze 
uplifted and lowered his voice forcibly. "You must look with fearless 
sincerity into the darkness of your soul. Remember whence the only true 
help can come. Those whom God has visited by a trial such as yours can 
not be held guiltless of their enormities. Withdraw from the world. 
Descend within yourself and abandon the vain thoughts of what people 
call happiness. Be an example to yourself of the sinfulness of our 
nature and of the weakness of our humanity. You may have been possessed. 
What do I know? Perhaps it was permitted in order to lead your soul to 
saintliness through a life of seclusion and prayer. To that it would be 
my duty to help you. Meantime you must pray to be given strength for a 
complete renunciation." 
 
Arlette, lowering her eyes slowly, appealed to the abb as a symbolic 
figure of spiritual mystery. "What can be God's designs on this 
creature?" he asked himself. 
 
"Monsieur le Cur," she said quietly, "I felt the need to pray to-day 
for the first time in many years. When I left home it was only to go to 
your church." 
 
"The church stands open to the worst of sinners," said the abb. 
 
"I know. But I would have had to pass before all those villagers: and 
you, abb, know well what they are capable of." 
 
"Perhaps," murmured the abb, "it would be better not to put their 
charity to the test." 
 
"I must pray before I go back again. I thought you would let me come in 
through the sacristy." 
 
"It would be inhuman to refuse your request," he said, rousing himself 
and taking down a key that hung on the wall. He put on his broad-brimmed 
hat and without a word led the way through the wicket gate and along the 
path which he always used himself and which was out of sight of the 
village fountain. After they had entered the damp and dilapidated 
sacristy he locked the door behind them and only then opened another, a 
smaller one, leading into the church. When he stood aside, Arlette 
became aware of the chilly odour as of freshly turned-up earth mingled 
with a faint scent of incense. In the deep dusk of the nave a single 
little flame glimmered before an image of the virgin. The abb whispered 
as she passed on: 
 
"There before the great altar abase yourself and pray for grace and 
strength and mercy in this world full of crimes against God and men." 
 
She did not look at him. Through the thin soles of her shoes she could 
feel the chill of the flagstones. The abb left the door ajar, sat down 
on a rush-bottomed chair, the only one in the sacristy, folded his arms 
and let his chin fall on his breast. He seemed to be sleeping 
profoundly, but at the end of half an hour he got up and, going to the 
doorway, stood looking at the kneeling figure sunk low on the altar 
steps. Arlette's face was buried in her hands in a passion of piety and 
prayer. The abb waited patiently for a good many minutes more, before he 
raised his voice in a grave murmur which filled the whole dark place. 
 
"It is time for you to leave. I am going to ring for vespers." 
 
The view of her complete absorption before the Most High had touched 
him. He stepped back into the sacristy and after a time heard the 
faintest possible swish of the black silk skirt of the Escampobar 
daughter in her Arlesian costume. She entered the sacristy lightly with 
shining eyes, and the abb looked at her with some emotion. 
 
"You have prayed well, my daughter," he said. "No forgiveness will be 
refused to you, for you have suffered much. Put your trust in the grace 
of God." 
 
She raised her head and stayed her footsteps for a moment. In the dark 
little place he could see the gleam of her eyes swimming in tears. 
 
"Yes, Monsieur l'Abb," she said in her clear seductive voice. "I have 
prayed and I feel answered. I entreated the merciful God to keep the 
heart of the man I love always true to me or else to let me die before I 
set my eyes on him again." 
 
The abb paled under his tan of a village priest and leaned his shoulders 
against the wall without a word. 
 
 
After leaving the church by the sacristy door Arlette never looked back. 
The abb saw her flit past the presbytery, and the building hid her from 
his sight. He did not accuse her of duplicity. He had deceived himself. 
A heathen. White as her skin was, the blackness of her hair and of her 
eyes, the dusky red of her lips, suggested a strain of Saracen blood. He 
gave her up without a sigh. 
 
Arlette walked rapidly towards Escampobar as if she could not get there 
soon enough; but as she neared the first enclosed field her steps became 
slower and after hesitating awhile she sat down between two olive trees, 
near a wall bordered by a growth of thin grass at the foot. "And if I 
have been possessed," she argued to herself, "as the abb said, what is 
it to me as I am now? That evil spirit cast my true self out of my body 
and then cast away the body too. For years I have been living empty. 
There has been no meaning in anything." 
 
But now her true self had returned matured in its mysterious exile, 
hopeful and eager for love. She was certain that it had never been far 
away from that outcast body which Catherine had told her lately was fit 
for no man's arms. That was all that old woman knew about it, thought 
Arlette, not in scorn but rather in pity. She knew better, she had gone 
to heaven for truth in that long prostration with its ardent prayers and 
its moment of ecstasy before an unlighted altar. 
 
She knew its meaning well, and also the meaning of another - of a 
terrestrial revelation which had come to her that day at noon while she 
waited on the lieutenant. Everybody else was in the kitchen; she and Ral 
were as much alone together as had ever happened to them in their lives. 
That day she could not deny herself the delight to be near him, to watch 
him covertly, to hear him perhaps utter a few words, to experience that 
strange satisfying consciousness of her own existence which nothing but 
Ral's presence could give her; a sort of unimpassioned but all-absorbing 
bliss, warmth, courage, confidence! . . . She backed away from Ral's 
table, seated herself facing him and cast down her eyes. There was a 
great stillness in the salle except for the murmur of the voices in the 
kitchen. She had at first stolen a glance or two and then peeping again 
through her eyelashes, as it were, she saw his eyes rest on her with a 
peculiar meaning. This had never happened before. She jumped up, 
thinking that he wanted something, and while she stood in front of him 
with her hand resting on the table he stooped suddenly, pressed it to 
the table with his lips and began kissing it passionately without a 
sound, endlessly. . . . More startled than surprised at first, then 
infinitely happy, she was beginning to breathe quickly, when he left off 
and threw himself back in the chair. She walked away from the table and 
sat down again to gaze at him openly, steadily, without a smile. But he 
was not looking at her. His passionate lips were set hard now and his 
face had an expression of stern despair. No word passed between them. 
Brusquely he got up with averted eyes and went outside, leaving the food 
before him unfinished. 
 
In the usual course of things, on any other day, she would have got up 
and followed him, for she had always yielded to the fascination that had 
first roused her faculties. She would have gone out just to pass in 
front of him once or twice. But this time she had not obeyed what was 
stronger than fascination, something within herself which at the same 
time prompted and restrained her. She only raised her arm and looked at 
her hand. It was true. It had happened. He had kissed it. Formerly she 
cared not how gloomy he was as long as he remained somewhere where she 
could look at him - which she would do at every opportunity with an open 
and unbridled innocence. But now she knew better than to do that. She 
had got up, had passed through the kitchen, meeting without 
embarrassment Catherine's inquisitive glance, and had gone upstairs. 
When she came down after a time, he was nowhere to be seen, and 
everybody else too seemed to have gone into hiding; Michel, Peyrol, 
Scevola . . . But if she had met Scevola she would not have spoken to 
him. It was now a very long time since she had volunteered a 
conversation with Scevola. She guessed, however, that Scevola had simply 
gone to lie down in his lair, a narrow shabby room lighted by one glazed 
little window high up in the end wall. Catherine had put him in there on 
the very day he had brought her niece home and he had retained it for 
his own ever since. She could even picture him to herself in there 
stretched on his pallet. She was capable of that now. Formerly, for 
years after her return, people that were out of her sight were out of 
her mind also. Had they run away and left her she would not have thought 
of them at all. She would have wandered in and out of the empty house 
and round the empty fields without giving anybody a thought. Peyrol was 
the first human being she had noticed for years. Peyrol, since he had 
come, had always existed for her. And as a matter of fact the rover was 
generally very much in evidence about the farm. That afternoon, however, 
even Peyrol was not to be seen. Her uneasiness began to grow, but she 
felt a strange reluctance to go into the kitchen where she knew her aunt 
would be sitting in the armchair like a presiding genius of the house 
taking its rest, and unreadable in her immobility. And yet she felt she 
must talk about Ral to somebody. This was how the idea of going down to 
the church had come to her. She would talk of him to the priest and to 
God. The force of old associations asserted itself. She had been taught 
to believe that one could tell everything to a priest, and that the 
omnipotent God who know everything could be prayed to, asked for grace, 
for strength, for mercy, for protection, for pity. She had done it and 
felt she had been heard. 
 
Her heart had quietened down while she rested under the wall. Pulling 
out a long stalk of grass she twined it round her fingers absently. The 
veil of cloud had thickened over her head, early dusk had descended upon 
the earth, and she had not found out what had become of Ral. She jumped 
to her feet wildly. But directly she had done that she felt the need of 
self-control. It was with her usual light step that she approached the 
front of the house and for the first time in her life perceived how 
barren and sombre it looked when Ral was not about. She slipped in 
quietly through the door of the main building and ran upstairs. It was 
dark on the landing. She passed by the door leading into the room 
occupied by her aunt and herself. It had been her father and mother's 
bedroom. The other big room was the lieutenant's during his visits to 
Escampobar. Without even a rustle of her dress, like a shadow, she 
glided along the passage, turned the handle without noise and went in. 
After shutting the door behind her she listened. There was no sound in 
the house. Scevola was either already down in the yard or still lying 
open-eyed on his tumbled pallet in raging sulks about something. She had 
once accidentally caught, him at it, down on his face, one eye and cheek 
of which were buried in the pillow, the other eye glaring savagely, and 
had been scared away by a thick mutter: "Keep off. Don't  approach me." 
And all this had meant nothing to her then. 
 
Having ascertained that the inside of the house was as still as the 
grave, Arlette walked across to the window, which when the lieutenant 
was occupying the room stood always open and with the shutter pushed 
right back against the wall. It was of course uncurtained, and as she 
came near to it Arlette caught sight of Peyrol coming down the hill on 
his return from the lookout. His white head gleamed like silver against 
the slope of the ground and by and by passed out of her sight, while her 
ear caught the sound of his footsteps below the window. They passed into 
the house, but she did not hear him come upstairs. He had gone into the 
kitchen. To Catherine. They would talk about her and Eugne. But what 
would they say? She was so new to life that everything appeared 
dangerous: talk, attitudes, glances. She felt frightened at the mere 
idea of silence between those two. It was possible. Suppose they didn't  
say anything to each other. That would be awful. 
 
Yet she remained calm like a sensible person, who knows that rushing 
about in excitement is not the way to meet unknown dangers. She swept 
her eyes over the room and saw the lieutenant's valise in a corner. That 
was really what she had wanted to see. He wasn't  gone then. But it 
didn't  tell her, though she opened it, what had become of him. As to his 
return, she had no doubt whatever about that. He had always returned. 
She noticed particularly a large packet sewn up in sail-cloth and with 
three large red seals on the seam. It didn't , however, arrest her 
thoughts. Those were still hovering about Catherine and Peyrol 
downstairs. How changed they were. Had they ever thought that she was 
mad? She became indignant. "How could I have prevented that?" she 
asked herself with despair. She sat down on the edge of the bed in her 
usual attitude, her feet crossed, her hands lying in her lap. She felt 
on one of them the impress off Ral's lips, soothing, reassuring like 
every certitude, but she was aware of a still remaining confusion in her 
mind, an indefinite weariness like the strain of an imperfect vision 
trying to discern shifting outlines, floating shapes, incomprehensible 
signs. She could not resist the temptation of resting her tired body, 
just for a little while. 
 
She lay down on the very edge of the bed, the kissed hand tucked under 
her cheek. The faculty of thinking abandoned her altogether, but she 
remained open-eyed, wide awake. In that position, without hearing the 
slightest sound, she saw the door handle move down as far as it would 
go, perfectly noiseless, as though the lock had been oiled not long 
before. Her impulse was to leap right out into the middle of the room, 
but she restrained herself and only swung herself into a sitting 
posture. The bed had not creaked. She lowered her feet gently to the 
ground, and by the time when holding her breath she put her ear against 
the door, the handle had come back into position. She had detected no 
sound outside. Not the faintest. Nothing. It never occurred to her to 
doubt her own eyes, but the whole thing had been so noiseless that it 
could not have disturbed the lightest sleeper. She was sure that had she 
been lying on her other side, that is with her back to the door, she 
would have known nothing. It was some time before she walked away from 
the door and sat on a chair which stood near a heavy and much-carved 
table, an heirloom more appropriate to a chteau than to a farmhouse. The 
dust of many months covered its smooth oval surface of dark, finely 
grained wood. 
 
"It must have been Scevola," thought Arlette. It could have been no 
one else. What could he have wanted? She gave herself up to thought, but 
really she did not care. The absent Ral occupied all her mind. With an 
unconscious slowness her finger traced in the dust on the table the 
initials E A and achieved a circle round them. Then she jumped up, 
unlocked the door and went downstairs. In the kitchen, as she fully 
expected, she found Scevola with the others. Directly she appeared he 
got up and ran upstairs, but returned almost immediately looking as if 
he had seen a ghost, and when Peyrol asked him some insignificant 
question his lips and even his chin trembled before he could command his 
voice. He avoided looking anybody in the face. The others too seemed shy 
of meeting each other's eyes, and the evening meal of the Escampobar 
seemed haunted by the absent lieutenant. Peyrol, besides, had his 
prisoner to think of. His existence presented a most interesting 
problem, and the proceedings of the English ship were another, closely 
connected with it and full of dangerous possibilities. Catherine's black 
and ungleaming eyes seemed to have sunk deeper in their sockets, but her 
face wore its habitual severe aloofness of expression. Suddenly Scevola 
spoke as if in answer to some thought of his own. 
 
"What has lost us was moderation." 
 
Peyrol swallowed the piece of bread and butter which he had been 
masticating slowly, and asked: 
 
"What are you alluding to, citoyen?" 
 
"I am alluding to the republic," answered Scevola, in a more assured 
tone than usual. "Moderation I say. We patriots held our hand too soon. 
All the children of the ci-devants and all the children of traitors 
should have been killed together with their fathers and mothers. 
Contempt for civic virtues and love of tyranny were inborn in them all. 
They grow up and trample on all the sacred principles. . . . The work of 
the Terror is undone!" 
 
"What do you propose to do about it?" growled Peyrol. "No use 
declaiming here or anywhere for that matter. You wouldn't  find anybody 
to listen to you - you cannibal," he added in a good-humoured tone. 
Arlette, leaning her head on her left hand, was tracing with the 
forefinger of her right invisible initials on the table-cloth. 
Catherine, stooping to light a four-beaked oil lamp mounted on a brass 
pedestal, turned her finely carved face over her shoulder. The 
sans-culotte jumped up, flinging his arms about. His hair was tousled 
from his sleepless tumbling on his pallet. The unbuttoned sleeves of his 
shirt flapped against his thin hairy forearms. He no longer looked as 
though he had seen a ghost. He opened a wide black mouth, but Peyrol 
raised his finger at him calmly. 
 
"No, no. The time when your own people up La Boyre way - don't  they 
live up there? - trembled at the idea of you coming to visit them with a 
lot of patriot scallywags at your back is past. You have nobody at your 
back; and if you started spouting like this at large, people would rise 
up and hunt you down like a mad dog." 
 
Scevola, who had shut his mouth, glanced over his shoulder, and as if 
impressed by his unsupported state went out of the kitchen, reeling, 
like a man who had been drinking. He had drunk nothing but water. Peyrol 
looked thoughtfully at the door which the indignant sans-culotte had 
slammed after him. During the colloquy between the two men, Arlette had 
disappeared into the salle. Catherine, straightening her long back, put 
the oil lamp with its four smoky flames on the table. It lighted her 
face from below. Peyrol moved it slightly aside before he spoke. 
 
"It was lucky for you," he said, gazing upwards, "that Scevola hadn't  
even one other like himself when he came here." 
 
"Yes,"  she admitted. "I had to face him alone from first to last. But 
can you see me between him and Arlette? In those days he raved terribly, 
but he was dazed and tired out. Afterwards I recovered myself and I 
could argue with him firmly. I used to say to him, `Look, she is so 
young and she has no knowledge of herself.  Why, for months the only 
thing she would say that one could understand was `Look how it spurts, 
look how it splashes!" He talked to me of his republican virtue. He was 
not a profligate. He could wait. She was, he said, sacred to him, and 
things like that. He would walk up and down for hours talking of her and 
I would sit there listening to him with the key of the room the child 
was locked in, in my pocket. I temporized, and, as you say yourself, it 
was perhaps because he had no one at his back that he did not try to 
kill me, which he might have done any day. I temporized. And after all, 
why should he want to kill me? He told me more than once he was sure to 
have Arlette for his own. Many a time he made me shiver explaining why 
it must be so. She owed her life to him. Oh! that dreadful crazy life. 
You know he is one of those men that can be patient as far as women are 
concerned." 
 
Peyrol nodded understandingly. "Yes, some are like that. That kind is 
more impatient sometimes to spill blood. Still I think that your life 
was one long narrow escape, at least till I turned up here." 
 
"Things had settled down, somehow," murmured Catherine. "But all the 
same I was glad when you appeared here, a grey-headed man, serious." 
 
"Grey hairs will come to any sort of man," observed Peyrol acidly, 
"and you did not know me. You don't  know anything of me even now." 
 
"There have been Peyrols living less than half a day's journey from 
here," observed Catherine in a reminiscent tone. 
 
"That's all right," said the rover in such a peculiar tone that she 
asked him sharply: "What's the matter? Aren't  you one of them? Isn't  
Peyrol your name?" 
 
"I have had many names and this was one of them. So this name and my 
grey hair pleased you, Catherine? They gave you confidence in me, hein?" 
 
"I wasn't  sorry to see you come. Scevola too, I believe. He heard that 
patriots were being hunted down, here and there, and he was growing 
quieter every day. You roused the child wonderfully." 
 
"And did that please Scevola too?" 
 
"Before you came she never spoke to anybody unless first spoken to. She 
didn't  seem to care where she was. At the same time," added Catherine 
after a pause, 'she didn't  care what happened to her either. Oh, I have 
had some heavy hours thinking it all over, in the daytime doing my work, 
and at night while I lay awake, listening to her breathing. And I 
growing older all the time, and, who knows, with my last hour ready to 
strike. I often thought that when I felt it coming I would speak to you 
as I am speaking to you now." 
 
"Oh, you did think," said Peyrol in an undertone. "Because of my grey 
hairs, I suppose." 
 
"Yes. And because you came from beyond the seas," Catherine said with 
unbending mien and in an unflinching voice. "Don't  you know that the 
first time Arlette saw you she spoke to you and that it was the first 
time I heard her speak of her own accord since she had been brought back 
by that man, and I had to wash her from head to foot before I put her 
into her mother's bed." 
 
"The first time," repeated Peyrol. 
 
"It was like a miracle happening," said Catherine, "and it was you 
that had done it." 
 
"Then it must be that some Indian witch has given me the power," 
muttered Peyrol, so low that Catherine could not hear the words. But she 
did not seem to care, and presently went on again: 
 
"And the child took to you wonderfully. Some sentiment was aroused in 
her at last." 
 
"Yes," assented Peyrol grimly. "She did take to me. She learned to 
talk to - the old man." 
 
"It's something in you that seems to have opened her mind and unloosed 
her tongue," said Catherine, speaking with a sort of regal composure 
down at Peyrol, like a chieftainess of a tribe. "I often used to look 
from afar at you two talking and wonder what she . . ." 
 
"She talked like a child," struck in Peyrol abruptly. "And so you 
were going to speak to me before your last hour came. Why, you are not 
making ready to die yet?" 
 
"Listen, Peyrol. If anybody's last hour is near it isn't  mine. You just 
look about you a little. It was time I spoke to you." 
 
"Why, I am not going to kill anybody," muttered Peyrol. "You are 
getting strange ideas into your head." 
 
"It is as I said," insisted Catherine without animation. "Death seems 
to cling to her skirts. She has been running with it madly. Let us keep 
her feet out of more human blood." 
 
Peyrol, who had let his head fall on his breast, jerked it up suddenly. 
"What on earth are you talking about?" he cried angrily. "I don't  
understand you at all." 
 
"You have not seen the state she was in when I got her back into my 
hands," remarked Catherine. . . . "I suppose you know where the 
lieutenant is. What made him go off like that? Where did he go to?" 
 
"I know," said Peyrol. "And he may be back to-night." 
 
"You know where he is! And of course you know why he has gone away and 
why he is coming back," pronounced Catherine in an ominous voice. 
"Well, you had better tell him that unless he has a pair of eyes at the 
back of his head he had better not return here - not return at all; for 
if he does, nothing can save him from a treacherous blow." 
 
"No man was ever safe from treachery," opined Peyrol after a moment's 
silence. "I won't  pretend not to understand what you mean." 
 
"You heard as well as I what Scevola said just before he went out. The 
lieutenant is the child of some ci-devant and Arlette of a man they 
called a traitor to his country. You can see yourself what was in his 
mind." 
 
"He is a chicken-hearted spouter," said Peyrol contemptuously, but it 
did not affect Catherine's attitude of an old sibyl risen from the 
tripod to prophesy calmly atrocious disasters. "It's all his 
republicanism," commented Peyrol with increased scorn. "He has got a 
fit of it on." 
 
"No, that's jealousy," said Catherine. "Maybe he has ceased to care 
for her in all these years. It is a long time since he has left off 
worrying me. With a creature like that I thought that if I let him be 
master here . . . But no! I know that after the lieutenant started 
coming here his awful fancies have come back. He is not sleeping at 
night. His republicanism is always there. But don't  you know, Peyrol, 
that there may be jealousy without love?" 
 
"You think so," said the rover profoundly. He pondered full of his own 
experience. "And he has tasted blood too," he muttered after a pause. 
"You may be right." 
 
"I may be right," repeated Catherine in a slightly indignant tone. 
"Every time I see Arlette near him I tremble lest it should come to 
words and to a bad blow. And when they are both out of my sight it is 
still worse. At this moment I am wondering where they are. They may be 
together and I daren't  raise my voice to call her away for fear of 
rousing his fury." 
 
"But it's the lieutenant he is after," observed Peyrol in a lowered 
voice. "Well, I can't  stop the lieutenant coming back." 
 
"Where is she? Where is he?" whispered Catherine in a tone betraying 
her secret anguish. 
 
Peyrol rose quietly and went into the salle, leaving the door open. 
Catherine heard the latch of the outer door being lifted cautiously. In 
a few moments Peyrol returned as quietly as he had gone out. 
 
"I stepped out to look at the weather. The moon is about to rise and 
the clouds have thinned down. One can see a star here and there." He 
lowered his voice considerably. "Arlette is sitting on the bench 
humming a little song to herself. I really wonder whether she knew I was 
standing within a few feet of her." 
 
"She doesn't  want to hear or see anybody except one man," affirmed 
Catherine, now in complete control of her voice. "And she was humming a 
song, did you say? She who would sit for hours without making a sound. 
And God knows what song it could have been!" 
 
"Yes, there's a great change in her," admitted Peyrol with a heavy 
sigh. "This lieutenant," he continued after a pause, "has always 
behaved coldly to her. I noticed him many times turn his face away when 
he saw her coming towards us. You know what these epaulette-wearers are, 
Catherine. And then this one has some worm of his own that is gnawing at 
him. I doubt whether he has ever forgotten that he was a ci-devant boy. 
Yet I do believe that she does not want to see and hear anybody but him. 
Is it because she has been deranged in her head for so long?" 
 
"No, Peyrol," said the old woman. "It isn't  that. You want to know 
how I can tell? For years nothing could make her either laugh or cry. 
You know that yourself. You have seen her every day. Would you believe 
that within the last month she has been both crying and laughing on my 
breast without knowing why?" 
 
"This I don't  understand," said Peyrol. 
 
"But I do. That lieutenant has got only to whistle to make her run 
after him. Yes, Peyrol. That is so. She has no fear, no shame, no pride. 
I myself have been nearly like that." Her fine brown face seemed to 
grow more impassive before she went on much lower and as if arguing with 
herself: "Only I at least was never blood-mad. I was fit for any man's 
arms. . . . But then that man is not a priest." 
 
The last words made Peyrol start. He had almost forgotten that story. He 
said to himself: "She knows, she has had the experience." 
 
"Look here, Catherine," he said decisively, "the lieutenant is coming 
back. He will be here probably about midnight. But one thing I can tell 
you: he is not coming back to whistle her away. Oh, no! It is not for 
her sake that he will come back." 
 
"Well, if it isn't  for her that he is coming back then it must be 
because death has beckoned to him," she announced in a tone of solemn 
unemotional conviction. "A man who has received a sign from death 
 - nothing can stop him!" 
 
Peyrol, who had seen death face to face many times, looked at 
Catherine's fine brown profile curiously. 
 
"It is a fact," he murmured, "that men who rush out to seek death do 
not often find it. So one must have a sign? What sort of sign would it be?" 
 
"How is anybody to know?" asked Catherine, staring across the kitchen 
at the wall. "Even those to whom it is made do not recognize it for 
what it is. But they obey all the same. I tell you, Peyrol, nothing can 
stop them. It may be a glance, or a smile, or a shadow on the water, or 
a thought that passes through the head. For my poor brother and 
sister-in-law it was the face of their child." 
 
Peyrol folded his arms on his breast and dropped his head. Melancholy 
was a sentiment to which he was a stranger; for what has melancholy to 
do with the life of a sea-rover, a Brother of the Coast, a simple, 
venturesome, precarious life, full of risks and leaving no time for 
introspection or for that momentary self-forgetfulness which is called 
gaiety. Sombre fury, fierce merriment, he had known in passing gusts, 
coming from outside; but never this intimate inward sense of the vanity 
of all things, that doubt of the power within himself. 
 
"I wonder what the sign for me will be," he thought; and concluded 
with self-contempt that for him there would be no sign, that he would 
have to die in his bed like an old yard dog in his kennel. Having 
reached that depth of despondency, there was nothing more before him but 
a black gulf into which his consciousness sank like a stone. 
 
The silence which had lasted perhaps a minute after Catherine had 
finished speaking was traversed suddenly by a clear high voice saying: 
 
"What are you two plotting here?" 
 
Arlette stood in the doorway of the salle. The gleam of light in the 
whites of her eyes set off her black and penetrating glance. The 
surprise was complete. The profile of Catherine, who was standing by the 
table, became if possible harder; a sharp carving of an old prophetess 
of some desert tribe. Arlette made three steps forward. In Peyrol even 
extreme astonishment was deliberate. He had been famous for never 
looking as though he had been caught unprepared. Age had accentuated 
that trait of a born leader. He only slipped off the edge of the table 
and said in his deep voice: 
 
"Why, patronne! We haven't  said a word to each other for ever so long." 
 
Arlette moved nearer still. "I know," she cried. "It was horrible. I 
have been watching you two. Scevola came and dumped himself on the bench 
close to me. He began to talk to me, and so I went away. That man bores 
me. And here I find you people saying nothing. It's insupportable. What 
has come to you both? Say, you, Papa Peyrol - don't  you like me any 
more?" Her voice filled the kitchen. Peyrol went to the salle door and 
shut it. While coming back he was staggered by the brilliance of life 
within her that seemed to pale the flames of the lamp. He said half in jest: 
 
"I don't  know whether I didn't  like you better when you were quieter." 
 
"And you would like best to see me still quieter in my grave." 
 
She dazzled him. Vitality streamed out of her eyes, her lips, her whole 
person, enveloped her like a halo and . . . yes, truly, the faintest 
possible flush had appeared on her cheeks, played on them faintly rosy 
like the light of a distant flame on the snow. She raised her arms up in 
the air and let her hands fall from on high on Peyrol's shoulders, 
captured his desperately dodging eyes with her black and compelling 
glance, put out all her instinctive seduction - while he felt a growing 
fierceness in the grip of her fingers. 
 
"No! I can't  hold it in! Monsieur Peyrol, Papa Peyrol, old gunner, you 
horrid sea-wolf, be an angel and tell me where he is." 
 
The rover, whom only that morning the powerful grasp of Lieutenant Ral 
found as unshakable as a rock, felt all his strength vanish under the 
hands of that woman. He said thickly: 
 
"He has gone to Toulon. He had to go." 
 
"What for? Speak the truth to me!" 
 
"Truth is not for everybody to know," mumbled Peyrol, with a sinking 
sensation as though the very ground were going soft under his feet. "On 
service," he added in a growl. 
 
Her hands slipped suddenly from his big shoulders. "On service?" she 
repeated. "What service?" Her voice sank and the words "Oh, yes! His 
service" were hardly heard by Peyrol, who as soon as her hands had left 
his shoulders felt his strength returning to him and the yielding earth 
grow firm again under his feet. Right in front of him Arlette, silent, 
with her arms hanging down before her with entwined fingers, seemed 
stunned because Lieutenant Ral was not free from all earthly 
connections, like a visiting angel from heaven depending only on God to 
whom she had prayed. She had to share him with some service that could 
order him about. She felt in herself a strength, a power, greater than 
any service. 
 
"Peyrol," she cried low, "don't  break my heart, my new heart, that 
has just begun to beat. Feel how it beats. Who could bear it?" She 
seized the rover's thick hairy paw and pressed it hard against her 
breast. "Tell me when he will be back." 
 
"Listen, patronne, you had better go upstairs," began Peyrol with a 
great effort and snatching his captured hand away. He staggered 
backwards a little while Arlette shouted at him: 
 
"You can't  order me about as you used to do." In all the changes from 
entreaty to anger she never struck a false note, so that her emotional 
outburst had the heart-moving power of inspired art. She turned round 
with a tempestuous swish to Catherine who had neither stirred nor 
emitted a sound: "Nothing you two can do will make any difference 
now." The next moment she was facing Peyrol again. "You frighten me 
with your white hairs. Come! . . . am I to go on my knees to you? . . . 
There!" 
 
The rover caught her under the elbows, swung her up clear of the ground, 
and set her down on her feet as if she had been a child. Directly he had 
let her go, she stamped her foot at him. 
 
"Are you stupid?" she cried. "Don't  you understand that something has 
happened to-day?" 
 
Through all this scene Peyrol had kept his head as creditably as could 
have been expected, in the manner of a seaman caught by a white squall 
in the tropics. But at those words a dozen thoughts tried to rush 
together through his mind, in chase of that startling declaration. 
Something had happened! Where? How? Whom to? What thing? It couldn't  be 
anything between her and the lieutenant. He had, it seemed to him, never 
lost sight of the lieutenant from the first hour when they met in the 
morning till he had sent him off to Toulon by an actual push on the 
shoulder; except while he was having his dinner in the next room with 
the door open, and for the few minutes spent in talking with Michel in 
the yard. But that was only a very few minutes, and directly afterwards 
the first sight of the lieutenant sitting gloomily on the bench like a 
lonely crow did not suggest either elation or excitement or any emotion 
connected with a woman. In the face of these difficulties Peyrol's mind 
became suddenly a blank. "Voyons, patronne," he began, unable to think 
of anything else to say. "What's all this fuss about? I expect him to 
be back here about midnight." 
 
He was extremely relieved to notice that she believed him. It was the 
truth. For indeed he did not know what he could have invented on the 
spur of the moment that would get her out of the way and induce her to 
go to bed. She treated him to a sinister frown and a terribly menacing, 
"If you have lied . . . Oh!" 
 
He produced an indulgent smile. "Compose yourself. He will be here soon 
after midnight. You may go to sleep with an easy mind." 
 
She turned her back on him contemptuously, and said curtly, "Come 
along, aunt," and went to the door leading to the passage. There she 
turned for a moment with her hand on the door handle. 
 
"You are changed. I can't  trust either of you. You are not the same 
people." 
 
She went out. Only then did Catherine detach her gaze from the wall to 
meet Peyrol's eyes. "Did you hear what she said? We! Changed! It is she 
herself . . ." 
 
Peyrol nodded twice and there was a long pause, during which even the 
flames of the lamp did not stir. 
 
"Go after her, Mademoiselle Catherine," he said at last with a shade 
of sympathy in his tone. She did not move. "Allons - du courage," he 
urged her deferentially as it were. "Try to put her to sleep." 
 
 
Upright and deliberate, Catherine left the kitchen, and in the passage 
outside found Arlette waiting for her with a lighted candle in her hand. 
Her heart was filled with sudden desolation by the beauty of that young 
face enhaloed in the patch of light, with the profound darkness as of a 
dungeon for a background. At once her niece led the way upstairs 
muttering savagely through her pretty teeth: "He thinks I could go to 
sleep. Old imbecile!" 
 
Peyrol did not take his eyes off Catherine's straight back till the door 
had closed after her. Only then he relieved himself by letting the air 
escape through his pursed lips and rolling his eyes freely about. He 
picked up the lamp by the ring on the top of the central rod and went 
into the salle, closing behind him the door of the dark kitchen. He 
stood the lamp on the very table on which Lieutenant Ral had had his 
midday meal. A small white cloth was still spread on it and there was 
his chair askew as he had pushed it back when he got up. Another of the 
many chairs in the salle was turned round conspicuously to face the 
table. These things made Peyrol remark to himself bitterly: "She sat 
and stared at him as if he had been gilt all over, with three heads and 
seven arms on his body" - a comparison reminiscent of certain idols he 
had seen in an Indian temple. Though not an iconoclast, Peyrol felt 
positively sick at the recollection, and hastened to step outside. The 
great cloud had broken up and the mighty fragments were moving to the 
westward in stately flight before the rising moon. Scevola, who had been 
lying extended full length on the bench, swung himself up suddenly, very 
upright. 
 
"Had a little nap in the open?" asked Peyrol, letting his eyes roam 
through the luminous space under the departing rearguard of the clouds 
jostling each other up there. 
 
"I did not sleep," said the sans-culotte. "I haven't  closed my 
eyes-not for one moment." 
 
"That must be because you weren't  sleepy," suggested the deliberate 
Peyrol, whose thoughts were far away with the English ship. His mental 
eye contemplated her black image against the white beach of the Salins 
describing a sparkling curve under the moon, and meantime he went on 
slowly: "For it could not have been noise that kept you awake." On the 
level of Escampobar the shadows lay long on the ground while the side of 
the lookout hill remained yet black but edged with an increasing 
brightness. And the amenity of the stillness was such that if softened 
for a moment Peyrol's hard inward attitude towards all mankind, 
including even the captain of the English ship. The old rover savoured a 
moment of serenity in the midst of his cares. 
 
"This is an accursed spot," declared Scevola suddenly. 
 
Peyrol, without turning his head, looked at him sideways. Though he had 
sprung up from his reclining posture smartly enough, the citizen had 
gone slack all over and was sitting all in a heap. His shoulders were 
hunched up, his hands reposed on his knees. With his staring eyes he 
resembled a sick child in the moonlight. 
 
"It's the very spot for hatching treacheries. One feels steeped in them 
up to the neck." 
 
He shuddered and yawned a long irresistible nervous yawn with the gleam 
of unexpected long canines in a retracted, gaping mouth giving away the 
restless panther lurking in the man. 
 
"Oh, yes, there's treachery about right enough. You couldn't  conceive 
that, citoyen?" 
 
"Of course I couldn't ," assented Peyrol with serene contempt. "What 
is this treachery that you are concocting?" he added carelessly, in a 
social way, while enjoying the charm of a moonlit evening. Scevola, who 
did not expect that turn, managed, however, to produce a rattling sort 
of laugh almost at once. 
 
"That's a good one. Ha! ha! ha! . . . Me! . . . concocting! . . . Why me?" 
 
"Well," said Peyrol carelessly, "there are not many of us to carry 
out treacheries about here. The women are gone upstairs; Michel is down 
at the tartane. There's me, and you would not dare suspect me of 
treachery. Well, there remains only you." 
 
Scevola roused himself. "This is not much of a jest," he said. "I 
have been a treason-hunter. I . . ." 
 
He checked that strain. He was full of purely emotional suspicions. 
Peyrol was talking like this only to annoy him and to get him out of the 
way; but in the particular state of his feelings Scevola was acutely 
aware of every syllable of these offensive remarks. "Aha," he thought 
to himself, "he doesn't  mention the lieutenant." This omission seemed 
to the patriot of immense importance. If Peyrol had not mentioned the 
lieutenant it was because those two had been plotting some treachery 
together, all the afternoon on board that tartane. That's why nothing 
had been seen of them for the best part of the day. As a matter of fact, 
Scevola too had observed Peyrol returning to the farm in the evening, 
only he had observed him from another window than Arlette. This was a 
few minutes before his attempt to open the lieutenant's door, in order 
to find out whether Ral was in his room. He had tiptoed away, uncertain, 
and going into the kitchen had found only Catherine and Peyrol there. 
Directly Arlette joined them a sudden inspiration made him run upstairs 
and try the door again. It was open now! A clear proof that it was 
Arlette who had been locked up in there. The discovery that she made 
herself at home like this in the lieutenant's room gave Scevola such a 
sickening shock that he thought he would die of it. It was beyond doubt 
now that the lieutenant had been conspiring with Peyrol down on board 
that tartane; for what else could they have been doing there? "But why 
had not Ral come up in the evening with Peyrol?" Scevola asked himself, 
sitting on the bench with his hands clasped between his knees. . . . 
It's their cunning," he concluded suddenly. "Conspirators always avoid 
being seen together. Ha!" 
 
It was as if somebody had let off a lot of fireworks in his brain. He 
was illuminated, dazzled, confused, with a hissing in his cars and 
showers of sparks before alone. Peyrol had vanished. Scevola seemed to 
remember that he had heard somebody pronounce the word "good-night" 
and the door of the salle slam. And sure enough the door of the salle 
was shut now. A dim light shone in the window that was next to it. 
Peyrol had extinguished three of the lamp flames and was now reclining 
on one of the long tables with that faculty of accommodating himself to 
a plank an old sea-dog never loses. He had decided to remain below 
simply to be handy, and he didn't  lie down on one of the benches along 
the wall because they were too narrow. He left one wick burning, so that 
the lieutenant should know where to look for him, and he was tired 
enough to think that he would snatch a couple of hours' sleep before Ral 
could return from Toulon. He settled himself with one arm under his head 
as if he were on the deck of a privateer, and it never occurred to him 
that Scevola was looking through the panes; but they were so small and 
dusty that the patriot could see nothing. His movement had been purely 
instinctive. He wasn't  even aware that he had looked in. He went away 
from there, walked to the end of the building, spun round and walked 
back again to the other end; and it was as if he had been afraid of 
going beyond the wall against which he reeled sometimes. "Conspiracy, 
conspiracy," he thought. He was now absolutely certain that the 
lieutenant was still hiding in that tartane, and was only waiting till 
all was quiet to sneak back to his room in which Scevola had proof 
positive that Arlette was in the habit of making herself at home. To rob 
him of his right to Arlette was part of the conspiracy no doubt. 
 
"Have I been a slave to those two women, have I waited all those years, 
only to see that corrupt creature go off infamously with a ci-devant, 
with a conspiring aristocrat?" 
 
He became giddy with virtuous fury. There was enough evidence there for 
any revolutionary tribunal to cut all their heads off. Tribunal! There 
was no tribunal! No revolutionary justice! No patriots! He hit his 
shoulder against the wall in his distress with such force that he 
rebounded. This world was no place for patriots. 
 
"If I had betrayed myself in the kitchen they would have murdered me in 
there." 
 
As it was he thought that he had said too much. Too much. "Prudence! 
Caution!" he repeated to himself, gesticulating with both arms. 
Suddenly he stumbled and there was an amazing metallic clatter made by 
something that fell at his feet. 
 
"They are trying to kill me now," he thought, shaking with fright. He 
gave himself up for dead. Profound silence reigned all round. Nothing 
more happened. He stooped fearfully to look and recognized his own 
stable fork lying on the ground. He remembered he had left it at noon 
leaning against the wall. His own foot had made it fall. He threw 
himself upon it greedily. "Here's what I need," he muttered 
feverishly. "I suppose that by now the lieutenant would think I am gone 
to bed." 
 
He flattened himself upright against the wall with the fork held along 
his body like a grounded musket. The moon clearing the hill-top flooded 
suddenly the front of the house with its cold light, but he didn't  know 
it; he imagined himself still to be ambushed in the shadow and remained 
motionless, glaring at the path leading towards the cove. His teeth 
chattered with savage impatience. 
 
He was so plainly visible in his death-like rigidity that Michel, coming 
up out of the ravine, stopped dead short, believing him an apparition 
not belonging to this earth. Scevola, on his side, noticed the moving 
shadow cast by a man - that man! - and charged forward without 
reflection, the prongs of the fork lowered like a bayonet. He didn't  
shout. He came straight on, growling like a dog, and lunged headlong 
with his weapon. 
 
Michel, a primitive, untroubled by anything so uncertain as 
intelligence, executed an instantaneous sideways leap with the precision 
of a wild animal; but he was enough of a man to become afterwards 
paralyzed with astonishment. The impetus of the rush carried Scevola 
several yards down the hill, before he could turn round and assume an 
offensive attitude. Then the two adversaries recognized each other. The 
terrorist exclaimed: "Michel?" and Michel hastened to pick up a large 
stone from the ground. 
 
"Hey, you, Scevola," he cried, not very loud but very threatening. 
"What are these tricks? . . . Keep away, or I will heave that piece of 
rock at your head, and I am good at that." 
 
Scevola grounded the fork with a thud. "I didn't  recognize you," he said. 
 
"That's a story. Who did you think I was? Not the other! I haven't  got 
a bandaged head, have I?" 
 
Scevola began to scramble up. "What's this?" he asked. "What head, 
did you say?" 
 
"I say that if you come near I will knock you over with that stone," 
answered Michel. "You aren't  to be trusted when the moon is full. Not 
recognize! There's a silly excuse for flying at people like this. You 
haven't  got anything against me, have you?" 
 
"No," said the ex-terrorist in a dubious tone and keeping a watchful 
eye on Michel, who was still holding the stone in his hand. 
 
"People have been saying for years that you are a kind of lunatic," 
Michel criticized fearlessly, because the other's discomfiture was 
evident enough to put heart into the timid hare. "If a fellow cannot 
come up now to get a snooze in the shed without being run at with a 
fork, well . . ." 
 
"I was only going to put this fork away," Scevola burst out volubly. 
"I had left it leaning against the wall, and as I. was passing along I 
suddenly saw it, so I thought I would put it in the stable before I went 
to bed. That's all." 
 
Michel's mouth fell open a bit. 
 
"Now what do you think I would want with a stable fork at this time of 
night, if it wasn't  to put it away?" argued Scevola. 
 
"What indeed!" mumbled Michel, who began to doubt the evidence of his 
senses. 
 
"You go about mooning like a fool and imagine a lot of silly things, 
you great, stupid imbecile. All I wanted to do was to ask whether 
everything was all right down there, and you, idiot, bound to one side 
like a goat and pick up a stone. The moon has affected your head, not 
mine. Now drop it." 
 
Michel, accustomed to do what he was told, opened his fingers slowly, 
not quite convinced but thinking there might be something in it. 
Scevola, perceiving his advantage, scolded on: 
 
"You are dangerous. You ought to have your feet and hands tied every 
full moon. What did you say about a head just now? What head?" 
 
"I said that I didn't  have a broken head." 
 
"Was that all?" said Scevola. He was asking himself what on earth 
could have happened down there during the afternoon to cause a broken 
head. Clearly, it must have been either a fight or an accident, but in 
any case he considered that it was for him a favourable circumstance, 
for obviously a man with a bandaged head is at a disadvantage. He was 
inclined to think it must have been some silly accident, and he 
regretted profoundly that the lieutenant had not killed himself 
outright. He turned sourly to Michel. 
 
"Now you may go into the shed. And don't  try any of your tricks with me 
any more, because next time you pick up a stone I will shoot you like a 
dog." 
 
He began to move towards the yard gate which stood always open, throwing 
over his shoulder an order to Michel: "Go into the salle. Somebody has 
left a light in there. They all seem to have gone crazy to-day. Take the 
lamp into the kitchen and put it out and see that the door into the yard 
is shut. I am going to bed." He passed through the gateway, but he did 
not penetrate into the yard very far. He stopped to watch Michel obeying 
the order. Scevola, advancing his head cautiously beyond the pillar of 
the gate, waited till he had seen Michel open the door of the salle and 
then bounded out again across the level space and down the ravine path. 
It was a matter of less than a minute. His fork was still on his 
shoulder. His only desire was not to be interfered with, and for the 
rest he did not care what they all did, what they would think and how 
they would behave. The fixed idea had taken complete possession of him. 
He had no plan, but he had a principle on which to act; and that was to 
get at the lieutenant unawares, and if the fellow died without knowing 
what hand had struck him, so much the better. Scevola was going to act 
in the cause of virtue and justice. It was not to be a matter of 
personal contest at all. Meantime, Michel, having gone into the salle, 
had discovered Peyrol fast asleep on a table. Though his reverence for 
Peyrol was unbounded, his simplicity was such that he shook his master 
by the shoulder as he would have done any common mortal. The rover 
passed from a state of inertia into a sitting posture so quickly that 
Michel stepped back a pace and waited to be addressed. But as Peyrol 
only stared at him, Michel took the initiative in a concise phrase: 
 
"He's at it!" 
 
Peyrol did not seem completely awake: "What is it you mean?" he asked. 
 
"He is making motions to escape." 
 
Peyrol was wide awake now. He even swung his feet off the table. 
 
"Is he? Haven't  you locked the cabin door?" 
 
Michel, very frightened, explained that he had never been told to do that. 
 
"No?" remarked Peyrol placidly. "I must have forgotten." But Michel 
remained agitated and murmured: "He is escaping." 
 
"That's all right," said Peyrol. "What are you fussing about? How far 
can he escape, do you think?" 
 
A slow grin appeared on Michel's face. "If he tries to scramble over 
the top of the rocks, he will get a broken neck in a very short time," 
he said. "And he certainly won't  get very far, that's a fact." 
 
"Well - you see," said Peyrol. 
 
"And he doesn't  seem strong either. He crawled out of the cabin door 
and got as far as the little water cask and he dipped and dipped into 
it. It must be half empty by now. After that he got on to his legs. I 
cleared out ashore directly I heard him move," he went on in a tone of 
intense self-approval. "I hid myself behind a rock and watched him.;; 
 
"Quite right," observed Peyrol. After that word of commendation, 
Michel's face wore a constant grin. 
 
"He sat on the after-deck," he went on as if relating an immense joke, 
"with his feet dangling down the hold, and may the devil take me if I 
don't  think he had a nap with his back against the cask. He was nodding 
and catching himself up, with that big white head of his. Well, I got 
tired of watching that, and as you told me to keep out of his way, I 
thought I would come up here and sleep in the shed. That was right, 
wasn't  it?" 
 
"Quite right," repeated Peyrol. "Well, you go now into the shed. And 
so you left him sitting on the after-deck?" 
 
"Yes," said Michel. "But he was rousing himself. I hadn't  got away 
more than ten yards when I heard an awful thump on board. I think he 
tried to get up and fell down the hold." 
 
"Fell down the hold?" repeated Peyrol sharply. 
 
"Yes, notre matre. I thought at first I would go back and see, but you 
had warned me against him, hadn't  you? And I really think that nothing 
can kill him." 
 
Peyrol got down from the table with an air of concern which would have 
astonished Michel, if he had not been utterly incapable of observing things. 
 
"This must be seen to," murmured the rover, buttoning the waistband of 
his trousers. "My cudgel there, in the corner. Now you go to the shed. 
What the devil are you doing at the door? Don't  you know the way to the 
shed?" This last observation was caused by Michel remaining in the 
doorway of the salle with his head out and looking to right and left 
along the front of the house. "What's come to you? You don't  suppose he 
has been able to follow you so quick as this up here?" 
 
"Oh no, notre matre, quite impossible. I saw that sacr Scevola 
promenading up and down here. I don't  want to meet him again." 
 
"Was he promenading outside?" asked Peyrol, with annoyance. "Well, 
what do you think he can do to you? What notions have you got in your 
silly head? You are getting worse and worse. Out you go." 
 
Peyrol extinguished the lamp and, going out, closed the door without the 
slightest noise. The intelligence about Scevola being on the move did 
not please him very much, but he reflected that probably the 
sans-culotte had fallen asleep again and after waking up was on his way 
to bed when Michel caught sight of him. He had his own view of the 
patriot's psychology and did not think the women were in any danger. 
Nevertheless he went to the shed and heard the rustling of straw as 
Michel settled himself for the night. 
 
"Debout," he cried low. "Sh, don't  make any noise. I want you to go 
into the house and sleep at the bottom of the stairs. If you hear 
voices, go up, and if you see Scevola about, knock him down. You aren't  
afraid of him, are you?" 
 
"No, if you tell me not to be," said Michel, who, picking up his 
shoes, a present from Peyrol, walked barefoot towards the house. The 
rover watched him slipping noiselessly through the salle door. Having 
thus, so to speak, guarded his base, Peyrol proceeded down the ravine 
with a very deliberate caution. When he got as far as the little hollow 
in the ground from which the mastheads of the tartane could be seen, he 
squatted and waited. He didn't  know what his prisoner had done or was 
doing and he did not want to blunder into the way of his escape. The 
day-old moon was high enough to have shortened the shadows almost to 
nothing and all the rocks were inundated by a yellow sheen, while the 
bushes by contrast looked very black. Peyrol reflected that he was not 
very well concealed. The continued silence impressed him in the end. 
"He has got away," he thought. Yet he was not sure. Nobody could be 
sure. He reckoned it was about an hour since Michel had left the 
tartane; time enough for a man, even on all fours, to crawl down to the 
shore of the cove. Peyrol wished he had not hit so hard. His object 
could have been attained with half the force. On the other hand all the 
proceedings of his prisoner, as reported by Michel, seemed quite 
rational. Naturally the fellow was badly shaken. Peyrol felt as though 
he wanted to go on board and give him some encouragement, and even 
active assistance. 
 
The report of a gun from seaward cut his breath short as he lay there 
meditating. Within a minute there was a second report, sending another 
wave of deep sound among the crags and hills of the peninsula. The 
ensuing silence was so profound that it seemed to extend to the very 
inside of Peyrol's head, and lull all his thoughts for a moment. But he 
had understood. He said to himself that after this his prisoner, if he 
had life enough left in him to stir a limb, would rather die than not 
try to make his way to the seashore. The ship was calling to her man. 
 
In fact those two guns had proceeded from the Amelia . After passing 
beyond Cape Esterel, Captain Vincent dropped an anchor under foot off 
the beach just as Peyrol had surmised he would do. From about six 
o'clock till nine the Amelia lay there with her unfurled sails hanging 
in the gear. Just before the moon rose the captain came up on deck and 
after a short conference with his first lieutenant, directed the master 
to get the ship under way and put her head again for the Petite Passe. 
Then he went below, and presently word was passed on deck that the 
captain wanted Mr. Bolt. When the master's mate appeared in his cabin, 
Captain Vincent motioned him to a chair. 
 
"I don't  think I ought to have listened to you," he said. "Still, the 
idea was fascinating, but how it would strike other people it is hard to 
say. The losing of our man is the worst feature. I have an idea that we 
might recover him. He may have been captured by the peasants or have met 
with an accident. It's unbearable to think of him lying at the foot of 
some rock with a broken leg. I have ordered the first and second cutters 
to be manned, and I propose that you should take command of them, enter 
the cove and, if necessary, advance a little inland to investigate. As 
far as we know there have never been any troops on that peninsula. The 
first thing you will do is to examine the coast." 
 
He talked for some time, giving more minute instructions, and then went 
on deck. The Amelia , with the two cutters towing alongside, reached 
about half-way down the Passe and then the boats were ordered to 
proceed. just before they shoved off, two guns were fired in quick 
succession. 
 
"Like this, Bolt," explained Captain Vincent, "Symons will guess that 
we are looking for him; and if he is hiding anywhere near the shore he 
will be sure to come down where he can be seen by you." 
 
 
The motive force of a fixed idea is very great. In the case of Scevola 
it was great enough to launch him down the slope and to rob him for the 
moment of all caution. He bounded amongst the boulders, using the handle 
of the stable fork for a staff. He paid no regard to the nature of the 
ground, till he got a fall and found himself sprawling on his face, 
while the stable fork went clattering down until it was stopped by a 
bush. It was this circumstance which saved Peyrol's prisoner from being 
caught unawares. Since he had got out of the little cabin, simply 
because after coming to himself he had perceived it was open, Symons had 
been greatly refreshed by long drinks of cold water and by his little 
nap in the fresh air. Every moment he was feeling in better command of 
his limbs. As to the command of his thoughts, that was coming to him too 
rather quickly. The advantage of having a very thick skull became 
evident in the fact that as soon as he had dragged himself out of that 
cabin he knew where he was. The next thing he did was to look at the 
moon, to judge of the passage of time. Then he gave way to an immense 
surprise at the fact of being alone aboard the tartane. As he sat with 
his legs dangling into the open hold he tried to guess how it came about 
that the cabin had been left unlocked and unguarded. 
 
He went on thinking about this unexpected situation. What could have 
become of that white-headed villain? Was he dodging about somewhere 
watching for a chance to give him another tap on the head? Symons felt 
suddenly very unsafe sitting there on the after-deck in the full light 
of the moon. Instinct rather than reason suggested to him that he ought 
to get down into the dark hold. It seemed a great undertaking at first, 
but once he started he accomplished it with the greatest ease, though he 
could not avoid knocking down a small spar which was leaning up against 
the deck. It preceded him into the hold with a loud crash which gave 
poor Symons an attack of palpitation of the heart. He sat on the keelson 
of the tartane and gasped, but after a while reflected that all this did 
not matter. His head felt very big, his neck was very painful and one 
shoulder was certainly very stiff. He could never stand up against that 
old ruffian. But what had become of him? Why! He had gone to fetch the 
soldiers! After that conclusion Symons became more composed. He began to 
try to remember things. When he had last seen that old fellow it was 
daylight, and now-Symons looked up at the moon again - it must be near 
six bells in the first watch. No doubt the old scoundrel was sitting in 
a wine shop drinking with the soldiers. They would be here soon enough! 
The idea of being a prisoner of war made his heart sink a little. His 
ship appeared to him invested with an extraordinary number of lovable 
features which included Captain Vincent and the first lieutenant. He 
would have been glad to shake hands even with the corporal, a surly and 
malicious marine acting as master-at-arms of the ship. "I wonder where 
she is now," he thought dismally, feeling his distaste for captivity 
grow with the increase of his strength. 
 
It was at this moment that he heard the noise of Scevola's fall. It was 
pretty close; but afterwards he heard no voices and footsteps heralding 
the approach of a body of men. If this was the old ruffian coming back, 
then he was coming back alone. At once Symons started on all fours for 
the fore-end of the tartane. He had an idea that ensconced under the 
fore-deck he would be in a better position to parley with the enemy and 
that perhaps he could find there a handspike or some piece of iron to 
defend himself with. just as he had settled himself in his hiding-place 
Scevola stepped from the shore on to the after-deck. 
 
At the very first glance Symons perceived that this one was very unlike 
the man he expected to see. He felt rather disappointed. As Scevola 
stood still in full moonlight Symons congratulated himself on having 
taken up a position under the fore-deck. That fellow, who had a beard, 
was like a sparrow in body compared with the other; but he was armed 
dangerously with something that looked to Symons like either a trident 
or fishgrains on a staff. "A devil of a weapon that," he thought, 
appalled. And what on earth did that beggar want on board? What could he 
be after? 
 
The new-comer acted strangely at first. He stood stock-still, craning 
his neck here and there, peering along the whole length of the tartane, 
then crossing the deck he repeated all those performances on the other 
side. "He has noticed that the cabin door is open. He's trying to see 
where I've  got to. He will be coming forward to look for me," said 
Symons to himself. "If he corners me here with that beastly pronged 
affair I am done for." For a moment he debated within himself whether 
it wouldn't  be better to make a dash for it and scramble ashore; but in 
the end he mistrusted his strength. "He would run me down for sure," 
he concluded. "And he means no good, that's certain. No man would go 
about at night with a confounded thing like that if he didn't  mean to do 
for somebody." 
 
Scevola, after keeping perfectly still, straining his ears for any sound 
from below where he supposed Lieutenant Ral to be, stooped down to the 
cabin scuttle and called in a low voice: "Are you there, lieutenant?" 
Symons saw these motions and could not imagine their purport. That 
excellent able seaman of proved courage in many cutting-out expeditions 
broke into a slight perspiration. In the light of the moon the prongs of 
the fork polished by much use shone like silver, and the whole aspect of 
the stranger was weird and dangerous in the extreme. Whom could that man 
be after but him, himself? 
 
Scevola, receiving no answer, remained in a stooping position. He could 
not detect the slightest sound of breathing down there. He remained in 
this position so long that Symons became quite interested. "He must 
think I am still down there,"  he whispered to himself. The next 
proceeding was quite astonishing. The man, taking up a position on one 
side of the cuddy scuttle and holding his horrid weapon as one would a 
boarding pike, uttered a terrific whoop and went on yelling in French 
with such volubility that he quite frightened Symons. Suddenly he left 
off, moved away from the scuttle and looked at a loss what to do next. 
Anybody who could have seen then Symons  protruded head with his face 
turned aft would have seen on it an expression of horror, "The cunning 
beast," he thought. "If I had been down there, with the row he made I 
would have surely rushed on deck and then he would have had me." Symons 
experienced the feeling of a very narrow escape; yet it brought not much 
relief. It was simply a matter of time. The fellow's homicidal purpose 
was evident. He was bound before long to come forward. Symons saw him 
move, and thought, "Now he's coming," and prepared himself for a dash. 
"If I can dodge past those blamed prongs I might be able to take him by 
the throat," he reflected, without, however, feeling much confidence in 
himself. 
 
But to his great relief Scevola's purpose was simply to conceal the fork 
in the hold in such a manner that the handle of it just reached the edge 
of the after-deck. In that position it was of course invisible to 
anybody coming from the shore. Scevola had made up his mind that the 
lieutenant was out of the tartane. He had wandered away along the shore 
and would probably be back in a moment. Meantime it had occurred to him 
to see if he could discover anything compromising in the cabin. He did 
not take the fork down with him because in that confined space it would 
have been useless and rather a source of embarrassment than otherwise, 
should the returning lieutenant find him there. He cast a circular 
glance around the basin and then prepared to go down. 
 
Every movement of his was watched by Symons. He guessed Scevola's 
purpose by his movements and said to himself: "Here's my only chance, 
and not a second to be lost either." Directly Scevola turned his back 
on the forepart of the tartane in order to go down the little cabin 
ladder, Symons crawled out from his concealment. He ran along the hold 
on all fours for fear the other should turn his head round before 
disappearing below, but directly he judged that the man had touched 
bottom, he stood on his feet and catching hold of the main rigging swung 
himself on the after-deck and, as it were in the same movement, flung 
himself on the doors of the cabin which came together with a crash. How 
he could secure them he had not thought, but as a matter of fact he saw 
the padlock hanging on a staple on one side; the key was in it, and it 
was a matter of a fraction of a second to secure the doors effectually. 
 
Almost simultaneously with the crash of the cabin door there was a 
shrill exclamation of surprise down there, and just as Symons had turned 
the key the man he had trapped made an effort to break out. That, 
however, did not disturb Symons. He knew the strength of that door. His 
first action was to get possession of the stable fork. At once he felt 
himself a match for any single man or even two men unless they had 
fire-arms. He had no hope, however, of being able to resist the soldiers 
and really had no intention of doing so. He expected to see them appear 
at any moment led by that confounded marinero. As to what the farmer man 
had come for on board the tartane he had not the slightest doubt about 
it. Not being troubled by too much imagination, it seemed to him obvious 
that it was to kill an Englishman and for nothing else. "Well, I am 
jiggered," he exclaimed mentally. "The damned savage! I haven't  done 
anything to him. They must be a murderous lot hereabouts." He looked 
anxiously up the slope. He would have welcomed the arrival of soldiers. 
He wanted more than ever to be made a proper prisoner, but a profound 
stillness reigned on the shore and a most absolute silence down below in 
the cabin. Absolute. No word, no movement. The silence of the grave. 
"He's scared to death," thought Symons, hitting in his simplicity on 
the exact truth. "It would serve him jolly well right if I went down 
there and ran him through with that thing. I would do it for a shilling, 
too." He was getting angry. It occurred to him also that there was some 
wine down there too. He discovered he was very thirsty and he felt 
rather faint. He sat down on the little skylight to think the matter 
over while awaiting the soldiers. He even gave a friendly thought to 
Peyrol himself. He was quite aware that he could have gone ashore and 
hidden himself for a time, but that meant in the end being hunted among 
the rocks and, certainly, captured; with the additional risk of getting 
a musket ball through his body. 
 
The first gun of the Amelia lifted him to his feet as though he had 
been snatched up by the hair of his head. He intended to give a 
resounding cheer, but produced only a feeble gurgle in his throat. His 
ship was talking to him. They hadn't  given him up. At the second report 
he scrambled ashore with the agility of a cat - in fact, with so much 
agility that he had a fit of giddiness. After it passed off he returned 
deliberately to the tartane to get hold of the stable fork. Then 
trembling with emotion, he staggered off quietly and resolutely with the 
only purpose of getting down to the seashore. He knew that as long as he 
kept downhill he would be all right. The ground in this part being a 
smooth rocky surface and Symons being barefooted, he passed at no great 
distance from Peyrol without being heard. When he got on rough ground he 
used the stable fork for a staff. Slowly as he moved he was not really 
strong enough to be sure-footed. Ten minutes later or so Peyrol, lying 
ensconced behind a bush, beard the noise of a rolling stone far away in 
the direction of the cove. Instantly the patient Peyrol got on his feet 
and started towards the cove himself. Perhaps he would have smiled if 
the importance and gravity of the affair in which he was engaged had not 
given all his thoughts a serious cast. Pursuing a higher path than the 
one followed by Symons, he had presently the satisfaction of seeing the 
fugitive, made very noticeable by the white bandages about his head, 
engaged in the last part of the steep descent. No nurse could have 
watched with more anxiety the adventure of a little boy than Peyrol the 
progress of his former prisoner. He was very glad to perceive that he 
had had the sense to take what looked like the tartane's boathook to 
help himself with. As Symons' figure sank lower and lower in his descent 
Peyrol moved on, step by step, till at last he saw him from above 
sitting down on the seashore, looking very forlorn and lonely, with his 
bandaged head between his hands. Instantly Peyrol sat down too, 
protected by a projecting rock. And it is safe to say that with that 
there came a complete cessation of all sound and movement on the lonely 
head of the peninsula for a full half hour. 
 
Peyrol was not in doubt as to what was going to happen. He was as 
certain that the corvette's boat or boats were now on the way to the 
cove as though he had seen them leave the side of the Amelia . But he 
began to get a little impatient. He wanted to see the end of this 
episode. Most of the time he was watching Symons. "Sacre tte dure," he 
thought. "He has gone to sleep."  Indeed Symons  immobility was so 
complete that he might have been dead from his exertions: only Peyrol 
had a conviction that his once youthful chum was not the sort of person 
that dies easily. The part of the cove he had reached was all right for 
Peyrol's purpose. But it would have been quite easy for a boat or boats 
to fail to notice Symons, and the consequence of that would be that the 
English would probably land in several parties for a search, discover 
the tartane. Peyrol shuddered. 
 
Suddenly he made out a boat just clear of the eastern point of the cove. 
Mr. Bolt had been hugging the coast and progressing very slowly, 
according to his instructions, till he had reached the edge of the 
point's shadow where it lay ragged and black on the moonlit water. 
Peyrol could see the oars rise and fall. Then another boat glided into 
view. Peyrol's alarm for his tartane grew intolerable. "Wake up, 
animal, wake up," he mumbled through his teeth. Slowly they glided on, 
and the first cutter was on the point of passing by the man on the shore 
when Peyrol was relieved by the hail of "Boat ahoy" reaching him 
faintly where he knelt leaning forward, an absorbed spectator. 
 
He saw the boat heading for Symons, who was standing up now and making 
desperate signs with both arms. Then he saw him dragged in over the 
bows, the boat back out, and then both of them tossed oars and floated 
side by side on the sparkling water of the cove. 
 
Peyrol got up from his knees. They had their man now. But perhaps they 
would persist in landing since there must have been some other purpose 
at first in the mind of the captain of the English corvette. This 
suspense did not last long. Peyrol saw the oars fall in the water, and 
in a very few minutes the boats, pulling round, disappeared one after 
another behind the eastern point of the cove. 
 
"That's done," muttered Peyrol to himself. "I will never see the 
silly hard-head again." He had a strange notion that those English 
boats had carried off something belonging to him, not a man but a part 
of his own life, the sensation of a regained touch with the far-off days 
in the Indian Ocean. He walked down quickly as if to examine the spot 
from which Testa Dura had left the soil of France. He was in a hurry now 
to get back to the farmhouse and meet Lieutenant Ral, who would be due 
back from Toulon. The way by the cove was as short as any other. When he 
got down he surveyed the empty shore and wondered at a feeling of 
emptiness within himself. While walking up towards the foot of the 
ravine he saw an object lying on the ground. It was a stable fork. He 
stood over it asking himself, "How on earth did this thing come here?" 
as though he had been too surprised to pick it up. Even after he had 
done so he remained motionless, meditating on it. He connected it with 
some activity of Scevola, since he was the man to whom it belonged, but 
that was no sort of explanation of its presence on that spot, unless . . . 
 
"Could he have drowned himself?" thought Peyrol, looking at the smooth 
and luminous water of the cove. It could give him no answer. Then at 
arm's length he contemplated his find. At last he shook his head, 
shouldered the fork, and with slow steps continued on his way. 
 
 
The midnight meeting of Lieutenant Ral and Peyrol was perfectly silent. 
Peyrol, sitting on the bench outside the salle, had heard the footsteps 
coming up the Madrague track long before the lieutenant became visible. 
But he did not move. He did not even look at him. The lieutenant, 
unbuckling his sword-belt, sat down without uttering a word. The moon, 
the only witness of the meeting, seemed to shine on two friends so 
identical in thought and feeling that they could commune with each other 
without words. It was Peyrol who spoke first. 
 
"You are up to time." 
 
"I had the deuce of a job to hunt up the people and get the certificate 
stamped. Everything was shut up. The Port-Admiral was giving a 
dinner-party, but he came out to speak to me when I sent in my name. And 
all the time, do you know, gunner, I was wondering whether I would ever 
see you again in my life. Even after I had the certificate, such as it 
is, in my pocket, I wondered whether I would." 
 
"What the devil did you think was going to happen to me?" growled 
Peyrol perfunctorily. He had thrown the incomprehensible stable fork 
under the narrow bench, and with his feet drawn in he could feel it 
there, lying against the wall. 
 
"No, the question with me was whether I would ever come here again." 
 
Ral drew a folded paper from his pocket and dropped it on the bench. 
Peyrol picked it up carelessly. That thing was meant only to throw dust 
into Englishmen's eyes. The lieutenant, after a moment's silence, went 
on with the sincerity of a man who suffered too much to keep his trouble 
to himself. 
 
"I had a hard struggle." 
 
"That was too late," said Peyrol, very positively. "You had to come 
back here for very shame; and now you have come, you don't  look very 
happy." 
 
"Never mind my looks, gunner. I have made up my mind." 
 
A ferocious, not unpleasing thought flashed through Peyrol's mind. It 
was that this intruder on the Escampobar sinister solitude in which he, 
Peyrol, kept order was under a delusion. Mind! Pah! His mind had nothing 
to do with his return. He had returned because in Catherine's words, 
"death had made a sign to him." Meantime, Lieutenant Ral raised his 
hat to wipe his moist brow. 
 
"I made up my mind to play the part of dispatch-bearer. As you have 
said yourself, Peyrol, one could not bribe a man - I mean an honest 
man - so you will have to find the vessel and leave the rest to me. In 
two or three days . . . You are under a moral obligation to let me have 
your tartane." 
 
Peyrol did not answer. He was thinking that Ral had got his sign, but 
whether it meant death from starvation or disease on board an English 
prison hulk, or in some other way, it was impossible to say. This naval 
officer was not a man he could trust; to whom he could, for instance, 
tell the story of his prisoner and what he had done with him. Indeed, 
the story was altogether incredible. The Englishman commanding that 
corvette had no visible, conceivable or probable reason for sending a 
boat ashore to the cove of all places in the world. Peyrol himself could 
hardly believe that it had happened. And he thought: "If I were to tell 
that lieutenant he would only think that I was an old scoundrel who had 
been in treasonable communication with the English for God knows how 
long. No words of mine could persuade him that this was as unforeseen to 
me as the moon falling from the sky." 
 
"I wonder," he burst out, but not very loud, "what made you keep on 
coming back here time after time!" Ral leaned his back against the wall 
and folded his arms in the familiar attitude of their leisurely talks. 
 
"Ennui, Peyrol," he said in a far-away tone. "Confounded boredom." 
 
Peyrol also, as if unable to resist the force of example, assumed the 
same attitude, and said: 
 
"You seem to be a man that makes no friends." 
 
"True, Peyrol. I think I am that sort of man." 
 
"What, no friends at all? Not even a little friend of any sort?" 
 
Lieutenant Ral leaned the back of his head against the wall and made no 
answer. Peyrol got on his legs. 
 
"Oh, then, it wouldn't  matter to anybody if you were to disappear for 
years in an English hulk. And so if I were to give you my tartane you 
would go?" 
 
"Yes, I would go this moment." 
 
Peyrol laughed quite loud, tilting his head back. All at once the laugh 
stopped short and the lieutenant was amazed to see him reel as though he 
had been hit in the chest. While giving way to his bitter mirth, the 
rover had caught sight of Arlette's face at the, open window of the 
lieutenant's room. He sat heavily on the bench and was unable to make a 
sound. The lieutenant was startled enough to detach the back of his head 
from the wall to look at him. Peyrol stooped low suddenly, and began to 
drag the stable fork from its concealment. Then he got on his feet and 
stood leaning on it, glaring down at Ral, who gazed upwards with languid 
surprise. Peyrol was asking himself, "Shall I pick him up on that pair 
of prongs, carry him down and fling him in the sea?" He felt suddenly 
overcome by a heaviness of arms and a heaviness of heart that made all 
movement impossible. His stiffened and powerless limbs refused all 
service. . . . Let Catherine look after her niece. He was sure that the 
old woman was not very far away. The lieutenant saw him absorbed in 
examining the points of the prongs carefully. There was something queer 
about all this. 
 
"Hallo, Peyrol! What's the matter?" he couldn't  help asking. 
 
"I was just looking," said Peyrol. "One prong is chipped a little. I 
found this thing in a most unlikely place." 
 
The lieutenant still gazed at him curiously. 
 
"I know! It was under the bench." 
 
"H'm," said Peyrol, who had recovered some self-control. "It belongs 
to Scevola." 
 
"Does it?" said the lieutenant, falling back again. 
 
His interest seemed exhausted, but Peyrol didn't  move. 
 
"You go about with a face fit for a funeral," he remarked suddenly in 
a deep voice. "Hang it all, lieutenant, I have heard you laugh once or 
twice, but the devil take me if I ever saw you smile. It is as if you 
had been bewitched in your cradle." 
 
Lieutenant Ral got up as if moved by a spring. "Bewitched," he 
repeated, standing very stiff: "In my cradle, eh? . . . No, I don't  
think it was so early as that." 
 
He walked forward with a tense still face straight at Peyrol as though 
he had been blind. Startled, the rover stepped out of the way and, 
turning on his heels, followed him with his eyes. The lieutenant paced 
on, as if drawn by a magnet, in the direction of the door of the house. 
Peyrol, his eyes fastened on Ral's back, let him nearly reach it before 
he called out tentatively: "I say, lieutenant!" To his extreme 
surprise, Ral swung round as if to a touch. 
 
"Oh, yes," he answered, also in an undertone. "We will have to 
discuss that matter to-morrow." 
 
Peyrol, who had approached him close, said in a whisper which sounded 
quite fierce: "Discuss? No! We will have to carry it out to-morrow. I 
have been waiting half the night just to tell you that." 
 
Lieutenant Ral nodded. The expression on his face was so stony that 
Peyrol doubted whether he had understood. He added: 
 
"It isn't  going to be child's play." The lieutenant was about to open 
the door when Peyrol said: "A moment," and again the lieutenant turned 
about silently. 
 
"Michel is sleeping somewhere on the stairs. Will you just stir him up 
and tell him I am waiting outside? We two will have to finish our night 
on board the tartane, and start work at break of day to get her ready 
for sea. Yes, lieutenant, by noon. In twelve hours' time you will be 
saying good-bye to la belle France." 
 
Lieutenant Ral's eyes staring over his shoulder, seemed glazed and 
motionless in the moonlight like the eyes of a dead man. But he went in. 
Peyrol heard presently sounds within of somebody staggering in the 
passage and Michel projected himself outside headlong, but after a 
stumble or two pulled up, scratching his head and looking on every side 
in the moonlight without perceiving Peyrol, who was regarding him from a 
distance of five feet. At last Peyrol said: 
 
"Come, wake up! Michel! Michel!" 
 
"Voil, notre matre." 
 
"Look at what I have picked up," said Peyrol. "Take it and put it away." 
 
Michel didn't  offer to touch the stable fork extended to him by Peyrol. 
 
"What's the matter with you?" asked Peyrol. 
 
"Nothing, nothing! Only last time I saw it, it was on Scevola's 
shoulder." He glanced up at the sky. 
 
"A little better than an hour ago." 
 
"What was he doing?" 
 
"Going into the yard to put it away." 
 
"Well, now you go into the yard to put it away," said Peyrol, "and 
don't  be long about it." He waited with his hand over his chin till his 
henchman reappeared before him. But Michel had not got over his surprise. 
 
"He was going to bed, you know," he said. 
 
"Eh, what? He was going. . . . He hasn't  gone to sleep in the stable, 
perchance? He does sometimes, you know." 
 
"I know. I looked. He isn't  there," said Michel, very awake and 
round-eyed. 
 
Peyrol started towards the cove. After three or four steps he turned 
round and found Michel motionless where he had left him. 
 
"Come on," he cried, "we will have to fit the tartane for sea 
directly the day breaks." 
 
Standing in the lieutenant's room just clear of the open window, Arlette 
listened to their voices and to the sound of their footsteps diminishing 
down the slope. Before they had quite died out she became aware of a 
light tread approaching the door of the room. 
 
Lieutenant Ral had spoken the truth. While in Toulon he had more than 
once said to himself that he could never go back to that fatal 
farmhouse. His mental state was quite pitiable. Honour, decency, every 
principle forbade him to trifle with the feelings of a poor creature 
with her mind darkened by a very terrifying, atrocious and, as it were, 
guilty experience. And suddenly he had given way to a base impulse and 
had betrayed himself by kissing her hand! He recognized with despair 
that this was no trifling, but that the impulse had come from the very 
depths of his being. It was an awful discovery for a man who on emerging 
from boyhood had laid for himself a rigidly straight line of conduct 
amongst the unbridled passions and the clamouring falsehoods of 
revolution which seemed to have destroyed in him all capacity for the 
softer emotions. Taciturn and guarded, he had formed no intimacies. 
Relations he had none. He had kept clear of social connections. It was 
in his character. At first he visited Escampobar because when he took 
his leave he had no place in the world to go to, and a few days there 
were a complete change from the odious town. He enjoyed the sense of 
remoteness from ordinary mankind. He had developed a liking for old 
Peyrol, the only man who had nothing to do with the revolution - who had 
not even seen it at work. The sincere lawlessness of the ex-Brother of 
the Coast was refreshing. That one was neither a hypocrite nor a fool. 
When he robbed or killed it was not in the name of the sacred 
revolutionary principles or for the love of humanity. 
 
Of course Ral had remarked at once Arlette's black, profound and unquiet 
eyes and the persistent dim smile on her lips, her mysterious silences 
and the rare sound of her voice which made a caress of every word. He 
heard something of her story from the reluctant Peyrol who did not care 
to talk about it. It awakened in Ral more bitter indignation than pity. 
But it stimulated his imagination, confirmed him in that scorn and angry 
loathing for the revolution he had felt as a boy and had nursed secretly 
ever since. She attracted him by her unapproachable aspect. Later he 
tried not to notice that, in common parlance, she was inclined to hang 
about him. He used to catch her gazing at him stealthily. But he was 
free from masculine vanity. It was one day in Toulon that it suddenly 
dawned on him what her mute interest in his person might mean. He was 
then sitting outside a caf sipping some drink or other with three or 
four officers, and not listening to their uninteresting conversation. He 
marvelled that this sort of illumination should come to him like this, 
under these circumstances; that he should have thought of her while 
seated in the street with these men round him, in the midst of more or 
less professional talk! And then it suddenly dawned on him that he had 
been thinking of nothing but that woman for days. 
 
He got up brusquely, flung the money for his drink on the table, and 
without a word left his companions. But he had the reputation of an 
eccentric man and they did not even comment on his abrupt departure. It 
was a clear evening. He walked straight out of town, and that night 
wandered beyond the fortifications, not noticing the direction he took. 
All the countryside was asleep. There was not a human being stirring, 
and his progress in that desolate part of the country between the forts 
could have been traced only by the barking of dogs in the rare hamlets 
and scattered habitations. 
 
"What has become of my rectitude, of my self-respect, of the firmness 
of my mind?" he asked himself pedantically. "I have let myself be 
mastered by an unworthy passion for a mere mortal envelope, stained with 
crime and without a mind." 
 
His despair at this awful discovery was so profound that if he had not 
been in uniform he would have tried to commit suicide with the small 
pistol he had in his pocket. He shrank from the act, and the thought of 
the sensation it would produce, from the gossip and comments it would 
raise, the dishonouring suspicions it would provoke. "No," he said to 
himself, "what I will have to do is to unmark my linen, put on civilian 
old clothes and walk out much farther away, miles beyond the forts, hide 
myself in some wood or in an overgrown hollow and put an end to my life 
there. The gendarmes or a garde-champtre discovering my body after a few 
days, a complete stranger without marks of identity, and being unable to 
find out anything about me, will give me an obscure burial in some 
village churchyard." 
 
On that resolution he turned back abruptly and at daybreak found himself 
outside the gate of the town. He had to wait till it was opened, and 
then the morning was so far advanced that he had to go straight to work 
at his office at the Toulon Admiralty. Nobody noticed anything peculiar 
about him that day. He went through his routine tasks with outward 
composure, but all the same he never ceased arguing with himself. By the 
time he returned to his quarters he had come to the conclusion that as 
an officer in war-time he had no right to take his own life. His 
principles would not permit him to do that. In this reasoning he was 
perfectly sincere. During a deadly struggle against an irreconcilable 
enemy his life belonged to his country. But there were moments when his 
loneliness, haunted by the forbidden vision of Escampobar with the 
figure of that distracted girl, mysterious, awful, pale, irresistible in 
her strangeness, passing along the walls, appearing on the hill-paths, 
looking out of the window, became unbearable. He spent hours of solitary 
anguish shut up in his quarters, and the opinion amongst his comrades 
was that Ral's misanthropy was getting beyond all bounds. 
 
One day it dawned upon him clearly that he could not stand this. It 
affected his power of thinking. "I shall begin to talk nonsense to 
people," he said to himself. "Hasn't  there been once a poor devil who 
fell in love with a picture or a statue? He used to go and contemplate 
it. His misfortune cannot be compared with mine! Well, I will go to look 
at her as at a picture too; a picture as untouchable as if it had been 
under glass." And he went on a visit to Escampobar at the very first 
opportunity. He made up for himself a repellent face, he clung to Peyrol 
for society, out there on the bench, both with their arms folded and 
gazing into space. But whenever Arlette crossed his line of sight it was 
as if something had moved in his breast. Yet these visits made life just 
bearable; they enabled him to attend to his work without beginning to 
talk nonsense to people. He said to himself that he was strong enough to 
rise above temptation, that he would never overstep the line; but it had 
happened to him upstairs in his room at the farm, to weep tears of sheer 
tenderness while thinking of his fate. These tears would put out for a 
while the gnawing fire of his passion. He assumed austerity like an 
armour and in his prudence he, as a matter of fact, looked very seldom 
at Arlette for fear of being caught in the act. 
 
The discovery that she had taken to wandering at night had upset him all 
the same, because that sort of thing was unaccountable. It gave him a 
shock which unsettled, not his resolution, but his fortitude. That 
morning he had allowed himself, while she was waiting on him, to be 
caught looking at her and then, losing his self-control, had given her 
that kiss on the hand. Directly he had done it he was appalled. He had 
overstepped the line. Under the circumstances this was an absolute moral 
disaster. The full consciousness of it came to him slowly. In fact this 
moment of fatal weakness was one of the reasons why he had let himself 
be sent off so unceremoniously by Peyrol to Toulon. Even while crossing 
over he thought the only thing was not to come back any more. Yet while 
battling with himself he went on with the execution of the plan. A 
bitter irony presided over his dual state. Before leaving the Admiral 
who had received him in full uniform in a room lighted by a single 
candle, he was suddenly moved to say: "I suppose if there is no other 
way I am authorized to go myself," and the Admiral had answered: "I 
didn't  contemplate that, but if you are willing I don't  see any 
objection. I would only advise you to go in uniform in the character of 
an officer entrusted with dispatches. No doubt in time the Government 
would arrange for your exchange. But bear in mind that it would be a 
long captivity, and you must understand it might affect your promotion." 
 
At the foot of the grand staircase in the lighted hall of the official 
building Ral suddenly thought: "And now I must go back to Escampobar." 
Indeed he had to go to Escampobar because the false dispatches were 
there in the valise he had left behind. He couldn't  go back to the 
Admiral and explain that he had lost them. They would look on him as an 
unutterable idiot or a man gone mad. While walking to the quay where the 
naval boat was waiting for him he said to himself. "This, in truth, is 
my last visit for years - perhaps for life." 
 
Going back in the boat, notwithstanding that the breeze was very light, 
he would not let the men take to the oars. He didn't  want to return 
before the women had gone to bed. He said to himself that the proper and 
honest thing to do was not to see Arlette again. He even managed to 
persuade himself that his uncontrolled impulse had had no meaning for 
that witless and unhappy creature. She had neither started nor 
exclaimed; she had made no sign. She had remained passive and then she 
had backed away and sat down quietly. He could not even remember that 
she had coloured at all. As to himself, he had enough self-control to 
rise from the table and go out without looking at her again. Neither did 
she make a sign. What could startle that body without mind? She had made 
nothing of it, he thought with self-contempt. "Body without mind! Body 
without mind!" he repeated with angry derision directed at himself. And 
all at once he thought: "No. It isn't  that. All in her is mystery, 
seduction, enchantment. And then - what do I care for her mind!" 
 
This thought wrung from him a faint groan so that the coxswain asked 
respectfully: "Are you in pain, lieutenant?" "It's nothing," he 
muttered and set his teeth with the desperation of a man under torture. 
 
While talking with Peyrol outside the house, the words "I won't  see her 
again," and "body without mind" rang through his head. By the time he 
had left Peyrol and walked up the stairs his endurance was absolutely at 
an end. All he wanted was to be alone. Going along the dark, passage he 
noticed that the door of Catherine's room was standing ajar. But that 
did not arrest his attention. He was approaching a state of 
insensibility. As he put his hand on the door handle of his room he said 
to himself. "It will soon be over!" 
 
He was so tired out that he was almost unable to hold up his head, and 
on going in he didn't  see Arlette, who stood against the wall on one 
side of the window, out of the moonlight and in the darkest corner of 
the room. He only became aware of somebody's presence in the room as she 
flitted past him with the faintest possible rustle, when he staggered 
back two paces and heard behind him the key being turned in the lock. If 
the whole house had fallen into ruins, bringing him to the ground, lie 
could not have been more overwhelmed and, in a manner, more utterly 
bereft of all his senses. The first that came back to him was the sense 
of touch when Arlette seized his hand. He regained his hearing next. She 
was whispering to him: "At last. At last! But you are careless. If it 
had been Scevola instead of me in this room you would have been dead 
now. I have seen him at work." He felt a significant pressure on his 
hand, but he couldn't  see her properly yet, though he was aware of her 
nearness with every fibre of his body. "It wasn't  yesterday though," 
she added in a low tone. Then suddenly: "Come to the window so that I 
may look at you." 
 
A great square of moonlight lay on the floor. He obeyed the tug like a 
little child. She caught hold of his other hand as it hung by his side. 
He was rigid all over, without joints, and it did not seem to him that 
he was breathing. With her face a little below his she stared at him 
closely, whispering gently: "Eugne, Eugne," and suddenly the livid 
immobility of his face frightened her. "You say nothing. You look ill. 
What is the matter? Are you hurt?" She let go his insensitive hands and 
began to feel him all over for evidence of some injury. She even 
snatched off his hat and flung it away in her haste to discover that his 
head was unharmed; but finding no sign of bodily damage, she calmed down 
like a sensible, practical person. With her hands clasped round his neck 
she hung back a little. Her little even teeth gleamed, her black eyes, 
immensely profound, looked into his, not with a transport of passion or 
fear but with a sort of reposeful satisfaction, with a searching and 
appropriating expression. He came back to life with a low and reckless 
exclamation, felt horribly insecure at once as if he were standing on a 
lofty pinnacle above a noise as of breaking waves in his cars, in fear 
lest her fingers should part and she would fall off and be lost to him 
for ever. He flung his arms round her waist and hugged her close to his 
breast. In the great silence, in the bright moonlight falling through 
the window, they stood like that for a long, long time. He looked at her 
head resting on his shoulder. Her eyes were closed and the expression of 
her unsmiling face was that of a delightful dream, something infinitely 
ethereal, peaceful and, as it were, eternal. Its appeal pierced his 
heart with a pointed sweetness. "She is exquisite. It's a miracle," he 
thought with a snort of terror. "It's impossible." 
 
She made a movement to disengage herself, and instinctively he resisted, 
pressing her closer to his breast. She yielded for a moment and then 
tried again. He let her go. She stood at arm's length, her hands on his 
shoulders, and her charm struck him suddenly as funny in the seriousness 
of expression as of a very capable, practical woman. 
 
"All this is very well," she said in a businesslike undertone. "We 
will have to think how to get away from here. I don't  mean now, this 
moment," she added, feeling his slight start. "Scevola is thirsting 
for your blood." She detached one hand to point a finger at the inner 
wall of the room, and lowered her voice. "He's there, you know. Don't  
trust Peyrol either. I was looking at you two out there. He has changed. 
I can trust him no longer." Her murmur vibrated. "He and Catherine 
behave strangely. I don't  know what came to them. He doesn't  talk to me. 
When I sit down near him he turns his shoulder to me. . . ." 
 
She felt Ral sway under her hands, paused in concern and said: "You are 
tired." But as he didn't  move, she actually led him to a chair, pushed 
him into it, and sat on the floor at his feet. She rested her head 
against his knees and kept possession of one of his hands. A sigh 
escaped her. "I knew this was going to be," she said very low. "But I 
was taken by surprise." 
 
"Oh, you knew it was going to be," he repeated faintly. 
 
"Yes! I had prayed for it. Have you ever been prayed for, Eugne?" she 
asked, lingering on his name. 
 
"Not since I was a child," answered Ral in a sombre tone. 
 
"Oh yes! You have been prayed for to-day. I went down to the church. . 
. ." Ral could hardly believe his ears. . . . The abb let me in by the 
sacristy door. He told me to renounce the world. I was ready to renounce 
anything for you." Ral, turning his face to the darkest part of the 
room, seemed to see the spectre of fatality awaiting its time to move 
forward and crush that calm, confident joy. He shook off the dreadful 
illusion, raised her hand to his lips for a lingering kiss, and then asked: 
 
"So you knew that it was going to be? Everything? Yes! And of me, what 
did you think?" 
 
She pressed strongly the hand to which she had been clinging all the 
time. "I thought this." 
 
"But what did you think of my conduct at times? You see, I did not know 
what was going to be. I . . . I was afraid," he added under his breath. 
 
"Conduct? What conduct? You came, you went. When you were not here I 
thought of you, and when you were here I could look my fill at you. I 
tell you I knew how it was going to be. I was not afraid then." 
 
"You went about with a little smile," he whispered, as one would 
mention an inconceivable marvel. 
 
"I was warm and quiet," murmured Arlette, as if on the borders of 
dreamland. Tender murmurs flowed from her lips describing a state of 
blissful tranquillity in phrases that sounded like the veriest nonsense, 
incredible, convincing and soothing to Ral's conscience. 
 
"You were perfect," it went on. "Whenever you came near me everything 
seemed different." 
 
"What do you mean? How different?" 
 
"Altogether. The light, the very stones of the house, the hills, the 
little flowers amongst the rocks! Even Nanette was different." 
 
Nanette was a white Angora with long silken hair, a pet that lived 
mostly in the yard. 
 
"Oh, Nanette was different too," said Ral, whom delight in the 
modulations of that voice had cut off from all reality, and even from a 
consciousness of himself, while he sat stooping over that head resting 
against his knee, the soft grip of her hand being his only contact with 
the world. 
 
"Yes. Prettier. It's only the people. . . . She ceased on an uncertain 
note. The crested wave of enchantment seemed to have passed over his 
head ebbing out faster than the sea, leaving the dreary expanses of the 
sand. He felt a chill at the roots of his hair. 
 
"What people?" he asked. 
 
"They are so changed. Listen, to-night while you were away - why did 
you go away? - I caught those two in the kitchen, saying nothing to each 
other. That Peyrol - he is terrible." 
 
He was struck by the tone of awe, by its profound conviction. He could 
not know that Peyrol, unforeseen, unexpected, inexplicable, had given by 
his mere appearance at Escampobar a moral and even a physical jolt to 
all her being, that he was to her an immense figure, like a messenger 
from the unknown entering the solitude of Escampobar; something 
immensely strong, with inexhaustible power, unaffected by familiarity 
and remaining invincible. 
 
"He will say nothing, he will listen to nothing. He can do what he likes." 
 
"Can he?" muttered Ral. 
 
She sat up on the floor, moved her head up and down several times as if 
to say that there could be no doubt about that. 
 
"Is he, too, thirsting for my blood?" asked Ral bitterly. 
 
"No, no. It isn't  that. You could defend yourself. I could watch over 
you. I have been watching over you. Only two nights ago I thought I 
heard noises outside and I went downstairs, fearing for you; your window 
was open but I could see nobody, and yet I felt. . . . No, it isn't  
that! It's worse. I don't  know what he wants to do. I can't  help being 
fond of him, but I begin to fear him now. When he first came here and I 
saw him he was just the same - only his hair was not so white - big, 
quiet. It seemed to me that something moved in my head. He was gentle, 
you know. I had to smile at him. It was as if I had recognized him. I 
said to myself. `That's he, the man himself." " 
 
"And when I came?" asked Ral with a feeling of dismay. 
 
"You! You were expected," she said in a low tone with a slight tinge 
of surprise at the question, but still evidently thinking of the Peyrol 
mystery. "Yes, I caught them at it last evening, he and Catherine in 
the kitchen, looking at each other and as quiet as mice. I told him he 
couldn't  order me about. Oh, mon chri, mon chri, don't  you listen to 
Peyrol - don't  let him . . ." 
 
With only a slight touch on his knee she sprang to her feet. Ral stood 
up too. 
 
"He can do nothing to me," he mumbled. 
 
`Don't  tell him anything. Nobody can guess what he thinks, and now even 
I cannot tell what he means when he speaks. It was as if he knew a 
secret." She put an accent into those words which made Ral feel moved 
almost to tears. He repeated that Peyrol could have no influence over 
him, and he felt that he was speaking the truth. He was in the power of 
his own word. Ever since he had left the Admiral in a gold-embroidered 
uniform, impatient to return to his guests, he was on a service for 
which he had volunteered. For a moment he had the sensation of an iron 
hoop very tight round his chest. She peered at his face closely, and it 
was more than he could bear. 
 
"All right. I'll be careful," he said. "And Catherine, is she also 
dangerous?" 
 
In the sheen of the moonlight Arlette, her neck and head above the 
gleams of the fichu, visible and elusive, smiled at him and moved a step 
closer. 
 
"Poor Aunt Catherine," she said. . . . "Put your arm round me, Eugne. 
. . . She can do nothing. She used to follow me with her eyes always. 
She thought I didn't  notice, but I did. And now she seems unable to look 
me in the face. Peyrol too, for that matter. He used to follow me with 
his eyes. Often I wondered what made them look at me like that. Can you 
tell, Eugne? But it's all changed now." 
 
"Yes, it is all changed," said Ral in a tone which he tried to make as 
light as possible. "Does Catherine know you are here?" 
 
"When we went upstairs this evening I lay down all dressed on my bed 
and she sat on hers. The candle was out, but in the moonlight I could 
see her quite plainly with her hands on her lap. When I could lie still 
no longer I simply got up and went out of the room. She was still 
sitting at the foot of her bed. All I did was to put my finger on my 
lips and then she dropped her head. I don't  think I quite closed the 
door. . . . Hold me tighter, Eugne, I am tired. . . . Strange, you know! 
Formerly, a long time ago, before I ever saw you, I never rested and 
never felt tired." She stopped her murmur suddenly and lifted a finger 
recommending silence. She listened and Ral listened too, he did not know 
for what; and in this sudden concentration on a point, all that had 
happened since he had entered the room seemed to him a dream in its 
improbability and in the more than life-like force dreams have in their 
inconsequence. Even the woman letting herself go on his arm seemed to 
have no weight as it might have happened in a dream. 
 
"She is there," breathed Arlette suddenly, rising on tiptoe to reach 
up to his ear. "She must have heard you go past." 
 
"Where is she?" asked Ral with the same intense secrecy. 
 
"Outside the door. She must have been listening to the murmur of our 
voices. . . ." Arlette breathed into his ear as if relating an 
enormity. "She told me one day that I was one of those who are fit for 
no man's arms." 
 
At this he flung his other arm round her and looked into her enlarged as 
if frightened eyes, while she clasped him with all her strength and they 
stood like that a long time, lips pressed on lips without a kiss, and 
breathless in the closeness of their contact. To him the stillness 
seemed to extend to the limits of the universe. The thought "Am I going 
to die?" flashed through that stillness and lost itself in it like a 
spark flying in an everlasting night. The only result of it was the 
tightening of his hold on Arlette. 
 
An aged and uncertain voice was heard uttering the word "Arlette." 
Catherine, who had been listening to their murmurs, could not bear the 
long silence. They heard her trembling tones as distinctly as though she 
had been in the room. Ral felt as if it had saved his life. They 
separated silently. 
 
"Go away," called out Arlette. 
 
"Arl - - . . ." 
 
"Be quiet," she cried louder. "You can do nothing." 
 
"Arlette," came through the door, tremulous and commanding. 
 
"She will wake up Scevola," remarked Arlette to Ral in a 
conversational tone. And they both waited for sounds that did not come. 
Arlette pointed her finger at the wall. "He is there, you know." 
 
"He is asleep," muttered Ral. But the thought "I am lost" which he 
formulated in his mind had no reference to Scevola. 
 
"He is afraid," said Arlette contemptuously in an undertone. "But 
that means little. He would quake with fright one moment and rush out to 
do murder the next." 
 
Slowly, as if drawn by the irresistible authority of the old woman, they 
had been moving towards the door. Ral thought with the sudden 
enlightenment of passion: "If she does not go now I won't  have the 
strength to part from her in the morning." He had no image of death 
before his eyes but of a long and intolerable separation. A sigh verging 
upon a moan reached them from the other side of the door and made the 
air around them heavy with sorrow against which locks and keys will not 
avail. 
 
"You had better go to her," he whispered in a penetrating tone. 
 
"Of course I will," said Arlette with some feeling. "Poor old thing. 
She and I have only each other in the world, but I am the daughter here, 
she must do what I tell her." With one of her hands on Ral's shoulder 
she put her mouth close to the door and said distinctly: 
 
"I am coming directly. Go back to your room and wait for me," as if 
she had no doubt of being obeyed. 
 
A profound silence ensued. Perhaps Catherine had gone already. Ral and 
Arlette stood still for a whole minute as if both had been changed into 
stone. 
 
"Go now," said Ral in a hoarse, hardly audible voice. 
 
She gave him a quick kiss on the lips and again they stood like a pair 
of enchanted lovers bewitched into immobility. 
 
"If she stays on," thought Ral, "I shall never have the courage to 
tear myself away, and then I shall have to blow my brains out." But 
when at last she moved he seized her again and held her as if she had 
been his very life. When he let her go he was appalled by hearing a very 
faint laugh of her secret joy. 
 
"Why do you laugh?" he asked in a scared tone. 
 
She stopped to answer him over her shoulder. 
 
"I laughed because I thought of all the days to come. Days and days and 
days. Have you thought of them?" 
 
"Yes," Ral faltered, like a man stabbed to the heart, holding the door 
half open. And he was glad to have something to hold on to. 
 
She slipped out with a soft rustle of her silk skirt, but before he had 
time to close the door behind her she put back her arm for an instant. 
He had just time to press the palm of her hand to his lips. It was cool. 
She snatched it away and he had the strength of mind to shut the door 
after her. He felt like a man chained to the wall and dying of thirst, 
from whom a cold drink is snatched away. The room became dark suddenly. 
He thought, "A cloud over the moon, a cloud over the moon, an enormous 
cloud," while he walked rigidly to the window, insecure and swaying as 
if on a tight rope. After a moment he perceived the moon in a sky on 
which there was no sign of the smallest cloud anywhere. He said to 
himself, "I suppose I nearly died just now. But no," he went on 
thinking with deliberate cruelty, "Oh, no, I shall not die. I shall 
only suffer, suffer, suffer. . . ." 
 
"Suffer, suffer." Only by stumbling against the side of the bed did he 
discover that he had gone away from the window. At once he flung himself 
violently on the bed with his face buried in the pillow, which he bit to 
restrain the cry of distress about to burst through his lips. Natures 
schooled into insensibility when once overcome by a mastering passion 
are like vanquished giants ready for despair. He, a man on service, felt 
himself shrinking from death and that doubt contained in itself all 
possible doubts of his own fortitude. The only thing he knew was that he 
would be gone to-morrow morning. He shuddered along his whole extended 
length, then lay still gripping a handful of bedclothes in each hand to 
prevent himself from leaping up in panicky restlessness. He was saying 
to himself pedantically, "I must lie down and rest, I must rest to have 
strength for to-morrow, I must rest," while the tremendous struggle to 
keep still broke out in waves of perspiration on his forehead. At last 
sudden oblivion must have descended on him because he turned over and 
sat up suddenly with the sound of the word "Ecoutez" in his ears. 
 
A strange, dim, cold light filled the room; a light he did not recognize 
for anything he had known before, and at the foot of his bed stood a 
figure in dark garments with a dark shawl over its head, with a 
fleshless predatory face and dark hollows for its eyes, silent, 
expectant, implacable. . . . Is this death?" he asked himself, staring 
at it terrified. It resembled Catherine. It said again: "Ecoutez." He 
took away his eyes from it and glancing down noticed that his clothes 
were torn open on his chest. He would not look up at that thing, 
whatever it was, spectre or old woman, and said: 
 
"Yes, I hear you." 
 
"You are an honest man." It was Catherine's unemotional voice. "The 
day has broken. You will go away." 
 
"Yes," he said without raising his head. 
 
"She is asleep," went on Catherine or whoever it was, "exhausted, and 
you would have to shake her hard before she would wake. You will go. You 
know," the voice continued inflexibly, 'she is my niece, and you know 
that there is death in the folds of her skirt and blood about her feet. 
She is for no man." 
 
Ral felt all the anguish of an unearthly experience. This thing that 
looked like Catherine and spoke like a cruel fate had to be faced. He 
raised his head in this light that seemed to him appalling and not of 
this world. 
 
"Listen well to me, you too," he said. "If she had all the madness of 
the world and the sin of all the murders of the Revolution on her 
shoulders, I would still hug her to my breast. Do you understand?" 
 
The apparition which resembled Catherine lowered and raised its hooded 
head slowly. "There was a time when I could have hugged l'enfer mme to 
my breast. He went away. He had his vow. You have only your honesty. You 
will go." 
 
"I have my duty," said Lieutenant Ral in measured tones, as if calmed 
by the excess of horror that old woman inspired him with. 
 
"Go without disturbing her, without looking at her." 
 
"I will carry my shoes in my hand," he said. He sighed deeply and felt 
as if sleepy. "It is very early," he muttered. 
 
"Peyrol is already down at the well," announced Catherine. "What can 
he be doing there all this time?" she added in a troubled voice. Ral, 
with his feet now on the ground, gave her a side glance; but she was 
already gliding away, and when he looked again she had vanished from the 
room and the door was shut. 
 
 
Catherine, going downstairs, found Peyrol still at the well. He seemed 
to be looking into it with extreme interest. 
 
"Your coffee is ready, Peyrol," she shouted to him from the doorway. 
 
He turned very sharply like a man surprised and came along smiling. 
 
"That's pleasant news, Mademoiselle Catherine," he said. "You are 
down early." 
 
"Yes," she admitted, "but you too, Peyrol. Is Michel about? Let him 
come and have some coffee too." 
 
"Michel's at the tartane. Perhaps you don't  know that she is going to 
make a little voyage." He drank a mouthful of coffee and took a bite 
out of a slice of bread. He was hungry. He had been up all night and had 
even had a conversation with Citizen Scevola. He had also done some work 
with Michel after daylight; however, there had not been much to do 
because the tartane was always kept ready for sea. Then after having 
again locked up Citizen Scevola, who was extremely concerned as to what 
was going to happen to him but was left in a state of uncertainty, he 
had come up to the farm, had gone upstairs where he was busy with 
various things for a time, and then had stolen down very cautiously to 
the well, where Catherine, whom he had not expected downstairs so early, 
had seen him before she went into Lieutenant Ral's room. While he 
enjoyed his coffee he listened without any signs of surprise to 
Catherine's comments upon the disappearance of Scevola. She had looked 
into his den. He had not slept on his pallet last night, of that she was 
certain, and he was nowhere to be seen, not even in the most distant 
field, from the points of vantage around the farm. It was inconceivable 
that he should have slipped away to Madrague, where he disliked to go, 
or to the village, where he was afraid to go. Peyrol remarked that 
whatever happened to him he was no great loss, but Catherine was not to 
be soothed. 
 
"It frightens a body," she said. "He may be hiding somewhere to jump 
on one treacherously. You know what I mean, Peyrol." 
 
"Well, the lieutenant will have nothing to fear, as he's going away. As 
to myself, Scevola and I are good friends. I had a long talk with him 
quite recently. You two women can manage him perfectly; and then, who 
knows, perhaps he has gone away for good." 
 
Catherine stared at him, if such a word as stare can be applied to a 
profound contemplative gaze. "The lieutenant has nothing to fear from 
him," she repeated cautiously. 
 
"No, he is going away. Didn't  you know it?" The old woman continued to 
look at him profoundly. "Yes, he is on service." 
 
For another minute or so Catherine continued silent in her contemplative 
attitude. Then her hesitation came to an end. She could not resist the 
desire to inform Peyrol of the events of the night. As she went on 
Peyrol forgot the half-full bowl of coffee and his half-eaten piece of 
bread. Catherine's voice flowed with austerity. She stood there, 
imposing and solemn like a peasant-priestess. The relation of what had 
been to her a soul-shaking experience did not take much time, and she 
finished with the words, "The lieutenant is an honest man." And after 
a pause she insisted further: "There is no denying it. He has acted 
like an honest man." 
 
For a moment longer Peyrol continued to look at the coffee in the bowl, 
then without warning got up with such violence that the chair behind him 
was thrown back upon the flagstones. 
 
"Where is he, that honest man?" he shouted suddenly in stentorian 
tones which not only caused Catherine to raise her hands, but frightened 
himself, and he dropped at once to a mere forcible utterance. "Where is 
that man? Let me see him." 
 
Even Catherine's hieratic composure was disturbed. "Why," she said, 
looking really disconcerted, "he will be down here directly. This bowl 
of coffee is for him." 
 
Peyrol made as if to leave the kitchen, but Catherine stopped him. "For 
God's sake, Monsieur Peyrol," she said, half in entreaty and half in 
command, "don't  wake up the child. Let her sleep. Oh, let her sleep! 
Don't  wake her up. God only knows how long it is since she has slept 
properly. I could not tell you. I daren't  think of it." She was shocked 
by hearing Peyrol declare: "All this is confounded nonsense." But he 
sat down again, seemed to catch sight of the coffee bowl and emptied 
what was left in it down his throat. 
 
"I don't  want her on my hands more crazy than she has been before," 
said Catherine, in a sort of exasperation but in a very low tone. This 
phrase in its selfish form expressed a real and profound compassion for 
her niece. She dreaded the moment when that fatal Arlette would wake up 
and the dreadful complications of life which her slumbers had suspended 
would have to be picked up again. Peyrol fidgeted on his seat. 
 
"And so he told you he was going? He actually did tell you that?" he 
asked. 
 
"He promised to go before the child wakes up. . . . At once." 
 
"But, sacr nom d'un chien, there is never any wind before eleven 
o'clock," Peyrol exclaimed in a tone of profound annoyance, yet trying 
to moderate his voice, while Catherine, indulgent to his changing moods, 
only compressed her lips and nodded at him soothingly. "It is 
impossible to work with people like that," he mumbled. 
 
"Do you know, Monsieur Peyrol, that she has been to see the priest?" 
Catherine was heard suddenly, towering above her end of the table. The 
two women had had a talk before Arlette had been induced by her aunt to 
lie down. Peyrol gave a start. 
 
"What? Priest? . . . Now look here, Catherine," he went on with 
repressed ferocity, "do you imagine that all this interests me in the 
least?" 
 
"I can think of nothing but that niece of mine. We two have nobody but 
each other in the world," she went on, reproducing the very phrase 
Arlette had used to Ral. She seemed to be thinking aloud, but noticed 
that Peyrol was listening with attention. "He wanted to shut her up 
from everybody," and the old woman clasped her meagre hands with a 
sudden gesture. "I suppose there are still some convents about the world." 
 
"You and the patronne are mad together," declared Peyrol. "All this 
only shows what an ass the cur is. I don't  know much about these things, 
though I have seen some nuns in my time, and some very queer ones too, 
but it seems to me that they don't  take crazy people into convents. 
Don't  you be afraid. I tell you that." He stopped because the inner 
door of the kitchen came open and Lieutenant Ral stepped in. His sword 
hung on his forearm by the belt, his hat was on his head. He dropped his 
little valise on the floor and sat down in the nearest chair to put on 
his shoes which he had brought down in his other hand. Then he came up 
to the table. Peyrol, who had kept his eyes on him, thought: "Here is 
one who looks like a moth scorched in the fire." Ral's eyes were sunk, 
his cheeks seemed hollowed and the whole face had an arid and dry aspect. 
 
"Well, you are in a fine state for the work of deceiving the enemy," 
Peyrol observed. "Why, to look at you, nobody would believe a word you 
said. You are not going to be ill, I hope. You are on service. You 
haven't  got the right to be ill. I say, Mademoiselle Catherine, produce 
the bottle - you know, my private bottle. . . ." He snatched it from 
Catherine's hand, poured some brandy into the lieutenant's coffee, 
pushed the bowl towards him and waited. "Nom de nom!" he said 
forcibly, "don't  you know what this is for? It's for you to drink." 
Ral obeyed with a strange, automatic docility. "And now," said Peyrol, 
getting up, "I will go to my room and shave. This is a great day - the 
day we are going to see the lieutenant off." 
 
Till then Ral had not uttered a word, but directly the door closed 
behind Peyrol he raised his head. 
 
"Catherine!" His voice was like a rustle in his throat. She was 
looking at him steadily and he continued: "Listen, when she finds I am 
gone you tell her I will return soon. To-morrow. Always to-morrow." 
 
"Yes, my good Monsieur," said Catherine in an unmoved voice but 
clasping her hands convulsively. "There is nothing else I would dare 
tell her!" 
 
"She will believe you," whispered Ral wildly. 
 
"Yes! She will believe me," repeated Catherine in a mournful tone. 
 
Ral got up, put the sword-belt over his head, picked up the valise. 
There was a little flush on his cheeks. 
 
"Adieu," he said to the silent old woman. She made no answer, but as 
he turned away she raised her hand a little, hesitated, and let it fall 
again. It seemed to her that the women of Escampobar had been singled 
out for divine wrath. Her niece appeared to her like the scapegoat 
charged with all the murders and blasphemies of the Revolution. She 
herself too had been cast out from the grace of God. But that had been a 
long time ago. She had made her peace with Heaven since. Again she 
raised her hand and, this time, made in the air the sign of the cross at 
the back of Lieutenant Ral. 
 
Meanwhile upstairs Peyrol, scraping his big flat cheek with an English 
razor-blade at the window, saw Lieutenant Ral on the path to the shore; 
and high above there, commanding a vast view of sea and land, he 
shrugged his shoulders impatiently with no visible provocation. One 
could not trust those epaulette-wearers. They would cram a fellow's head 
with notions either for their own sake or for the sake of the service. 
Still, he was too old a bird to be caught with chaff; and besides, that 
long-legged stiff beggar going down the path with all his officer airs, 
was honest enough. At any rate he knew a seaman when he saw one, though 
he was as cold-blooded as a fish. Peyrol had a smile which was a little 
awry. 
 
Cleaning the razor-blade  one of a set of twelve in a case  he had a 
vision of a brilliantly hazy ocean and an English Indiaman with her 
yards braced all ways, her canvas blowing loose above her bloodstained 
decks overrun by a lot of privateersmen and with the island of Ceylon 
swelling like a thin blue cloud on the far horizon. He had always wished 
to own a set of English blades and there he had got it, fell over it as 
it were, lying on the floor of a cabin which had been already ransacked. 
"For good steel - it was good steel," he thought looking at the blade 
fixedly. And there it was, nearly worn out. The others too. That steel! 
And here he was holding the case in his hand as though he had just 
picked it up from the floor. Same case. Same man. And the steel worn out. 
 
He shut the case brusquely, flung it into his sea-chest which was 
standing open, and slammed the lid down. The feeling which was in his 
breast and had been known to more articulate men than himself, was that 
life was a dream less substantial than the vision of Ceylon lying like a 
cloud on the sea. Dream left astern. Dream straight ahead. This 
disenchanted philosophy took the shape of fierce swearing. "Sacr nom de 
nom de nom. . . . Tonnerre de bon Dieu!" 
 
While tying his neckcloth he handled it with fury as though he meant to 
strangle himself with it. He rammed a soft cap on to his venerable locks 
recklessly, seized his cudgel - but before leaving the room walked up to 
the window giving on the east. He could not see the Petite Passe on 
account of the lookout hill, but to the left a great portion of the 
Hyres roadstead lay spread out before him, pale grey in the morning 
light, with the land about Cape Blanc swelling in the distance with all 
its details blurred as yet and only one conspicuous object presenting to 
his sight something that might have been a lighthouse by its shape, but 
which Peyrol knew very well was the English corvette already under way 
and with all her canvas set. 
 
This sight pleased Peyrol mainly because he had expected it. The 
Englishman was doing exactly what he had expected he would do, and 
Peyrol looked towards the English cruiser with a smile of malicious 
triumph as if he were confronting her captain. For some reason or other 
he imagined Captain Vincent as long-faced, with yellow teeth and a wig, 
whereas that officer wore his own hair and had a set of teeth which 
would have done honour to a London belle and was really the hidden cause 
of Captain Vincent appearing so often wreathed in smiles. 
 
That ship at this great distance and steering in his direction held 
Peyrol at the window long enough for the increasing light of the morning 
to burst into sunshine, colouring and filling-in the flat outline of the 
land with tints of wood and rock and field, with clear dots of buildings 
enlivening the view. The sun threw a sort of halo around the ship. 
Recollecting himself, Peyrol left the room and shut the door quietly. 
Quietly too he descended the stairs from his garret. On the landing he 
underwent a short inward struggle, at the end of which he approached the 
door of Catherine's room and opening it a little, put his head in. 
Across the whole width of it he saw Arlette fast asleep. Her aunt had 
thrown a light coverlet over her. Her low shoes stood at the foot of the 
bed. Her black hair lay loose on the pillow; and Peyrol's gaze became 
arrested by the long eyelashes on her pale cheek. Suddenly he fancied 
she moved, and he withdrew his head sharply, pulling the door to. He 
listened for a moment as if tempted to open it again, but judging it too 
risky, continued on his way downstairs. At his reappearance in the 
kitchen Catherine turned sharply. She was dressed for the day, with a 
big white cap on her head, a black bodice and a brown skirt with ample 
folds. She had a pair of varnished sabots on her feet over her shoes. 
 
"No signs of Scevola," she said, advancing towards Peyrol. "And 
Michel too has not been here yet." 
 
Peyrol thought that if she had been only shorter, what with her black 
eyes and slightly curved nose she would have looked like a witch. But 
witches can read people's thoughts, and he looked openly at Catherine 
with the pleasant conviction that she could not read his thoughts. He said: 
 
"I took good care not to make any noise upstairs, Mademoiselle 
Catherine. When I am gone the house will be empty and quiet enough." 
 
She had a curious expression. She struck Peyrol suddenly as if she were 
lost in that kitchen in which A she had reigned for many years. He 
continued: 
 
"You will be alone all the morning." 
 
She seemed to be listening to some distant sound, and after Peyrol had 
added, "Everything is all right now," she nodded and after a moment 
said in a manner that for her was unexpectedly impulsive: 
 
"Monsieur Peyrol, I am tired of life." 
 
He shrugged his shoulders and with somewhat sinister jocosity remarked: 
 
"I will tell you what it is; you ought to have been married." 
 
She turned her back on him abruptly. 
 
"No offence," Peyrol excused himself in a tone of gloom rather than of 
apology. "It is no use to attach any importance to things. What is this 
life? Phew! Nobody can remember one-tenth of it. Here I am; and, you 
know, I would bet that if one of my old-time chums came along and saw me 
like this, here with you - I mean one of those chums that stand up for a 
fellow in a scrimmage and look after him should he be hurt - well, I 
bet," he repeated, "he wouldn't  know me. He would say to himself 
perhaps, `Hullo! here's a comfortable married couple." " 
 
He paused. Catherine, with her back to him and calling him, not 
"Monsieur," but "Peyrol," tout court, remarked, not exactly with 
displeasure, but rather with an ominous accent that this was no time for 
idle talk. Peyrol, however, continued, though his tone was very far from 
being that of idle talk: 
 
"But you see, Mademoiselle Catherine, you were not like the others. You 
allowed yourself to be struck all of a heap, and at the same time you 
were too hard on yourself." 
 
Her long thin frame, bent low to work the bellows under the enormous 
overmantel, she assented: "Perhaps! We Escampobar women were always 
hard on ourselves." 
 
"That's what I say. If you had had things happen to you which happened 
to me. . . ." 
 
"But you men, you are different. lt doesn't  matter what you do. You 
have got your own strength. You need not be hard on yourselves. You go 
from one thing to another thoughtlessly." 
 
He remained looking at her searchingly with something like a hint of a 
smile on his shaven lips, but she turned away to the sink where one of 
the women working about the farm had deposited a great pile of 
vegetables. She started on them with a broken-bladed knife, preserving 
her sibylline air even in that homely occupation. 
 
"It will be a good soup, I see, at noon to-day," said the rover 
suddenly. He turned on his heels and went out through the salle. The 
whole world lay open to him, or at any rate the whole of the 
Mediterranean, viewed down the ravine between the two hills. The bell of 
the farm's milch-cow, which had a talent for keeping herself invisible, 
reached him from the right, but he could not see as much as the tips of 
her horns, though he looked for them. He stepped out sturdily. He had 
not gone twenty yards down the ravine when another sound made him stand 
still as if changed into stone. It was a faint noise resembling very 
much the hollow rumble an empty farm-cart would make on a stony road, 
but Peyrol looked up at the sky, and though it was perfectly clear, he 
did not seem pleased with its aspect. He had a hill on each side of him 
and the placid cove below his feet. He muttered "H'm! Thunder at 
sunrise. It must be in the west. It only wanted that!" He feared it 
would first kill the little breeze there was and then knock the weather 
up altogether. For a moment all his faculties seemed paralyzed by that 
faint sound. On that sea ruled by the gods of Olympus he might have been 
a pagan mariner subject to Jupiter's caprices; but like a defiant pagan 
he shook his fist vaguely at space which answered him by a short and 
threatening mutter. Then he swung on his way till he caught sight of the 
two mastheads of the tartane, when he stopped to listen. No sound of any 
sort reached him from there, and he went on his way thinking, "Go from 
one thing to another thoughtlessly! Indeed! . . . That's all old 
Catherine knows about it." He had so many things to think of that he 
did not know which to lay hold of first. He just let them lie jumbled up 
in his head. His feelings too were in a state of confusion, and vaguely 
he felt that his conduct was at the mercy of an internal conflict. The 
consciousness of that fact accounted perhaps for his sardonic attitude 
towards himself and outwardly towards those whom he perceived on board 
the tartane; and especially towards the lieutenant whom he saw sitting 
on the deck leaning against the head of the rudder, characteristically 
aloof from the two other persons on board. Michel, also 
characteristically, was standing on the top of the little cabin scuttle, 
obviously looking out for his "matre." Citizen Scevola, sitting on 
deck, seemed at first sight to be at liberty, but as a matter of fact he 
was not. He was loosely tied up to a stanchion by three turns of the 
mainsheet with the knot in such a position that he could not get at it 
without attracting attention; and that situation seemed also somewhat 
characteristic of Citizen Scevola with its air of half liberty, half 
suspicion and, as it were, contemptuous restraint. The sans-culotte, 
whose late experiences had nearly unsettled his reason, first by their 
utter incomprehensibility and afterwards by the enigmatical attitude of 
Peyrol, had dropped his head and folded his arms on his breast. And that 
attitude was dubious too. It might have been resignation or it might 
have been profound sleep. The rover addressed himself first to the 
lieutenant. 
 
"Le moment approche," said Peyrol with a queer twitch at a corner of 
his lip, while under his soft woollen cap his venerable locks stirred in 
the breath of a suddenly warm air. "The great moment - eh?" 
 
He leaned over the big tiller, and seemed to be hovering above the 
lieutenant's shoulder. 
 
"What's this infernal company?" murmured the latter without even 
looking at Peyrol. 
 
"All old friends - quoi?" said Peyrol in a homely tone. "We will keep 
that little affair amongst ourselves. The fewer the men the greater the 
glory. Catherine is getting the vegetables ready for the noonday soup 
and the Englishman is coming down towards the Passe where he will arrive 
about noon too, ready to have his eye put out. You know, lieutenant, 
that will be your job. You may depend on me for sending you off when the 
moment comes. For what is it to you? You have no friends, you have not 
even a petite amie. As to expecting an old rover like me - oh no, 
lieutenant! Of course liberty is sweet, but what do you know of it, you 
epaulette-wearers? Moreover, I am no good for quarter-deck talks and all 
that politeness." 
 
"I wish, Peyrol, you would not talk so much," said Lieutenant Ral, 
turning his head slightly. He was struck by the strange expression on 
the old rover's face. "And I don't  see what the actual moment matters. 
I am going to look for the fleet. All you have to do is to hoist the 
sails for me and then scramble ashore." 
 
"Very simple," observed Peyrol through his teeth, and then began to sing: 
 
"Quoique leurs chapeaux sont bien laids God-dam! Moi, j'aime les 
Anglais Ils ont un si bon caractre!" 
 
 
"H! Citoyen!" and then remarked confidentially to Ral: "He isn't  
asleep, you know, but he isn't  like the English, he has a sacr mauvais 
caractre. He got into his head," continued Peyrol, in a loud and 
innocent tone, "that you locked him up in this cabin last night. Did 
you notice the venomous glance he gave you just now?" 
 
Both Lieutenant Ral and the innocent Michel appeared surprised at his 
boisterousness; but all the time Peyrol was thinking: "I wish to 
goodness I knew how that thunderstorm is getting on and what course it 
is shaping. I can't  find that out unless I go up to the farm and get a 
view to the westward. It may be as far as the Rhne Valley; no doubt it 
is and it will come out of it too, curses on it. One won't  be able to 
reckon on half an hour of steady wind from any quarter." He directed a 
look of ironic gaiety at all the faces in turn. Michel met it with a 
faithful-dog gaze and innocently open mouth. Scevola kept his chin 
buried on his chest. Lieutenant Ral was insensible to outward 
impressions and his absent stare made nothing of Peyrol. The rover 
himself presently fell into thought. The last stir of air died out in 
the little basin, and the sun clearing Porquerolles inundated it with a 
sudden light in which Michel blinked like an owl. 
 
"It's hot early," he announced aloud but only because he had formed 
the habit of talking to himself. He would not have presumed to offer an 
opinion unless asked by Peyrol. 
 
His voice having recalled Peyrol to himself, he proposed to masthead the 
yards and even asked Lieutenant Ral to help in that operation which was 
accomplished in silence except for the faint squeaking of the blocks. 
The sails, however, were kept hauled up in the gear. 
 
"Like this," said Peyrol, "you have only to let go the ropes and you 
will be under canvas at once." 
 
Without answering Ral returned to his position by the rudder-head. He 
was saying to himself - "I am sneaking off. No, there is honour, duty. 
And of course I will return. But when? They will forget all about me and 
I shall never be exchanged. This war may last for years, - " and 
illogically he wished he could have had a God to whom he could pray for 
relief in his anguish. "She will be in despair," he thought, writhing 
inwardly at the mental picture of a distracted Arlette. Life, however, 
had embittered his spirit early, and he said to himself: "But in a 
month's time will she even give me a thought?" Instantly he felt 
remorseful with a remorse strong enough to lift him to his feet as if he 
were morally obliged to go up again and confess to Arlette this 
sacrilegious cynicism of thought. "I am mad," he muttered, perching 
himself on the low rail. His lapse from faith plunged him into such a 
depth of unhappiness that he felt all his strength of will go out of 
him. He sat there apathetic and suffering. He meditated dully: "Young 
men have been known to die suddenly; why should not I? I am, as a matter 
of fact, at the end of my endurance. I am half dead already. Yes! but 
what is left of that life does not belong to me now." 
 
"Peyrol," he said in such a piercing tone that even Scevola jerked his 
head up; but he made an effort to reduce his shrillness and went on 
speaking very carefully: "I have left a letter for the Secretary 
General at the Majorit to pay twenty-five hundred francs to Jean - you 
are Jean, are you not? - Peyrol, price of the tartane in which I sail. 
Is that right?" 
 
"What did you do that for?" asked Peyrol with an extremely stony face. 
"To get me into trouble?" 
 
"Don't  be a fool, gunner, nobody remembers your, name. It is buried 
under a stack of blackened paper. I must ask you to go there and tell 
them that you have seen with your own eyes Lieutenant Ral sail away on 
his mission." 
 
The stoniness of Peyrol persisted but his eyes were full of fury. "Oh, 
yes, I see myself going there. Twenty-five hundred francs! Twenty-five 
hundred fiddlesticks." His tone changed suddenly. "I heard some one 
say that you were an honest man, and I suppose this is a proof of it. 
Well, to the devil with your honesty." He glared at the lieutenant and 
then thought: "He doesn't  even pretend to listen to what I say" - and 
another sort of anger, partly contemptuous and with something of dim 
sympathy in it, replaced his downright fury. "Pah!" he said, spat over 
the side, and walking up to Ral with great deliberation, slapped him on 
the shoulder. The only effect of this proceeding was to make Ral look up 
at him without any expression whatever. 
 
Peyrol then picked up the lieutenant's valise and carried it down into 
the cuddy. As he passed by, Citizen Scevola uttered the word "Citoyen" 
but it was only when he came back again that Peyrol condescended to say, 
"Well?" 
 
"What are you going to do with me?" asked Scevola. 
 
"You would not give me an account of how you came on board this 
tartane," said Peyrol in a tone that sounded almost friendly, 
"therefore I need not tell you what I will do with you." 
 
A low muttering of thunder followed so close upon his words that it 
might have come out of Peyrol's own lips. The rover gazed uneasily at 
the sky. It was still clear overhead, and at the bottom of that little 
basin surrounded by rocks there was no view in any other direction; but 
even as he gazed there was a sort of flicker in the sunshine succeeded 
by a mighty but distant clap of thunder. For the next half hour Peyrol 
and Michel were busy ashore taking a long line from the tartane to the 
entrance of the little basin where they fastened the end of it to a 
bush. This was for the purpose of hauling the tartane out into the cove. 
Then they came aboard again. The bit of sky above their heads was still 
clear, but while walking with the hauling line near the cove Peyrol had 
got a glimpse of the edge of the cloud. The sun grew scorching all of a 
sudden, and in the stagnating air a mysterious change seemed to come 
over the quality and the colour of the light. Peyrol flung his cap on 
the deck, baring his head to the subtle menace of the breathless 
stillness of the air. 
 
"Phew! a chauffe," he muttered, rolling up the sleeves of his jacket. 
He wiped his forehead with his mighty forearm upon which a mermaid with 
an immensely long fishtail was tattooed. Perceiving the lieutenant's 
belted sword lying on the deck, he picked it up and without any ceremony 
threw it down the cabin stairs. As he was passing again near Scevola, 
the sans-culotte raised his voice. 
 
"I believe you are one of those wretches corrupted by English gold," 
he cried like one inspired. His shining eyes, his red cheeks, testified 
to the fire of patriotism burning in his breast, and he used that 
conventional phrase of revolutionary time, a time when, intoxicated with 
oratory, he used to run about dealing death to traitors of both sexes 
and all ages. But his denunciation was received in such profound silence 
that his own belief in it wavered. His words had sunk into an abysmal 
stillness and the next sound was Peyrol speaking to Ral. 
 
"I am afraid you will get very wet, lieutenant, before long," and 
then, looking at Ral, he thought with great conviction: "Wet! He 
wouldn't  mind getting drowned." Standing stock-still he fretted and 
fumed inwardly, wondering where precisely the English ship was by this 
time and where the devil that thunderstorm had got to: for the sky had 
become as mute as the oppressed earth. Ral asked: 
 
"Is it not time to haul out, gunner?" And Peyrol said: 
 
"There is not a breath of wind anywhere for miles." He was gratified 
by the fairly loud mutter rolling apparently along the inland hills. 
Over the pool a little ragged cloud torn from the purple robe of the 
storm floated, arrested and thin like a bit of dark gauze. 
 
Above at the farm Catherine had heard too the ominous mutter and came to 
the door of the salle. From there she could see the purple cloud itself, 
convoluted and solid, and its sinister shadow lying over the hills. The 
oncoming of the storm added to her sense of uneasiness at finding 
herself all alone in the house. Michel had not come up. She would have 
welcomed Michel, to whom she hardly ever spoke, simply as a person 
belonging to the usual order of things. She was not talkative, but 
somehow she would have liked somebody to speak to just for a moment. 
This cessation of all sound, voices or footsteps, around the buildings 
was not welcome; but looking at the cloud, she thought that there would 
be noise enough presently. However, stepping back into the kitchen, she 
was met by a sound that made her regret the oppressive silence, by its 
piercing and terrifying character; it was a shriek in the upper part of 
the house where, as far as she knew, there was only Arlette asleep. In 
her attempt to cross the kitchen to the foot of the stairs the weight of 
her accumulated years fell upon the old woman. She felt suddenly very 
feeble and hardly able to breathe. And all at once the thought, 
"Scevola! Was he murdering her up there?" paralyzed the last remnant 
of her physical powers. What else could it be? She fell, as if shot, 
into a chair under the first shock and found herself unable to move. 
Only her brain remained active, and she raised her hands to her eyes as 
if to shut out the image of the horrors upstairs. She heard nothing more 
from above. Arlette was dead. She thought that now it was her turn. 
While her body quailed before the brutal violence, her weary spirit 
longed ardently f or the end. Let him come! Let all this be over at 
last, with a blow on the head or a stab in the breast. She had not the 
courage to uncover her eyes. She waited. But after about a minute - it 
seemed to her interminable - she heard rapid footsteps overhead. Arlette 
was running here and there. Catherine uncovered her eyes and was about 
to rise when she heard at the top of the stairs the name of Peyrol 
shouted with a desperate accent. Then, again, after the shortest of 
pauses, the cry of: "Peyrol, Peyrol!" and then the sound of feet 
running downstairs. There was another shriek, "Peyrol!" just outside 
the door before it flew open. Who was pursuing her? Catherine managed to 
stand up. Steadying herself with one hand on the table she presented an 
undaunted front to her niece who ran into the kitchen with loose hair 
flying and the appearance of wildest distraction in her eyes. 
 
The staircase door had slammed to behind her. Nobody was pursuing her; 
and Catherine, putting forth her lean brown arm, arrested Arlette's 
flight with such a jerk that the two women swung against each other. She 
seized her niece by the shoulders. 
 
"What is this, in Heaven's name? Where are you rushing to?" she cried, 
and the other, as if suddenly exhausted, whispered: 
 
"I woke up from an awful dream." 
 
The kitchen grew dark under the cloud that hung over the house now. 
There was a feeble flicker of lightning and a faint crash, far away. 
 
The old woman gave her niece a little shake. 
 
"Dreams are nothing," she said. "You are awake now. . . ." And 
indeed Catherine thought that no dream could be so bad as the realities 
which kept hold of one through the long waking hours. 
 
"They were killing him," moaned Arlette, beginning to tremble and 
struggle in her aunt's arms. "I tell you they were killing him." 
 
"Be quiet. Were you dreaming of Peyrol?" 
 
She became still in a moment and then whispered: "No. Eugne." 
 
She had seen Ral set upon by a mob of men and women, all dripping with 
blood, in a livid cold light, in front of a stretch of mere shells of 
houses with cracked walls and broken windows, and going down in the 
midst of a forest of raised arms brandishing sabres, clubs, knives, 
axes. There was also a man flourishing a red rag on a stick, while 
another was beating a drum which boomed above the sickening sound of 
broken glass falling like rain on the pavement. And away round the 
corner of an empty street came Peyrol whom she recognized by his white 
head, walking without haste, swinging his cudgel regularly. The terrible 
thing was that Peyrol looked straight at her, not noticing anything, 
composed, without a frown or a smile, unseeing and deaf, while she waved 
her arms and shrieked desperately to him for help. She woke up with the 
piercing sound of his name in her ears and with the impression of the 
dream so powerful that even now, looking distractedly into her aunt's 
face, she could see the bare arms of that murderous crowd raised above 
Ral's sinking head. Yet the name that had sprung to her lips on waking 
was the name of Peyrol. She pushed her aunt away with such force that 
the old woman staggered backwards and to save herself had to catch hold 
of the overmantel above her head. Arlette ran to the door of the salle, 
looked in, came back to her aunt and shouted: "Where is he?" 
 
Catherine really did not know which path the lieutenant had taken. She 
understood very well that "he" meant Ral. 
 
She said: "He went away a long time ago" grasped her niece's arm and 
added with an effort to steady her voice: "He is coming back, 
Arlette - for nothing will keep him away from you." 
 
Arlette, as if mechanically, was whispering to herself the magic name, 
"Peyrol, Peyrol!" then cried: "I want Eugne now. This moment." 
 
Catherine's face wore a look of unflinching patience. "He has departed 
on service," she said. Her niece looked at her with enormous eyes, 
coal-black, profound, and immovable, while in a forcible and distracted 
tone she said: "You and Peyrol have been plotting to rob me of my 
reason. But I will know how to make that old man give him up. He is 
mine!" She spun round wildly like a person looking for a way of escape 
from a deadly peril, and rushed out blindly. 
 
About Escampobar the air was murky but calm, and the silence was so 
profound that it was possible to hear the first heavy drops of rain 
striking the ground. In the intimidating shadow of the storm-cloud, 
Arlette stood irresolute for a moment, but it was to Peyrol, the man of 
mystery and power, that her thoughts turned. She was ready to embrace 
his knees, to entreat and to scold. "Peyrol, Peyrol!" she cried twice, 
and lent her ear as if expecting an answer. Then she shouted: "I want 
him back." 
 
Catherine, alone in the kitchen, moving with dignity, sat down in the 
armchair with the tall back, like a senator in his curule chair awaiting 
the blow of a barbarous fate. 
 
Arlette flew down the slope. The first sign of her coming was a faint 
thin scream which really the rover alone heard and understood. He 
pressed his lips in a particular way, showing his appreciation of the 
coming difficulty. The next moment he saw, poised on a detached boulder 
and thinly veiled by the first perpendicular shower, Arlette, who, 
catching sight of the tartane with the men on board of her, let out a 
prolonged shriek of mingled triumph and despair: "Peyrol! Help! 
Pey - - rol!" 
 
Ral jumped to his feet with an extremely scared face, but Peyrol 
extended an arresting arm. "She is calling to me," he said, gazing at 
the figure poised on the rock. "Well leaped! Sacr nom! . . . Well 
leaped!" And he muttered to himself soberly: "She will break her legs 
or her neck." 
 
"I see you, Peyrol," screamed Arlette, who seemed to be flying through 
the air. "Don't  you dare." 
 
"Yes, here I am," shouted the rover, striking his breast with his fist. 
 
Lieutenant Ral put both his hands over his face. Michel looked on 
open-mouthed, very much as if watching a performance in a circus; but 
Scevola cast his eyes down. Arlette came on board with such an impetus 
that Peyrol had to step forward and save her from a fall which would 
have stunned her. She struggled in his arms with extreme violence. The 
heiress of Escampobar with her loose black hair seemed the incarnation 
of pale fury. "Misrable! Don't  you dare!" A roll of thunder covered 
her voice, but when it had passed away she was heard again in suppliant 
tones. "Peyrol, my friend, my dear old friend. Give him back to me," 
and all the time her body writhed in the arms of the old seaman. "You 
used to love me, Peyrol," she cried without ceasing to struggle, and 
suddenly struck the rover twice in the face with her clenched fist. 
Peyrol's head received the two blows as if it had been made of marble, 
but he felt with fear her body become still, grow rigid in his arms. A 
heavy squall enveloped the group of people on board the tartane. Peyrol 
laid Arlette gently on the deck. Her eyes were closed, her hands 
remained clenched; every sign of life had left her white face. Peyrol 
stood up and looked at the tall rocks streaming with water. The rain 
swept over the tartane with an angry swishing roar to which was added 
the sound of water rushing violently down the folds and seams of the 
precipitous shore vanishing gradually from his sight, as if this had 
been the beginning of a destroying and universal deluge - the end of all 
things. 
 
Lieutenant Ral, kneeling on one knee, contemplated the pale face of 
Arlette. Distinct, yet mingling with the faint growl of distant thunder, 
Peyrol's voice was heard saying: 
 
"We can't  put her ashore and leave her lying in the rain. She must be 
taken up to the house." Arlette's soaked clothes clung to her limbs 
while the lieutenant, his bare head dripping with rain water, looked as 
if he had just saved her from drowning. Peyrol gazed down inscrutably at 
the woman stretched on the deck and at the kneeling man. "She has 
fainted from rage at her old Peyrol," he went on rather dreamily. 
"Strange things do happen. However, lieutenant, you had better take her 
under the arms and step ashore first. I will help you. Ready? Lift." 
 
The movements of the two men had to be careful and their progress was 
slow on the lower, steep part of the slope. After going up more than 
two-thirds of the way, they rested their insensible burden on a flat 
stone. Ral continued to sustain the shoulders but Peyrol lowered the 
feet gently. 
 
"Ha!" he said. "You will be able to carry her yourself the rest of 
the way and give her up to old Catherine. Get a firm footing and I will 
lift her and place her in your arms. You can walk the distance quite 
easily. There. . . . Hold her a little higher, or her feet will be 
catching on the stones." 
 
Arlette's hair was hanging far below the lieutenant's arm in an inert 
and heavy mass. The thunderstorm was passing away, leaving a cloudy sky. 
And Peyrol thought with a profound sigh: "I am tired." 
 
"She is light," said Ral. 
 
"Parbleu, she is light. If she were dead, you would find her heavy 
enough. Allons, lieutenant. No! I am not coming. What's the good? I'll 
stay down here. I have no mind to listen to Catherine's scolding." 
 
The lieutenant, looking absorbed into the face resting in the hollow of 
his arm, never averted his gaze - not even when Peyrol, stooping over 
Arlette, kissed the white forehead near the roots of the hair, black as 
a raven's wing. 
 
"What am I to do?" muttered Ral. 
 
"Do? Why, give her up to old Catherine. And you may just as well tell 
her that I will be coming along directly. That will cheer her up. I used 
to count for something in that house. Allez. For our time is very short." 
 
With these words he turned away and walked slowly down to the tartane. A 
breeze had sprung up. He felt it on his wet neck and was grateful for 
the cool touch which recalled him to himself, to his old wandering self 
which had known no softness and no hesitation in the face of any risk 
offered by life. 
 
As he stepped on board, the shower passed away. Michel, wet to the skin, 
was still in the very same attitude gazing up the slope. Citizen Scevola 
had drawn his knees up and was holding his head in his hands; whether 
because of rain or cold or for some other reason, his teeth were 
chattering audibly with a continuous and distressing rattle. Peyrol 
flung off his jacket, heavy with water, with a strange air as if it was 
of no more use to his mortal envelope, squared his broad shoulders and 
directed Michel in a deep, quiet voice to let go the lines holding the 
tartane to the shore. The faithful henchman was taken aback and required 
one of Peyrol's authoritative "Allez" to put him in motion. Meantime 
the rover cast off the tiller lines and laid his hand with an air of 
mastery on the stout piece of wood projecting horizontally from the 
rudder-head about the level of his hip. The voices and the movements of 
his companions caused Citizen Scevola to master the desperate trembling 
of his jaw. He wriggled a little in his bonds and the question that had 
been on his lips for a good many hours was uttered again. 
 
"What are you going to do with me?" 
 
"What do you think of a little promenade at sea?" Peyrol asked in a 
tone that was not unkindly. 
 
Citizen Scevola, who had seemed totally and completely cast down and 
subdued, let out a most unexpected screech. 
 
"Unbind me. Put me ashore." 
 
Michel, busy forward, was moved to smile as though he had possessed a 
cultivated sense of incongruity. Peyrol remained serious. 
 
"You shall be untied presently," he assured the blood-drinking 
patriot, who had been for so many years the reputed possessor not only 
of Escampobar, but of the Escampobar heiress that, living on 
appearances, he had almost come to believe in that ownership himself. No 
wonder he screeched at this rude awakening. Peyrol raised his voice: 
"Haul on the line, Michel." 
 
As, directly the ropes had been let go, the tartane had swung clear of 
the shore, the movement given her by Michel carried her towards the 
entrance by which the basin communicated with the cove. Peyrol attended 
to the helm, and in a moment, gliding through the narrow gap, the 
tartane carrying her way, shot out almost into the middle of the cove. 
 
A little wind could be felt, running light wrinkles over the water, but 
outside the overshadowed sea was already speckled with white caps. 
Peyrol helped Michel to haul aft the sheets and then went back to the 
tiller. The pretty spick-and-span craft that had been lying idle for so 
long began to glide into the wide world. Michel gazed at the shore as if 
lost in admiration. Citizen Scevola's head had fallen on his knees while 
his nerveless hands clasped his legs loosely. He was the very image of 
dejection. 
 
"H, Michel! Come here and cast loose the citizen. It is only fair that 
he should be untied for a little excursion at sea." 
 
When his order had been executed, Peyrol addressed himself to the 
desolate figure on the deck. 
 
"Like this, should the tartane get capsized in a squall, you will have 
an equal chance with us to swim for your life." 
 
Scevola disdained to answer. He was engaged in biting his knee with rage 
in a stealthy fashion. 
 
"You came on board for some murderous purpose. Who you were after 
unless it was myself, God only knows. I feel quite justified in giving 
you a little outing at sea. I won't  conceal from you, citizen, that it 
may not be without risk to life or limb. But you have only yourself to 
thank for being here." 
 
As the tartane drew clear of the cove, she felt more the weight of the 
breeze and darted forward with a lively motion. A vaguely contented 
smile lighted up Michel's hairy countenance. 
 
"She feels the sea," said Peyrol, who enjoyed the swift movement of 
his vessel. "This is different from your lagoon, Michel." 
 
"To be sure," said Michel with becoming gravity. 
 
"Doesn't  it seem funny to you, as you look back at the shore, to think 
that you have left nothing and nobody behind?" 
 
Michel assumed the aspect of a man confronted by an intellectual 
problem. Since he had become Peyrol's henchman he had lost the habit of 
thinking altogether. Directions and orders were easy things to 
apprehend; but a conversation with him whom he called "notre matre" 
was a serious matter demanding great and concentrated attention. 
 
"Possibly," he murmured, looking strangely self-conscious. 
 
"Well, you are lucky, take my word for it," said the rover, watching 
the course of his little vessel along the head of the peninsula. "You 
have not even a dog to miss you." 
 
"I have only you, Matre Peyrol." 
 
"That's what I was thinking," said Peyrol half to himself, while 
Michel, who had good sea-legs, kept his balance to the movements of the 
craft without taking his eyes from the rover's face. 
 
"No," Peyrol exclaimed suddenly, after a moment of meditation, "I 
could not leave you behind." He extended his open palm towards Michel. 
 
"Put your hand in there," he said. 
 
Michel hesitated for a moment before this extraordinary proposal. At 
last he did so, and Peyrol, holding the bereaved fisherman's hand in a 
powerful grip, said: 
 
"If I had gone away by myself, I would have left you marooned on this 
earth like a man thrown out to die on a desert island." Some dim 
perception of the solemnity of the occasion seemed to enter Michel's 
primitive brain. He connected Peyrol's words with the sense of his own 
insignificant position at the tail of all mankind; and, timidly, he 
murmured with his clear, innocent glance unclouded, the fundamental 
axiom of his philosophy: 
 
"Somebody must be last in this world." 
 
"Well, then, you will have to forgive me all that may happen between 
this and the hour of sunset." 
 
The tartane, obeying the helm, fell off before the wind, with her head 
to the eastward. 
 
Peyrol murmured: "She has not forgotten how to walk the seas." His 
unsubdued heart, heavy for so many days, had a moment of buoyancy - the 
illusion of immense freedom. 
 
At that moment Ral, amazed at finding no tartane in the basin, was 
running madly towards the cove, where he was sure Peyrol must be waiting 
to give her up to him. He ran out on to the very rock on which Peyrol's 
late prisoner had sat after his escape, too tired to care, yet cheered 
by the hope of liberty. But Ral was in a worse plight. He could see no 
shadowy form through the thin veil of rain which pitted the sheltered 
piece of water framed in the rocks. The little craft had been spirited 
away. Impossible! There must be something wrong with his eyes! Again the 
barren hillsides echoed the name of "Peyrol," shouted with all the 
force of Ral's lungs. He shouted it only once, and about five minutes 
afterwards appeared at the kitchen-door, panting, streaming with water 
as if he had fought his way up from the bottom of the sea. In the 
tall-backed armchair Arlette lay, with her limbs relaxed, her head on 
Catherine's arm, her face white as death. He saw her open her black 
eyes, enormous and as if not of this world; he saw old Catherine turn 
her head, heard a cry of surprise, and saw a sort of struggle beginning 
between the two women. He screamed at them like a madman: "Peyrol has 
betrayed me!" and in an instant, with a bang of the door, he was gone. 
 
The rain had ceased. Above his head the unbroken mass of clouds moved to 
the eastward, and he moved in the same direction as if he too were 
driven by the wind up the hillside, towards the lookout. When he reached 
the spot and, gasping, flung one arm round the trunk of the leaning 
tree, the only thing he was aware of during the sombre pause in the 
unrest of the elements was the distracting turmoil of his thoughts. 
After a moment he perceived through the rain the English ship with her 
topsails lowered on the caps, forging ahead slowly across the northern 
entrance of the Petite Passe. His distress fastened insanely on the 
notion of there being a connection between that enemy ship and Peyrol's 
inexplicable conduct. That old man had always meant to go himself! And 
when a moment after, looking to the southward, he made out the shadow of 
the tartane coming round the land in the midst of another squall, he 
muttered to himself a bitter: "Of course!" She had both her sails set. 
Peyrol was indeed pressing her to the utmost in his shameful haste to 
traffic with the enemy. The truth was that from the position in which 
Ral first saw him, Peyrol could not yet see the English ship, and held 
confidently on his course up the middle of the strait. The man-of-war 
and the little tartane saw each other quite unexpectedly at a distance 
that was very little over a mile. Peyrol's heart flew into his mouth at 
finding himself so close to the enemy. On board the Amelia at first no 
notice was taken. It was simply a tartane making for shelter on the 
north side of Porquerolles. But when Peyrol suddenly altered his course, 
the master of the man-of-war, noticing the manuvre, took up the long 
glass for a look. Captain Vincent was on deck and agreed with the 
master's remark that "there was a craft acting suspiciously." Before 
the Amelia could come round in the heavy squall, Peyrol was already 
under the battery of Porquerolles and, so far, safe from capture. 
Captain Vincent had no mind to bring his ship within reach of the 
battery and risk damage in his rigging or hull for the sake of a small 
coaster. However, the tale brought on board by Symons of his discovery 
of a hidden craft, of his capture, and his wonderful escape, had made 
every tartane an object of interest to the whole ship's company. The 
 Amelia remained hove to in the strait while her officers watched the 
lateen sails gliding to and fro under the protecting muzzles of the 
guns. Captain Vincent himself had been impressed by Peyrol's manuvre. 
Coasting craft as a rule were not afraid of the Amelia . After taking a 
few turns on the quarter-deck he ordered Symons to be called aft. 
 
The hero of a unique and mysterious adventure, which had been the only 
subject of talk on board the corvette for the last twenty-four hours, 
came along rolling, hat in hand, and enjoying a secret sense of his 
importance. 
 
"Take the glass," said the captain, "and have a look at that vessel 
under the land. Is she anything like the tartane that you say you have 
been aboard of?" 
 
Symons was very positive. "I think I can swear to those painted 
mastheads, your honour. It is the last thing I remember before that 
murderous ruffian knocked me senseless. The moon shone on them. I can 
make them out now with the glass." As to the fellow boasting to him 
that the tartane was a dispatch-boat and had already made some trips, 
well, Symons begged his honour to believe that the beggar was not sober 
at the time. He did not care what he blurted out. The best proof of his 
condition was that he went away to fetch the soldiers and forgot to come 
back. The murderous old ruffian! "You see, your honour,"  continued 
Symons, "he thought I was not likely to escape after getting a blow 
that would have killed nine out of any ten men. So he went away to boast 
of what he had done before the people ashore; because one of his chums, 
worse than himself, came down thinking he would kill me with a dam  big 
manure fork, saving your honour's presence. A regular savage he was." 
 
Symons paused, staring, as if astonished at the marvels of his own tale. 
The old master, standing at his captain's elbow, observed in a 
dispassionate tone that, anyway, that peninsula was not a bad 
jumping-off place for a craft intending to slip through the blockade. 
Symons, not being dismissed, waited hat in hand while Captain Vincent 
directed the master to fill on the ship and stand a little nearer to the 
battery. It was done, and presently there was a flash of a gun low down 
on the water's edge and a shot came skipping in the direction of the 
 Amelia . It fell very short, but Captain Vincent judged the ship was 
close enough and ordered her to be hove to again. Then Symons was told 
to take a look through the glass once more. After a long interval he 
lowered it and spoke impressively to his captain: 
 
"I can make out three heads aboard, your honour, and one is white. I 
would swear to that white head anywhere." 
 
Captain Vincent made no answer. All this seemed very odd to him; but 
after all it was possible. The craft had certainly acted suspiciously. 
He spoke to the first lieutenant in a half-vexed tone. 
 
"He has done a rather smart thing. He will dodge here till dark and 
then get away. lt is perfectly absurd. I don't  want to send the boats 
too close to the battery. And if I do he may simply sail away from them 
and be round the land long before we are ready to give him chase. 
Darkness will be his best friend. However, we will keep a watch on him 
in case he is tempted to give us the slip late in the afternoon. In that 
case we will have a good try to catch him. If he has anything aboard I 
should like to get hold of it. It may be of some importance, after all." 
 
On board the tartane Peyrol put his own interpretation on the ship's 
movements. His object had been attained. The corvette had marked him for 
her prey. Satisfied as to that, Peyrol watched his opportunity and 
taking advantage of a long squall, with rain thick enough to blur the 
form of the English ship, he left the shelter of the battery to lead the 
Englishman a dance and keep up his character of a man anxious to avoid 
capture. 
 
Ral, from his position on the lookout, saw in the thinning downpour the 
pointed lateen sails glide round the north end of Porquerolles and 
vanish behind the land. Some time afterwards the Amelia made sail in a 
manner that put it beyond doubt that she meant to chase. Her lofty 
canvas was shut off too presently by the land of Porquerolles. When she 
had disappeared Ral turned to Arlette. 
 
"Let us go," he said. 
 
Arlette, stimulated by the short glimpse of Ral at the kitchen door, 
whom she had taken for a vision of a lost man calling her to follow him 
to the end of the world, had torn herself out of the old woman's thin, 
bony arms which could not cope with the struggles of her body and the 
fierceness of her spirit. She had run straight to the lookout, though 
there was nothing to guide her there except a blind impulse to seek Ral 
wherever he might be. He was not aware of her having found him until she 
seized hold of his arm with a suddenness, energy and determination of 
which no one with a clouded mind could have been capable. He felt 
himself being taken possession of in a way that tore all his scruples 
out of his breast. Holding on to the trunk of the tree, he threw his 
other arm round her waist, and when she confessed to him that she did 
not know why she had run up there, but that if she had not found him she 
would have thrown herself over the cliff, he tightened his clasp with 
sudden exultation, as though she had been a gift prayed for instead of a 
stumbling block for his pedantic conscience. Together they walked back. 
In the failing light the buildings awaited them, lifeless, the walls 
darkened by rain and the big slopes of the roofs glistening and sinister 
under the flying desolation of the clouds. In the kitchen Catherine 
heard their mingled footsteps, and rigid in the tall armchair awaited 
their coming. Arlette threw her arms round the old woman's neck while 
Ral stood on one side, looking on. Thought after thought flew through 
his mind and vanished in the strong feeling of the irrevocable nature of 
the event handing him to the woman whom, in the revulsion of his 
feelings, he was inclined to think more sane than himself Arlette, with 
one arm over the old woman's shoulders, kissed the wrinkled forehead 
under the white band of linen that, on the erect head, had the effect of 
a rustic diadem. 
 
"To-morrow you and I will have to walk down to the church." 
 
The austere dignity of Catherine's pose seemed to be shaken by this 
proposal to lead before the God, with whom she had made her peace long 
ago, that unhappy girl chosen to share in the guilt of impious and 
unspeakable horrors which had darkened her mind. 
 
Arlette, still stooping over her aunt's face, extended a hand towards 
Ral, who, making a step forward, took it silently into his grasp. 
 
"Oh, yes, you will, Aunt," insisted Arlette. "You will have to come 
with me to pray for Peyrol, whom you and I shall never see any more." 
 
Catherine's head dropped, whether in assent or grief; and Ral felt an 
unexpected and profound emotion, for he, too, was convinced that none of 
the three persons in the farm would ever see Peyrol again. It was as 
though the rover of the wide seas had left them to themselves on a 
sudden impulse of scorn, of magnanimity, of a passion weary of itself. 
However come by, Ral was ready to clasp for ever to his breast that 
woman touched by the red hand of the Revolution; for she, whose little 
feet had run ankle-deep through the terrors of death, had brought to him 
the sense of triumphant life. 
 
 
Astern of the tartane, the sun, about to set, kindled a streak of dull 
crimson glow between the darkening sea and the overcast sky. The 
peninsula of Giens and the islands of Hyres formed one mass of land 
detaching itself very black against the fiery girdle of the horizon; but 
to the north the long stretch of the Alpine coast continued beyond sight 
its endless sinuosities under the stooping clouds. 
 
The tartane seemed to be rushing together with the run of the waves into 
the arms of the oncoming night. A little more than a mile away on her 
lee quarter, the Amelia , under all plain sail, pressed to the end of 
the chase. It had lasted now for a good many hours, for Peyrol, when 
slipping away, had managed to get the advantage of the Amelia from the 
very start. While still within the large sheet of smooth water which is 
called the Hyres roadstead, the tartane, which was really a craft of 
extraordinary speed, managed to gain positively on the sloop. 
Afterwards, by suddenly darting down the eastern passage between the two 
last islands of the group, Peyrol actually got out of sight of the 
chasing ship, being hidden by the Ile du Levant for a time. The Amelia 
having to tack twice in order to follow, lost ground once more. Emerging 
into the open sea, she had to tack again, and then the position became 
that of a stern chase, which proverbially is known as a long chase. 
Peyrol's skilful seamanship had twice extracted from Captain Vincent a 
low murmur accompanied by a significant compression of lips. At one time 
the Amelia had been near enough the tartane to send a shot ahead of 
her. That one was followed by another which whizzed extraordinarily 
close to the mastheads, but then Captain Vincent ordered the gun to be 
secured again. He said to his first lieutenant, who, his speaking 
trumpet in hand, kept at his elbow: "We must not sink that craft on any 
account. If we could get only an hour's calm, we would carry her with 
the boats." 
 
The lieutenant remarked that there was no hope of a calm for the next 
twenty-four hours at least. 
 
"No," said Captain Vincent, "and in about an hour it will be dark, 
and then he may very well give us the slip. The coast is not very far 
off and there are batteries on both sides of Frjus, under any of which 
he will be as safe from capture as though he were hove up on the beach. 
And look," he exclaimed after a moment's pause, "this is what the 
fellow means to do." 
 
"Yes, sir," said the lieutenant, keeping his eyes on the white speck 
ahead, dancing lightly on the short Mediterranean waves, "he is keeping 
off the wind." 
 
"We will have him in less than an hour," said Captain Vincent, and 
made as if he meant to rub his hands, but suddenly leaned his elbow on 
the rail. "After all," he went on, "properly speaking, it is a race 
between the Amelia and the night." 
 
"And it will be dark early to-day," said the first lieutenant, 
swinging the speaking trumpet by its lanyard. "Shall we take the yards 
off the back-stays, sir?" 
 
"No," said Captain Vincent. "There is a clever seaman aboard that 
tartane. He is running off now, but at any time he may haul up again. We 
must not follow him too closely, or we shall lose the advantage which we 
have now. That man is determined on making his escape." 
 
If those words by some miracle could have been carried to the ears of 
Peyrol, they would have brought to his lips a smile of malicious and 
triumphant exultation. Ever since he had laid his hand on the tiller of 
the tartane every faculty of his resourcefulness and seamanship had been 
bent on deceiving the English captain, that enemy whom he had never 
seen, the man whose mind he had constructed for himself from the 
evolutions of his ship. Leaning against the heavy tiller he addressed 
Michel, breaking the silence of the strenuous afternoon. 
 
"This is the moment," his deep voice uttered quietly. "Ease off the 
mainsheet, Michel. A little now, only." 
 
When Michel returned to the place where he had been sitting to windward, 
the rover noticed his eyes fixed on his face wonderingly. Some vague 
thoughts had been forming themselves slowly, incompletely, in Michel's 
brain. Peyrol met the utter innocence of the unspoken inquiry with a 
smile that, beginning sardonically on his manly and sensitive mouth, 
ended in something resembling tenderness. 
 
"That's so, camarade," he said with particular stress and intonation, 
as if those words contained a full and sufficient answer. Most 
unexpectedly Michel's round and generally staring eyes blinked as if 
dazzled. He too produced from somewhere in the depths of his being a 
queer, misty smile from which Peyrol averted his gaze. 
 
"Where is the citizen?" he asked, bearing hard against the tiller and 
staring straight ahead. "He isn't  gone overboard, is he? I don't  seem 
to have seen him since we rounded the land near Porquerolles Castle." 
 
Michel, after craning his head forward to look over the edge of the 
deck, announced that Scevola was sitting on the keelson. 
 
"Go forward," said Peyrol, "and ease off the fore-sheet now a little. 
This tartane has wings," he added to himself. 
 
Alone on the after-deck Peyrol turned his head to look at the Amelia . 
That ship, in consequence of holding her wind, was now crossing 
obliquely the wake of the tartane. At the same time she had diminished 
the distance. Nevertheless, Peyrol considered that had he really meant 
to escape, his chances were as eight to ten - practically an assured 
success. For a long time he had been contemplating the lofty pyramid of 
canvas towering against the fading red belt on the sky, when a 
lamentable groan made him look round. It was Scevola. The citizen had 
adopted the mode of progression on all fours, and while Peyrol looked at 
him he rolled to leeward, saving himself rather cleverly from going 
overboard, and holding on desperately to a cleat, shouted in a hollow 
voice, pointing with the other hand as if he had made a tremendous 
discovery: "La terre! La terre!" 
 
"Certainly," said Peyrol, steering with extreme nicety. "What of that?" 
 
"I don't  want to be drowned!" cried the citizen in his new hollow 
voice. Peyrol reflected a bit before he spoke in a serious tone: 
 
"If you stay where you are, I assure you that you will . . ." he 
glanced rapidly over his shoulder at the Amelia . . . "not die by 
drowning." He jerked his head sideways. "I know that man's mind." 
 
"What man? Whose mind?" yelled Scevola with intense eagerness and 
bewilderment. "We are only three on board." 
 
But Peyrol's mind was contemplating maliciously the figure of a man with 
long teeth, in a wig and with large buckles to his shoes. Such was his 
ideal conception of what the captain of the Amelia ought to look like. 
That officer, whose naturally good-humoured face wore then a look of 
severe resolution, had beckoned his first lieutenant to his side again. 
 
"We are gaining," he said quietly. "I intend to close with him to 
windward. We won't  risk any of his tricks. It is very difficult to 
outmanuvre a Frenchman, as you know. Send a few armed marines on the 
forecastle-head. I am afraid the only way to get hold of this tartane is 
to disable the men on board of her. I wish to goodness I could think of 
some other. When we close with her, let the marines fire a well-aimed 
volley. You must get some marines to stand by aft as well. I hope we may 
shoot away his halliards; once his sails are down on his deck he is ours 
for the trouble of putting a boat over the side." 
 
For more than half an hour Captain Vincent stood silent, elbow on rail, 
keeping his eye on the tartane, while on board the latter Peyrol steered 
silent and watchful but intensely conscious of the enemy ship holding on 
in her relentless pursuit. The narrow red band was dying out of the sky. 
The French coast, black against the fading light, merged into the 
shadows gathering in the eastern board. Citizen Scevola, somewhat 
soothed by the assurance that he would not die by drowning, had elected 
to remain quiet where he had fallen, not daring to trust himself to move 
on the lively deck. Michel, squatting to windward, gazed intently at 
Peyrol in expectation of some order at any minute. But Peyrol uttered no 
word and made no sign. From time to time a burst of foam flew over the 
tartane, or a splash of water would come aboard with a scurrying noise. 
 
It was not till the corvette had got within a long gunshot from the 
tartane that Peyrol opened his mouth. 
 
"No!" he burst out, loud in the wind, as if giving vent to long 
anxious thinking, "No! I could not have left you behind with not even a 
dog for company. Devil take me if I don't  think you would not have 
thanked me for it either. What do you say to that, Michel?" 
 
A half-puzzled smile dwelt persistently on the guileless countenance of 
the ex-fisherman. He stated what he had always thought in respect of 
Peyrol's every remark: "I think you are right, matre." 
 
"Listen then, Michel. That ship will be alongside of us in less than 
half an hour. As she comes up they will open on us with musketry." 
 
"They will open on us . . ." repeated Michel, looking quite 
interested. "But how do you know they will do that, matre?" 
 
"Because her captain has got to obey what is in my mind," said Peyrol, 
in a tone of positive and solemn conviction. "He will do it as sure as 
if I were at his car telling him what to do. He will do it because he is 
a first-rate seaman, but I, Michel, I am just a little bit cleverer than 
he." He glanced over his shoulder at the Amelia rushing after the 
tartane with swelling sails, and raised his voice suddenly. "He will do 
it because no more than half a mile ahead of us is the spot where Peyrol 
will die!" 
 
Michel did not start. He only shut his eyes for a time, and the rover 
continued in a lower tone: 
 
"I may be shot through the heart at once," he said: "and in that case 
you have my permission to let go the halliards if you are alive 
yourself. But if I live I mean to put the helm down. When I do that you 
will let go the foresheet to help the tartane to fly into the wind's 
eye. This is my last order to you. Now go forward and fear nothing. 
Adieu." Michel obeyed without a word. 
 
Half a dozen of the Amelia 's marines stood ranged on the 
forecastle-head ready with their muskets. Captain Vincent walked into 
the lee waist to watch his chase. When he thought that the jibboom of 
the Amelia had drawn level with the stern of the tartane he waved his 
hat and the marines discharged their muskets. Apparently no gear was 
cut. Captain Vincent observed the white-headed man, who was steering, 
clap his hand to his left side, while he hove the tiller to leeward and 
brought the tartane sharply into the wind. The marines on the poop fired 
in their turn, all the reports merging into one. Voices were heard on 
the decks crying that they "had hit the white-haired chap." Captain 
Vincent shouted to the master: 
 
"Get the ship round on the other tack." 
 
The elderly seaman who was the master of the Amelia took a critical 
look before he gave the necessary orders; and the Amelia closed on her 
chase with her decks resounding to the piping of boatswain's mates and 
the hoarse shout: "Hands shorten sail. About ship." 
 
Peyrol, lying on his back under the swinging tiller, heard the calls 
shrilling and dying away; he heard the ominous rush of Amelia 's bow 
wave as the sloop foamed within ten yards of the tartane's stern; he 
even saw her upper yards coming down, and then everything vanished out 
of the clouded sky. There was nothing in his ears but the sound of the 
wind, the wash of the waves buffeting the little craft left without 
guidance, and the continuous thrashing of its foresail the sheet of 
which Michel had let go according to orders. The tartane began to roll 
heavily, but Peyrol's right arm was sound and he managed to put it round 
a bollard to prevent himself from being flung about. A feeling of peace 
sank into him, not unmingled with pride. Everything he had planned had 
come to pass. He had meant to play that man a trick, and now the trick 
had been played. Played by him better than by any other old man on whom 
age had stolen, unnoticed, till the veil of peace was torn down by the 
touch of a sentiment unexpected like an intruder and cruel like an enemy. 
 
Peyrol rolled his head to the left. All he could see were the legs of 
Citizen Scevola sliding nervelessly to and fro to the rolling of the 
vessel as if his body had been jammed somewhere. Dead, or only scared to 
death? And Michel? Was he dead or dying, that man without friends whom 
his pity had refused to leave behind marooned on the earth without even 
a dog for company? As to that, Peyrol felt no compunction; but he 
thought he would have liked to see Michel once more. He tried to utter 
his name, but his throat refused him even a whisper. He felt himself 
removed far away from that world of human sounds, in which Arlette had 
screamed at him: "Peyrol, don't  you dare!" He would never hear 
anybody's voice again! Under that grey sky there was nothing for him but 
the swish of breaking seas and the ceaseless furious beating of the 
tartane's foresail. His play-thing was knocking about terribly under 
him, with her tiller flying madly to and fro just clear of his head, and 
solid lumps of water coming on board over his prostrate body. Suddenly, 
in a desperate lurch which brought the whole Mediterranean with a 
ferocious snarl level with the slope of the little deck, Peyrol saw the 
 Amelia bearing right down upon the tartane. The fear, not of death but 
of failure, gripped his slowing-down heart. Was this blind Englishman 
going to run him down and sink the dispatches together with the craft? 
With a mighty effort of his ebbing strength Peyrol sat up and flung his 
arm round the shroud of the mainmast. 
 
The Ameleia , whose way had carried her past the tartane for a quarter 
of a mile, before sail could be shortened and her yards swung on the 
other tack, was coming back to take possession of her chase. In the 
deepening dusk and amongst the foaming seas it was a matter of 
difficulty to make out the little craft. At the very moment when the 
master of the man-of-war, looking out anxiously from the 
forecastle-head, thought that she might perhaps have filled and gone 
down, he caught sight of her rolling in the trough of the sea, and so 
close that she seemed to be at the end of the Amelia 's jibboom. His 
heart flew in his mouth. "Hard a starboard!" he yelled, his order 
being passed along the decks. 
 
Peyrol, sinking back on the deck in another heavy lurch of his craft, 
saw for an instant the whole of the English corvette swing up into the 
clouds as if she meant to fling herself upon his very breast. A blown 
seatop flicked his face noisily, followed by a smooth interval, a 
silence of the waters. He beheld in a flash the days of his manhood, of 
strength and adventure. Suddenly an enormous voice like the roar of an 
angry sea-lion seemed to fill the whole of the empty sky in a mighty and 
commanding shout: "Steady!"". . . And with the sound of that familiar 
English word ringing in his ears Peyrol smiled to his visions and died. 
 
The Amelia , stripped down to her topsails and hove to, rose and fell 
easily while on her quarter about a cable's length away Peyrol's tartane 
tumbled like a lifeless corpse amongst the seas. Captain Vincent, in his 
favourite attitude of leaning over the rail, kept his eyes fastened on 
his prize. Mr. Bolt, who had been sent for, waited patiently till his 
commander turned round. 
 
"Oh, here you are, Mr. Bolt. I have sent for you to go and take 
possession. You speak French, and there may still be somebody alive in 
her. If so, of course you will send him on board at once. I am sure 
there can be nobody unwounded there. It will anyhow be too dark to see 
much, but just have a good look round and secure everything in the way 
of papers you can lay your hands on. Haul aft the foresheet and sail her 
up to receive a tow line. I intend to take her along and ransack her 
thoroughly in the morning; tear down the cuddy linings and so on, should 
you not find at once what I expect. . . ." Captain Vincent, his white 
teeth gleaming in the dusk, gave some further orders in a lower tone, 
and Mr. Bolt departed in a hurry. Half an hour afterwards he was back on 
board, and the Amelia , with the tartane in tow, made sail to the 
eastward in search of the blockading fleet. 
 
Mr. Bolt, introduced into a cabin strongly lighted by a swinging lamp, 
tendered to his captain across the table a sail-cloth package corded and 
scaled, and a piece of paper folded in four, which, he explained, seemed 
to be a certificate of registry, strangely enough mentioning no name. 
Captain Vincent seized the grey canvas package eagerly. 
 
"This looks like the very thing, Bolt," he said, turning it over in 
his hands. "What else did you find on board?" 
 
Bolt said that he had found three dead men, two on the after-deck and 
one lying at the bottom of the open hold with the bare end of the 
foresheet in his hand - 'shot down, I suppose, just as he had let it 
go," he commented. He described the appearance of the bodies and 
reported that he had disposed of them according to orders. In the 
tartane's cabin there was half a demijohn of wine and a loaf of bread in 
a locker; also, on the floor, a leather valise containing an officer's 
uniform coat and a change of clothing. He had lighted the lamp and saw 
that the linen was marked "E. Ral." An officer's sword on a broad 
shoulder-belt was also lying on the floor. These things could not have 
belonged to the old chap with the white hair, who was a big man. "Looks 
as if somebody had tumbled overboard," commented Bolt. Two of the 
bodies looked nondescript, but there was no doubt about that fine old 
fellow being a seaman. 
 
"By Heavens!" said Captain Vincent, "he was that! Do you know, Bolt, 
that he nearly managed to escape us? Another twenty minutes would have 
done it. How many wounds had he?" 
 
"Three I think, sir. I did not look closely," said Bolt. 
 
"I hated the necessity of shooting brave men like dogs," said Captain 
Vincent. "Still, it was the only way; and there may be something 
here," he went on, slapping the package with his open palm, "that will 
justify me in my own eyes. You may go now." 
 
Captain Vincent did not turn in but only lay down fully dressed on the 
couch till the officer of the watch, appearing at the door, told him 
that a ship of the fleet was in sight away to windward. Captain Vincent 
ordered the private night signal to be made. When he came on deck the 
towering shadow of a line-of-battle ship that seemed to reach to the 
very clouds was well within hail and a voice bellowed from her through a 
speaking trumpet: 
 
"What ship is that?" 
 
"His Majesty's sloop Amelia ," hailed back Captain Vincent. "What 
ship is that, pray?" 
 
Instead of the usual answer there was a short pause and another voice 
spoke boisterously through the trumpet: 
 
"Is that you, Vincent? Don't  you know the Superb when you see her?" 
 
"Not in the dark, Keats. How are you? I am in a hurry to speak the 
Admiral." 
 
"The fleet is lying by," came the voice now with painstaking 
distinctness across the murmurs, whispers and splashes of the black lane 
of water dividing the two ships. "The Admiral bears S.S.E. If you 
stretch on till daylight as you are, you will fetch him on the other 
tack in time for breakfast on board the Victory. Is anything up?" 
 
At every slight roll the sails of the Amelia , becalmed by the bulk of 
the seventy-four, flapped gently against the masts. 
 
"Not much," hailed Captain Vincent. "I made a prize." 
 
"Have you been in action?" came the swift inquiry. 
 
"No, no. Piece of luck." 
 
"Where's your prize?" roared the speaking trumpet with interest. 
 
"In my desk," roared Captain Vincent in reply. . . . "Enemy 
dispatches. . . . I say, Keats, fill on your ship. Fill on her, I say, 
or you will be falling on board of me." He stamped his foot 
impatiently. "Clap some hands at once on the tow-line and run that 
tartane close under our stern," he called to the officer of the watch, 
"or else the old Superb will walk over her without ever knowing 
anything about it." 
 
When Captain Vincent presented himself on board the Victory it was too 
late for him to be invited to share the Admiral's breakfast. He was told 
that Lord Nelson had not been seen on deck yet, that morning; and 
presently word came that he wished to see Captain Vincent at once in his 
cabin. Being introduced, the captain of the Amelia , in undress 
uniform, with a sword by his side and his hat under his arm, was 
received kindly, made his bow and with a few words of explanation laid 
the packet on the big round table at which sat a silent secretary in 
black clothes, who had been obviously writing a letter from his 
lordship's dictation. The Admiral had been walking up and down, and 
after he had greeted Captain Vincent he resumed his pacing of a nervous 
man. His empty sleeve had not yet been pinned on his breast and swung 
slightly every time he turned in his walk. His thin locks fell lank 
against the pale cheeks, and the whole face in repose had an expression 
of suffering with which the fire of his one eye presented a startling 
contrast. He stopped short and exclaimed while Captain Vincent towered 
over him in a respectful attitude: 
 
"A tartane! Captured on board a tartane! How on earth did you pitch 
upon that one out of the hundreds you must see every month?" 
 
"I must confess that I got hold accidentally of some curious 
information," said Captain Vincent. "It was all a piece of luck." 
 
While the secretary was ripping open with a pen-knife the cover of the 
dispatches Lord Nelson took Captain Vincent out into the stern gallery. 
The quiet and sunshiny morning had the added charm of a cool, light 
breeze; and the Victory , under her three topsails and lower staysails, 
was moving slowly to the southward in the midst of the scattered fleet 
carrying for the most part the same sail as the Admiral. Only far away 
two or three ships could be seen covered with canvas trying to close 
with the flag. Captain Vincent noted with satisfaction that the first 
lieutenant of the Amelia had been obliged to brace by his afteryards 
in order not to overrun the Admiral's quarter. 
 
"Why!" exclaimed Lord Nelson suddenly, after looking at the sloop for 
a moment, "you have that tartane in tow!" 
 
"I thought that your lordship would perhaps like to see a 40-ton lateen 
craft which has led such a chase to, I daresay, the fastest sloop in his 
Majesty's service." 
 
"How did it all begin?" asked the Admiral, continuing to look at the 
 Amelia . 
 
"As I have already hinted to your lordship, certain information came in 
my way," began Captain Vincent, who did not think it necessary to 
enlarge upon that part of the story. "This tartane, which is not very 
different to look at from the other tartanes along the coast between 
Cette and Genoa, had started from a cove on the Giens Peninsula. An old 
man with a white head of hair was entrusted with the service and really 
they could have found nobody better. He came round Cape Esterel 
intending to pass through the Hyres roadstead. Apparently he did not 
expect to find the Amelia in his way. And it was there that he made 
his only mistake. If he had kept on his course I would probably have 
taken no more notice of him than of two other craft that were in sight 
then. But he acted suspiciously by hauling up for the battery on 
Porquerolles. This manuvre in connection with the information of which I 
spoke decided me to overhaul him and see what he had on board." Captain 
Vincent then related concisely the episodes of the chase. "I assure 
your lordship that I never gave an order with greater reluctance than to 
open musketry fire on that craft; but the old man had given such proofs 
of his seamanship and determination that there was nothing else for it. 
Why! at the very moment he had the Amelia alongside of him he still 
made a most clever attempt to prolong the chase. There were only a few 
minutes of daylight left, and in the darkness we might very well have 
lost him. Considering that they all could have saved their lives simply 
by striking their sails on deck, I can not refuse them my admiration and 
especially to the white-haired man." 
 
The Admiral, who had been all the time looking absently at the Amelia 
keeping her station with the tartane in tow, said: 
 
"You have a very smart little ship, Vincent. Very fit for the work I 
have given you to do. French built, isn't  she?" 
 
"Yes, my lord. They are great shipbuilders." 
 
"You don't  seem to hate the French, Vincent," said the Admiral, 
smiling faintly. 
 
"Not that kind, my lord," said Captain Vincent with a bow. "I detest 
their political principles and the characters of their public men, but 
your lordship will admit that for courage and determination we could not 
have found worthier adversaries anywhere on this globe." 
 
"I never said that they were to be despised," said Lord Nelson. 
"Resource, courage, yes. . . . If that Toulon fleet gives me the slip, 
all our squadrons from Gibraltar to Brest will be in jeopardy. Why don't  
they come out and be done with it? Don't  I keep far enough out of their 
way?" he cried. 
 
Vincent remarked the nervous agitation of the frail figure with a 
concern augmented by a fit of coughing which came on the Admiral. He was 
quite alarmed by its violence. He watched the Commander-in-Chief in the 
Mediterranean choking and gasping so helplessly that he felt compelled 
to turn his eyes away from the painful spectacle; but he noticed also 
how quickly Lord Nelson recovered from the subsequent exhaustion. 
 
"This is anxious work, Vincent," he said. "It is killing me. I aspire 
to repose somewhere in the country, in the midst of fields, out of reach 
of the sea and the Admiralty and dispatches and orders, and 
responsibility too. I have been just finishing a letter to tell them at 
home I have hardly enough breath in my body to carry me on from day to 
day. . . . But I am like that white-headed man you admire so much, 
Vincent," he pursued, with a weary smile, "I will stick to my task 
till perhaps some shot from the enemy puts an end to everything. . . . 
Let us see what there may be in those papers you have brought on board." 
 
The secretary in the cabin had arranged them in separate piles. 
 
"What is it all about?" asked the Admiral, beginning again to pace 
restlessly up and down the cabin. 
 
"At the first glance the most important, my lord, are the orders for 
marine authorities in Corsica and Naples to make certain dispositions in 
view of an expedition to Egypt." 
 
"I always thought so," said the Admiral, his eye gleaming at the 
attentive countenance of Captain Vincent. "This is a smart piece of 
work on your part, Vincent. I can do no better than send you back to 
your station. Yes . . . Egypt . . . the Easts. . . . Everything points 
that way," he soliloquized under Vincent's eyes while the secretary, 
picking up the papers with care, rose quietly and went out to have them 
translated and to make an abstract for the Admiral. 
 
"And, yet who knows!" exclaimed Lord Nelson, standing still for a 
moment. "But the blame or the glory must be mine alone. I will seek 
counsel from no man." Captain Vincent felt himself forgotten, 
invisible, less than a shadow in the presence of a nature capable of 
such vehement feelings. "How long can he last?" he asked himself with 
sincere concern. 
 
The Admiral, however, soon remembered his presence, and at the end of 
another ten minutes Captain Vincent left the Victory , feeling, like 
all officers who approached Lord Nelson, that he had been speaking with 
a personal friend; and with a renewed devotion for the great 
sea-officer's soul dwelling in the frail body of the Commander-in-Chief 
of his Majesty's ships in the Mediterranean. While he was being pulled 
back to his ship a general signal went up in the Victory for the fleet 
to form line, as convenient, ahead and astern of the Admiral; followed 
by another to the Amelia to part company. Vincent accordingly gave his 
orders to make sail, and, directing the master to shape a course for 
Cape Cici, went down into his cabin. He had been up nearly the whole of 
the last three nights and he wanted to get a little sleep. His 
slurnbers, however, were short and disturbed. Early in the afternoon he 
found himself broad awake and reviewing in his mind the events of the 
day before. The order to shoot three brave men in cold blood, terribly 
distasteful at the time, was lying heavily on him. Perhaps he had been 
impressed by Peyrol's white head, his obstinacy to escape him, the 
determination shown to the very last minute, by something in the whole 
episode that suggested a more than common devotion to duty and a spirit 
of daring defiance. With his robust health, simple good nature, and 
sanguine temperament touched with a little irony, Captain Vincent was a 
man of generous feelings and of easily moved sympathies. 
 
"Yet," he reflected, "they have been asking for it. There could be 
only one end to that affair. But the fact remains that they were 
defenceless and unarmed and particularly harmless-looking, and at the 
same time as brave as any. That old chap now. . . ."  He wondered how 
much of exact truth there was in Symons  tale of adventure. He concluded 
that the facts must have been true but that Symons' interpretation of 
them made it extraordinarily difficult to discover what really there was 
under all that. That craft certainly was fit for blockade running. Lord 
Nelson had been pleased. Captain Vincent went on deck with the kindliest 
feelings towards all men, alive and dead. 
 
The afternoon had turned out very fine. The British Fleet was just out 
of sight with the exception of one or two stragglers, under a press of 
canvas. A light breeze in which only the Amelia could travel at five 
knots, hardly ruffled the profundity of the blue waters basking in the 
warm tenderness of the cloudless sky. To south and west the horizon was 
empty except for two specks very far apart, of which one shone white 
like a bit of silver and the other appeared black like a drop of ink. 
Captain Vincent, with his purpose firm in his mind, felt at peace with 
himself. As he was easily accessible to his officers his first 
lieutenant ventured a question to which Captain Vincent replied: 
 
"He looks very thin and worn out, but I don't  think he is as ill as he 
thinks he is. I am sure you all would like to know that his lordship is 
pleased with our yesterday's work - those papers were of some importance 
you know - and generally with the Amelia . It was a queer chase, wasn't  
it?" he went on. "That tartane was clearly and unmistakably running 
away from us. But she never had a chance against the Amelia ." 
 
During the latter part of that speech the first lieutenant glanced 
astern as if asking himself how long Captain Vincent proposed to drag 
that tartane behind the Amelia . The two keepers in her wondered also 
as to when they would be permitted to get back on board their ship. 
Symons, who was one of them, declared that he was sick and tired of 
steering the blamed thing. Moreover, the company on board made him 
uncomfortable; for Symons was aware that in pursuance of Captain 
Vincent's orders, Mr. Bolt had had the three dead Frenchmen carried into 
the cuddy which he afterwards secured with an enormous padlock that, 
apparently, belonged to it, and had taken the key on board the Amelia . 
As to one of them, Symons' unforgiving verdict was that it would have 
served him right to be thrown ashore for crows to peck his eyes out. And 
anyhow, he could not understand why he should have been turned into the 
coxswain of a floating hearse, and be damned to it. . . . He grumbled 
interminably. 
 
Just about sunset, which is the time of burials at sea, the Amelia was 
hove to and, the rope being manned, the tartane was brought alongside 
and her two keepers ordered on board their ship. Captain Vincent, 
leaning over with his elbows on the rail, seemed lost in thought. At 
last the first lieutenant spoke. 
 
"What are we going to do with that tartane, sir? Our men are on board." 
 
"We are going to sink her by gunfire," declared Captain Vincent 
suddenly. "His ship makes a very good coffin for a seaman, and those 
men deserve better than to be thrown overboard to roll on the waves. Let 
them rest quietly at the bottom of the sea in the craft to which they 
had stuck so well." 
 
The lieutenant, making no reply, waited for some more positive order. 
Every eye on the ship was turned on the captain. But Captain Vincent 
said nothing and seemed unable or unwilling to give it yet. He was 
feeling vaguely, that in all his good intentions there was something 
wanting. 
 
"Ah! Mr. Bolt," he said, catching sight of the master's-mate in the 
waist. "Did they have a flag on board that craft?" 
 
"I think she had a tiny bit of ensign when the chase began, sir, but it 
must have blown away. It is not at the end of her mainyard now." He 
looked over the side. "The halliards are rove, though," he added. 
 
"We must have a French ensign somewhere on board," said Captain Vincent. 
 
"Certainly, sir," struck in the master, who was listening. 
 
"Well, Mr. Bolt," said Captain Vincent, "you have had most to do with 
all this. Take a few men with you, bend the French ensign on the 
halliards and sway his mainyard to the masthead." He smiled at all the 
faces turned towards him. "After all they never surrendered and, by 
heavens, gentlemen, we will let them go down with their colours flying." 
 
A profound but not disapproving silence reigned over the decks of the 
ship while Mr. Bolt with three or four hands was busy executing the 
order. Then suddenly above the topgallant rail of the Amelia appeared 
the upper curve of a lateen yard with the tricolour drooping from the 
point. A subdued murmur from all hands greeted this apparition. At the 
same time Captain Vincent ordered the line holding the tartane alongside 
to be cast off and the mainyard of the Amelia to be swung round. The 
sloop shooting ahead of her prize left her stationary on the sea, then 
putting the helm up, ran back abreast of her on the other side. The port 
bow-gun was ordered to fire a round, aiming well forward. That shot, 
however, went just over, taking the foremast out of the tartane. The 
next was more successful, striking the little hull between wind and 
water, and going out well under water on the other side. A third was 
fired, as the men said, just for luck, and that too took effect, a 
splintered hole appearing at the bow. After that the guns were secured 
and the Amelia , with no brace being touched, was brought to her course 
towards Cape Cici. All hands on board of her with their backs to the 
sunset sky, clear like a pale topaz above the hard blue gem of the sea, 
watched the tartane give a sudden dip, followed by a slow, unchecked 
dive. At last the tricolour flag alone remained visible for a tense and 
interminable moment, pathetic and lonely, in the centre of a brimful 
horizon. All at once it vanished, like a flame blown upon, bringing to 
the beholders the sense of having been left face to face with an 
immense, suddenly created solitude. On the decks of the Amelia a low 
murmur died out. 
 
             
 
When Lieutenant Ral sailed away with the Toulon fleet on the great 
strategical cruise which was to end in the battle of Trafalgar, Madame 
Ral returned with her aunt to her hereditary house at Escampobar. She 
had only spent a few weeks in town where she was not much seen in 
public. The lieutenant and his wife lived in a little house near the 
western gate, and the lieutenant's official position, though he was 
employed on the staff to the last, was not sufficiently prominent to 
make her absence from official ceremonies at all remarkable. But this 
marriage was an object of mild interest in naval circles. Those - mostly 
men - who had seen Madame Ral at home, told stories of her dazzling 
complexion, of her magnificent black eyes, of her personal and 
attractive strangeness, and of the Arlesian costume she insisted on 
wearing, even after her marriage to an officer of the navy, being 
herself sprung from farmer stock. It was also said that her father and 
mother had fallen victims in the massacres of Toulon after the 
evacuation of the town; but all those stories varied in detail and were 
on the whole very vague. Whenever she went abroad Madame Ral was 
attended by her aunt who aroused almost as much curiosity as herself: a 
magnificent old woman with upright carriage and an austere, brown, 
wrinkled face showing signs of past beauty. Catherine was also seen 
alone in the streets where, as a matter of fact, people turned round to 
look after the thin and dignified figure, remarkable amongst the 
passers-by, whom she, herself, did not seem to see. About her escape 
from the massacres most wonderful tales were told, and she acquired the 
reputation of a heroine. Arlette's aunt was known to frequent the 
churches, which were all open to the faithful now, carrying even into 
the house of God her sibylline aspect of a prophetess and her austere 
manner. It was not at the services that she was seen most. People would 
see her oftener in an empty nave, standing slim and as straight as an 
arrow in the shade of a mighty pillar as if making a call on the Creator 
of all things with whom she had made her peace generously, and now would 
petition only for pardon and reconciliation with her niece Arlette. For 
Catherine for a long time remained uncertain of the future. She did not 
get rid of her involuntary awe of her niece as a selected object of 
God's wrath, until towards the end of her life. There was also another 
soul for which she was concerned. The pursuit of the tartane by the 
 Amelia had been observed from various points of the islands that close 
the roadstead of Hyres, and the English ship had been seen from the Fort 
de la Vigie opening fire on her chase. The result, though the two 
vessels soon ran out of sight, could not be a matter of doubt. There was 
also the story told by a coaster that got into Frjus, of a tartane being 
fired on by a square-rigged man-of-war; but that apparently was the next 
day. All these rumours pointed one way and were the foundation of the 
report made by Lieutenant Ral to the Toulon Admiralty. That Peyrol went 
out to sea in his tartane and was never seen again, was of course an 
incontrovertible fact. 
 
The day before the two women were to go back to Escampobar, Catherine 
approached a priest in the church of Ste Marie Majeure, a little 
unshaven fat man with a watery eye, in order to arrange for some masses 
to be said for the dead. 
 
"But for whose soul are we to pray?" mumbled the priest in a wheezy 
low tone. 
 
"Pray for the soul of Jean," said Catherine. "Yes, Jean. There is no 
other name." 
 
Lieutenant Ral, wounded at Trafalgar, but escaping capture, retired with 
the rank of Capitaine de Frgate and vanished from the eyes of the naval 
world in Toulon and indeed from the world altogether. Whatever sign 
brought him back to Escampobar on that momentous night, was not meant to 
call him to his death but to a quiet and retired life, obscure in a 
sense but not devoid of dignity. In the course of years he became the 
Mayor of the Commune in that very same little village which had looked 
on Escampobar as the abode of iniquity, the sojourn of blood-drinkers 
and of wicked women. 
 
One of the earliest excitements breaking the monotony of the Escampobar 
life was the discovery at the bottom of the well, one dry year when the 
water got very low, of some considerable obstruction. After a lot of 
trouble in getting it up, this obstruction turned out to be a garment 
made of sail-cloth, which had armholes and three horn buttons in front, 
and looked like a waistcoat; but it was lined, positively quilted, with 
a surprising quantity of gold pieces of various ages, coinages and 
nationalities. Nobody but Peyrol could have put it there. Catherine was 
able to give the exact date; because she remembered seeing him doing 
something at the well on the very morning before he went out to sea with 
Michel, carrying off Scevola. Captain Ral could guess easily the origin 
of that treasure, and he decided with his wife's approval to give it up 
to the Government as the hoard of a man who had died intestate with no 
discoverable relations, and whose very name had been a matter of 
uncertainty, even to himself. After that event the uncertain name of 
Peyrol found itself oftener and oftener on Monsieur and Madame Ral's 
lips, on which before it was but seldom heard; though the recollection 
of his white-headed, quiet, irresistible personality haunted every 
corner of the Escampobar fields. From that time they talked of him 
openly, as though he had come back to live again amongst them. 
 
Many years afterwards, one fine evening, Monsieur and Madame Ral sitting 
on the bench outside the salle  the house had not been altered at all 
outside except that it was now kept whitewashed , began to talk of that 
episode and of the man who, coming from the seas, had crossed their 
lives to disappear at sea again. 
 
"How did he get all that lot of gold?" wondered Madame Ral innocently. 
"He could not possibly want it; and, Eugne, why should he have put it 
down there?" 
 
"That, ma chre amie," said Ral, "is not an easy question to answer. 
Men and women are not so simple as they seem. Even you, fermire  he used 
to give his wife that name jocularly, sometimes , are not so simple as 
some people would take you to be. I think that if Peyrol were here he 
could not perhaps answer your question himself." 
 
And they went on, reminding each other in short phrases separated by 
long silences, of his peculiarities of person and behaviour, when above 
the slope leading down to Madrague, there appeared first, the pointed 
ears, and then the whole body of a very diminutive donkey of a light 
grey colour with dark points. Two pieces of wood, strangely shaped, 
projected on each side of his body as far as his head, like very long 
shafts of a cart. But the donkey dragged no cart after him. He was 
carrying on his back on a small pack saddle the torso of a man who did 
not seem to have any legs. The little animal, beautifully groomed and 
with an intelligent and even impudent physiognomy, stopped in front of 
Monsieur and Madame Ral. The man, balancing himself cleverly on the pack 
saddle with his withered legs crossed in front of him, slipped off, 
disengaged his crutches from each side of the donkey smartly, propped 
himself on them, and with his open palm gave the animal a resounding 
thwack which sent it trotting into the yard. The cripple of the Madrague 
in his quality of Peyrol's friend  for the rover had often talked of him 
both to the women and to Lieutenant Ral with great 
appreciation - "C'est un homme, a"  had become a member of the 
Escampobar community. His employment was to run about the country on 
errands, most unfit, one would think, for a man without legs. But the 
donkey did all the walking while the cripple supplied the sharp wits and 
an unfailing memory. The poor fellow, snatching off his hat and holding 
it with one hand alongside his right crutch, approached to render his 
account of the day in the simple words: "Everything has been done as 
you ordered, madame"; then lingered, a privileged servant, familiar but 
respectful, attractive with his soft eyes, long face, and his pained smile. 
 
"We were just talking of Peyrol," remarked Captain Ral. 
 
"Ah, one could talk a long time of him," said the cripple. "He told 
me once that if I had been complete - with legs like everybody else, I 
suppose he meant - I would have made a good comrade away there in the 
distant seas. He had a great heart." 
 
"Yes," murmured Madame Ral thoughtfully. Then turning to her husband, 
she asked: "What sort of man was he really, Eugne?" Captain Ral 
remained silent. "Did you ever ask yourself that question?" she insisted. 
 
"Yes," said Ral. "But the only certain thing we can say of him is 
that he was not a bad Frenchman." 
 
"Everything's in that," murmured the cripple, with fervent conviction 
in the silence that fell upon Ral's words and Arlette's faint sigh of 
memory. 
 
The blue level of the Mediterranean, the charmer and the deceiver of 
audacious men, kept the secret of its fascination - hugged to its calm 
breast the victims of all the wars, calamities and tempests of its 
history, under the marvellous purity of the sunset sky. A few rosy 
clouds floated high up over the Esterel range. The breath of the evening 
breeze came to cool the heated rocks of Escampobar; and the mulberry 
tree, the only big tree on the head of the peninsula, standing like a 
sentinel at the gate of the yard, sighed faintly in a shudder of all its 
leaves, as if regretting the Brother of the Coast, the man of dark 
deeds, but of large heart, who often at noonday would lie down to sleep 
under its shade. 
  
