THE WATER OF THE WONDROUS ISLES




THE FIRST PART: OF THE HOUSE OF CAPTIVITY




CHAPTER I. CATCH AT UTTERHAY



Whilom, as tells the tale, was a walled cheaping-town hight Utterhay,
which was builded in a bight of the land a little off the great
highway which went from over the mountains to the sea.

The said town was hard on the borders of a wood, which men held to be
mighty great, or maybe measureless; though few indeed had entered it,
and they that had, brought back tales wild and confused thereof.

Therein was neither highway nor byway, nor wood-reeve nor way-warden;
never came chapman thence into Utterhay; no man of Utterhay was so
poor or so bold that he durst raise the hunt therein; no outlaw durst
flee thereto; no man of God had such trust in the saints that he
durst build him a cell in that wood.

For all men deemed it more than perilous; and some said that there
walked the worst of the dead; othersome that the Goddesses of the
Gentiles haunted there; others again that it was the faery rather,
but they full of malice and guile. But most commonly it was deemed
that the devils swarmed amidst of its thickets, and that wheresoever
a man sought to, who was once environed by it, ever it was the Gate
of Hell whereto he came. And the said wood was called Evilshaw.

Nevertheless the cheaping-town throve not ill; for whatso evil things
haunted Evilshaw, never came they into Utterhay in such guise that
men knew them, neither wotted they of any hurt that they had of the
Devils of Evilshaw.

Now in the said cheaping-town, on a day, it was market and high noon,
and in the market-place was much people thronging; and amidst of them
went a woman, tall, and strong of aspect, of some thirty winters by
seeming, black-haired, hook-nosed and hawk-eyed, not so fair to look
on as masterful and proud. She led a great grey ass betwixt two
panniers, wherein she laded her marketings. But now she had done her
chaffer, and was looking about her as if to note the folk for her
disport; but when she came across a child, whether it were borne in
arms or led by its kinswomen, or were going alone, as were some, she
seemed more heedful of it, and eyed it more closely than aught else.

So she strolled about till she was come to the outskirts of the
throng, and there she happened on a babe of some two winters, which
was crawling about on its hands and knees, with scarce a rag upon its
little body. She watched it, and looked whereto it was going, and
saw a woman sitting on a stone, with none anigh her, her face bowed
over her knees as if she were weary or sorry. Unto her crept the
little one, murmuring and merry, and put its arms about the woman's
legs, and buried its face in the folds of her gown: she looked up
therewith, and showed a face which had once been full fair, but was
now grown bony and haggard, though she were scarce past five and
twenty years. She took the child and strained it to her bosom, and
kissed it, face and hands, and made it great cheer, but ever
woefully. The tall stranger stood looking down on her, and noted how
evilly she was clad, and how she seemed to have nought to do with
that throng of thriving cheapeners, and she smiled somewhat sourly.

At last she spake, and her voice was not so harsh as might have been
looked for from her face: Dame, she said, thou seemest to be less
busy than most folk here; might I crave of thee to tell an alien who
has but some hour to dwell in this good town where she may find her a
chamber wherein to rest and eat a morsel, and be untroubled of
ribalds and ill company? Said the poor-wife: Short shall be my
tale; I am over poor to know of hostelries and ale-houses that I may
tell thee aught thereof. Said the other: Maybe some neighbour of
thine would take me in for thy sake? Said the mother: What
neighbours have I since my man died; and I dying of hunger, and in
this town of thrift and abundance?

The leader of the ass was silent a while, then she said: Poor woman!
I begin to have pity on thee; and I tell thee that luck hath come to
thee to-day.

Now the poor-wife had stood up with the babe in her arms and was
turning to go her ways; but the alien put forth a hand to her, and
said: Stand a while and hearken good tidings. And she put her hand
to her girdle-pouch, and drew thereout a good golden piece, a noble,
and said: When I am sitting down in thine house thou wilt have
earned this, and when I take my soles out thereof there will be three
more of like countenance, if I be content with thee meanwhile.

The woman looked on the gold, and tears came into her eyes; but she
laughed and said: Houseroom may I give thee for an hour truly, and
therewithal water of the well, and a mouse's meal of bread. If thou
deem that worth three nobles, how may I say thee nay, when they may
save the life of my little one. But what else wouldst thou of me?
Little enough, said the alien; so lead me straight to thine house.

So went they forth of the market-place, and the woman led them, the
alien and the ass, out of the street through the west gate of
Utterhay, that, to wit, which looked on Evilshaw, and so into a
scattering street without the wall, the end of which neared a corner
of the wood aforesaid: the houses there were nought so evil of
fashion, but whereas they were so nigh unto the Devil's Park, rich
men might no longer away with them, and they were become wares for
poor folk.

Now the townswoman laid her hand on the latch of the door that was
hers, and threw the door open; then she put forth her palm to the
other, and said: Wilt thou give me the first gold now, since rest is
made sure for thee, as long as thou wilt? The ass-leader put it into
her hand, and she took it and laid it on her baby's cheek, and then
kissed both gold and child together; then she turned to the alien and
said: As for thy way-beast, I have nought for him, neither hay nor
corn: thou wert best to leave him in the street. The stranger
nodded a yeasay, and the three went in together, the mother, the
child, and the alien.

Not right small was the chamber; but there was little therein; one
stool to wit, a yew-chair, a little table, and a coffer: there was
no fire on the hearth, nought save white ashes of small wood; but it
was June, so that was of no account.

The guest sat down in the yew-chair, and the poor-wife laid her child
down gently on the floor and came and stood before the stranger, as
if abiding her bidding.

Spake the alien: Nought so uncomely or strait is thy chamber; and
thy child, which I see is a woman, and therefore belike shall long
abide with thee, is lovely of shape, and fair of flesh. Now also
thou shalt have better days, as I deem, and I pray them on thine
head.

She spake in a kind wheedling voice, and the poor-wife's face grew
softer, and presently tears fell down on to the table from her, but
she spake no word. The guest now drew forth, not three nobles, but
four, and laid them on the table, and said: Lo, my friend, the three
nobles which I behight thee! now are they thine; but this other thou
shalt take and spend for me. Go up into the town, and buy for me
white bread of the best; and right good flesh, or poulaine if it may
be, already cooked and dight; and, withal, the best wine that thou
mayst get, and sweetmeats for thy baby; and when thou comest back, we
will sit together and dine here. And thereafter, when we be full of
meat and drink, we shall devise something more for thy good speed.

The woman knelt before her weeping, but might speak no word because
of the fullness of her heart. She kissed the guest's hands, and took
the money, and then arose and caught up her child, and kissed her
bare flesh eagerly many times, and then hastened out of the house and
up the street and through the gate; and the guest sat hearkening to
the sound of her footsteps till it died out, and there was nought to
be heard save the far-off murmur of the market, and the chirrup of
the little one on the floor.

Then arose the guest and took up the child from the floor, who kicked
and screamed, and craved her mother as her broken speech might; but
the alien spake softly to her, and said: Hush, dear one, and be
good, and we will go and find her; and she gave her therewith a
sugar-plum from out of her scrip. Then she came out of doors, and
spake sweetly to the little one: See now this pretty way-beast. We
will ride merrily on him to find thy mother.

Then she laid the child in the pannier with a soft cushion under, and
a silk cloth over her, so that she lay there happily. Then she took
her ass's rein and went her ways over the waste toward Evilshaw; for,
as ye may deem, where the houses and the street ended, the beaten way
ended also.

Quietly and speedily she went, and met but three men on the way; and
when these saw her, and that she was making for Evilshaw, they turned
their heads away, each one, and blessed themselves, and went past
swiftly. Not one sought to stay her, or held any converse with her,
and no foot she heard following after her. So in scarce more than
the saying of a low mass she was in amongst the trees, with her ass
and her wares and her prey.

No stay she made there, but held forward at her best before the night
should fall upon her. And whatsoever might be told concerning the
creatures that other folk had met in Evilshaw, of her it must needs
be said that therein she happened on nought worser than herself.



CHAPTER II. NOW SHALL BE TOLD OF THE HOUSE BY THE WATER-SIDE



Four days they wended the wood, and nought befell to tell of. The
witch-wife  for even such was she  fed the stolen child well and
duly, and whiles caressed her and spake sweetly unto her; whiles also
she would take her out of the pannier, and set her on the ass's back
and hold her thereon heedfully; or, otherwhiles, when they came upon
grassy and flowery places, she would set her down on the ground and
let her roam about, and pluck the flowers and the strawberries. And
whoso might be sorry, the child was glad, so many things new and fair
as she came upon.

At last, when the fifth day was waning, and they had been a long
while wending a wood set thick with trees, it began to grow grey
betwixt the distant boles, and then from grey to white, and it was as
if a new world of light lay before them. Thitherward went they, and
in a little, and before the sun was set, came they to the shore of a
great water, and thence was no more land to be seen before them than
if it had been the main sea itself, though this was a sweet water.
Albeit, less than a half mile from the shore lay two eyots, as it
might have been on the salt sea; but one of these sat low down on the
water, and was green and well bushed, but the other, which lay east
of it, and was nigher to the shore, was high, rocky, and barren.

Now the ending of the wood left a fair green plain betwixt it and the
water, whiles more than a furlong across, whiles much less; and
whiles the trees came down close to the water-side. But the place
whereas they came from out the wood was of the widest, and there it
was a broad bight of greensward of the fashion of the moon seven
nights old, and a close hedge of thicket there was at the back of it;
and the lake lay south, and the wood north. Some deal of this
greensward was broken by closes of acre-land, and the tall green
wheat stood blossoming therein; but the most was sweet meadow, and
there as now was a gallant flock of goats feeding down it; five kine
withal, and a tethered bull. Through the widest of this meadow ran a
clear stream winding down to the lake, and on a little knoll beside a
lap of the said stream, two bow-shots from the water, was a knoll,
whereon stood, amidst of a potherb garden, a little house strongly
framed of timber. Before it the steep bank of the lake broke down
into a slowly-shelving beach, whose honey-coloured sand thrust up a
tongue in amongst the grass of the mead.

Went the witch-wife straight to the door of the said house as if she
were at home, as was sooth indeed. She threw the door open, and
unladed the ass of all his wares, and first of the youngling, whom
she shook awake, and bore into the house, and laid safely on the
floor of the chamber; nor did she wait on her wailing, but set about
what was to be done to kindle fire, and milk a she-goat, and get meat
upon the board. That did she, and fed both herself and the child
plenteously: neither did she stint her of meat ever, from that time
forward, however else she dealt with her.



CHAPTER III. OF SKIN-CHANGING



One thing must here be told: Whenas the said dame stood forth clad
amidst of the chamber the next morning, the child ran up to her to
greet her or what not, but straightway when she saw her close, drew
aback, and stood gasping with affright; for verily she deemed this
was nowise she who had brought her last night into the fair chamber,
and given bread and milk to her and put her to bed, but someone else.
For this one had not dark hair, and hooked nose, and eyen hawk-
bright; stark and tall was she indeed, as that other one, and by
seeming of the same-like age; but there came to an end all her
likeness to last night's housewife. This one had golden-red hair
flowing down from her head; eyes of hazel colour, long and not well-
opened, but narrow and sly. High of cheekbones she was, long-chinned
and thin-lipped; her skin was fine and white, but without ruddiness;
flat-breasted she was, and narrow-hipped.

Now she laughed at the babe's terror, and said, but in her old voice
at least: Thou foolish little beast! I know what scares thee, to
wit, that thou deemest me changed: now I tell thee that I am the one
who brought thee here last night, and fed thee; neither is my
changing a matter of thine, since at least I am the one who shall
keep thee from hunger and weather henceforward; that is enough for
thee to know as now. Now thou hast to eat and sleep and play and cry
out, that thou mayest the sooner wax, and grow into the doing of my
will.

Therewith she led her out into the sunshine, and tethered her to an
ash sapling which grew anigh the door, that the child might be safe
the while she went about her work in acre and mead.

But as for that matter of changing of aspect, the maiden came to know
thereafter that the witch durst not go into the wood in the same skin
as that which she wore at home, wherefore she had changed it for the
journey to Utterhay, and changed back again in the night-tide before
she arose.



CHAPTER IV. OF THE WAXING OF THE STOLEN CHILD



This little one, who is henceforth called Birdalone, though the witch
called her but seldom so, nor indeed by any name, dwelt there betwixt
the water and the wood, and saw none save the said witch-wife, who,
as aforesaid, fed her well, but scarce meddled with her else for a
long while; so she wandered well-nigh as she had will, and much in
the wood; for she had no fear thereof, nor indeed of aught else save
of the dame. She learned of the ways and the wont of all the
creatures round about her, and the very grass and flowers were
friends to her, and she made tales of them in her mind; and the wild
things feared her in no wise, and the fowl would come to her hand,
and play with her and love her. A lovely child she was, rosy and
strong, and as merry as the birds on the bough; and had she trouble,
for whiles she came across some ugly mood of the witch-wife, she bore
it all as lightly as they.

Wore the years thus, till now she was grown tall and thin, and had
seen twelve winters, and was far stronger and handier than at first
sight she looked to be. That found her mistress, and would not
forego the using of her deftness. For indeed the maiden knew all
matters of wood and field full well, and somewhat of the water also
 though no boat had she ever seen there , for she learned herself
swimming, as the ducks do belike.

But now her mistress would learn her swinking, and hard was the
lesson, for with twiggen rods and switches was she learned, and was
somewhat stubborn with this woman, who she deemed loved her not; and,
however it were, there began to grow in her an inkling that all was
not well with the dame, and howsoever she might fear her, she trusted
her not, nor worshipped her; otherwise she had learned her lesson
speedily; for she was not slack nor a sluggard, and hated not the
toil, even when it pained and wearied her, but against the anger and
malice she hardened her heart.

It is to be said, that though there she dwelt alone with the witch-
wife, she had somehow got to know that they two were not alone in the
world, and she knew of male and female, and young and old. Thereof
doubtless the witch herself had learned her, would she, would she
not; for though she were mostly few-spoken, yet whiles the tongue of
her would loosen, and she would tell Birdalone tales of men and
women, and kings and warriors and thralls, and the folk of the world
beyond them, if it were but to scare the child. Yea, and when she
rated Birdalone, or girded at her, words would come forth which the
maiden stored up, and by laying two and two together gat wisdom howso
it were. Moreover, she was of the race of Adam, and her heart
conceived of diverse matters from her mother's milk and her father's
blood, and her heart and her mind grew up along with her body.
Herein also was she wise, to wit, how to give wrath the go-by, so
that she oft found the wood a better home than the house: for now
she knew that the witch-wife would enter it never; wherefore she
loved it much, and haunted it daily if she might.

Amidst all this she lived not unmerrily; for the earth was her
friend, and solaced her when she had suffered aught: withal she was
soon grown hardy as well as strong; and evil she could thole, nor let
it burden her with misery.



CHAPTER V. OF BIRDALONE, AND HOW SHE IS GROWN INTO MAIDENHOOD



Wear the years and the years amidst such days as these, and now is
Birdalone grown a dear maiden of seventeen summers; and yet was her
life not unhappy; though the mirth of her childhood was somewhat
chastened in her, and she walked the earth soberly and measurely, as
though deep thoughts were ever in her head: though, forsooth, it is
not all so sure that her serious face and solemn eyes were but a part
of the beauty which was growing with the coming forth of childhood
into youth and maidenhood. But this at least is sure, that about
this time those forebodings which had shown her that she had no call
to love and honour her mistress took clearer shape, and became a
burden on her, which she might never wholly shake off. For this she
saw, that she was not her own, but a chattel and a tool of one who
not only used her as a thrall in the passing day, but had it in her
mind to make of her a thing accursed like to herself, and to bait the
trap with her for the taking of the sons of Adam. Forsooth she saw,
though dimly, that her mistress was indeed wicked, and that in the
bonds of that wickedness was she bound.

One thing, moreover, had she noted now this long while, that once and
again, it might be once every two moons, the witch-wife would arise
in the dead of night and go forth from the house, and be away for a
day, or two or three, or whiles more, and come back again weary and
fordone; but never said she any word to Birdalone hereof. Yet oft
when she arose to go this errand, before she left the chamber would
she come to Birdalone's truckle-bed, and stand over her to note if
she were asleep or not; and ever at such times did Birdalone feign
slumber amidst of sickening dread. Forsooth in these latter days it
whiles entered the maiden's head that when the dame was gone she
would rise and follow her and see whither she went, and what she did;
but terror constrained her that she went not.

Now from amidst all these imaginings arose a hope in her that she
might one day escape from her thralldom: and whiles, when she was
lonely and safe in the wood, to this hope she yielded herself; but
thereof came such tumult of her soul for joy of the hope, that she
might not master her passion; the earth would seem to rise beneath
her, and the woods to whirl about before her eyes, so that she might
not keep her feet, but would sink adown to earth, and lie there
weeping. Then most oft would come the cold fit after the hot, and
the terror would take her that some day the witch would surprise the
joy of that hope in her eyes, and would know what it meant, or that
some light word might bewray her; and therewith came imaginings of
what would then befall her, nor were that hard to picture, and it
would come before her over and over again till she became weary and
worn out therewith.

But though they abode ever with her, these troubling thoughts pricked
not so oft at the keenest, but were as the dull ache of little import
that comes after pain overcome: for in sooth busy and toilsome days
did she wear, which irked her in nowise, since it eased her of the
torment of those hopes and fears aforesaid, and brought her sound
sleep and sweet awaking. The kine and the goats must she milk, and
plough and sow and reap the acre-land according to the seasons, and
lead the beasts to the woodland pastures when their own were flooded
or burned; she must gather the fruits of the orchard, and the hazel
nuts up the woodlands, and beat the walnut-trees in September. She
must make the butter and the cheese, grind the wheat in the quern,
make and bake the bread, and in all ways earn her livelihood hard
enough. Moreover, the bowman's craft had she learned, and at the
dame's bidding must fare alone into the wood now and again to slay
big deer and little, and win venison: but neither did that irk her
at all, for rest and peace were in the woods for her.

True it is, that as she wended thicket or glade or wood-lawn, she
would at whiles grow timorous, and tread light and heedfully, lest
rustling leaves or crackling stick should arouse some strange
creature in human shape, devil, or god now damned, or woman of the
faery. But if such were there, either they were wise and would not
be seen, or kind and had no will to scare the simple maiden; or else
maybe there were none such in those days. Anyhow, nought evil came
to her out of Evilshaw.



CHAPTER VI. HEREIN IS TOLD OF BIRDALONE'S RAIMENT



Lank and long is Birdalone the sweet, with legs that come forth bare
and browned from under her scant grey coat and scantier smock
beneath, which was all her raiment save when the time was bitter, and
then, forsooth, it was a cloak of goat-skin that eked her attire:
for the dame heeded little the clothing of her; nor did Birdalone
give so much heed thereto that she cared to risk the anger of her
mistress by asking her for aught.

But on a day of this same spring, when the witch-wife was of sweeter
temper than her wont was, and the day was very warm and kindly,
though it was but one of the last of February days, Birdalone,
blushing and shamefaced, craved timidly some more womanly attire.
But the dame turned gruffly on her and said: Tush, child! what
needeth it? here be no men to behold thee. I shall see to it, that
when due time comes thou shalt be whitened and sleeked to the very
utmost. But look thou! thou art a handy wench; take the deer-skin
that hangs up yonder and make thee brogues for thy feet, if so thou
wilt.

Even so did Birdalone, and shaped the skin to her feet; but as she
was sewing them a fancy came into her head; for she had just come
across some threads of silk of divers colours; so she took them and
her shoon and her needle up into the wood, and there sat down happily
under a great spreading oak which much she haunted, and fell to
broidering the kindly deer-skin. And she got to be long about it,
and came back to it the next day and the next, and many days, whenso
her servitude would suffer it, and yet the shoon were scarce done.

So on a morning the dame looked on her feet as she moved about the
chamber, and cried out at her: What! art thou barefoot as an hen
yet? Hast thou spoilt the good deer-skin and art yet but shoeless?
Nay, our lady, said Birdalone, but the shoon are not altogether done.
Show them to me, said the dame.

Birdalone went to her little coffer to fetch them, and brought them
somewhat timorously, for she knew not how her mistress would take her
working on them so long, if perchance she would blame her, or it
might be chastise her, for even in those days the witch-wife's hand
was whiles raised against her. But now when the dame took the shoes
and looked on them, and saw how there were oak-leaves done into them,
and flowers, and coneys, and squirrels, she but smiled somewhat
grimly on Birdalone, and said: Well, belike thou art a fool to waste
thy time and mine in such toys; and to give thee thy due would be to
give thee stripes. But thou doest herein after the nature of earthly
women, to adorn thy body, whatsoever else is toward. And well is
that, since I would have thee a woman so soon as may be; and I will
help thy mind for finery, since thou art so deft with thy needle.

Therewith she went to the big coffer and drew forth thence a piece of
fine green cloth, and another of fine linen, and said to Birdalone:
This mayest thou take, and make thee a gown thereof and a new smock,
and make them if thou wilt as gay as thy new shoon are gotten to be;
and here is wherewithal. And therewith she gave her two handfuls of
silken threads and gold, and said: Now I suppose that I must do the
more part of thy work, while thou art making thee these gaudy
garments. But maybe someone may be coming this way ere long, who
will deem the bird the finer for her fine feathers. Now depart from
me; for I would both work for thee and me, and ponder weighty
matters.

Who was glad now but Birdalone; she grew red with new pleasure, and
knelt down and kissed the witch's hand, and then went her ways to the
wood with her precious lading, and wrought there under her oak-tree
day after day, and all days, either there, or in the house when the
weather was foul. That was in the middle of March, when all birds
were singing, and the young leaves showing on the hawthorns, so that
there were pale green clouds, as it were, betwixt the great grey
boles of oak and sweet-chestnut; and by the lake the meadow-saffron
new-thrust-up was opening its blossom; and March wore and April, and
still she was at work happily when now it was later May, and the
hare-bells were in full bloom down the bent before her.

All this while the witch had meddled little with Birdalone, and had
bidden her to no work afield or in the stead which was anywise
grievous, but had done all herself; yet was she few-spoken with her,
and would oft behold her gloomily. And one evening when Birdalone
came in from the wood, the witch came close up to her and stared her
in the face, and said suddenly: Is it in thine heart to flee away
from me and leave me?

A sharp pang of fear shot through Birdalone's heart at that word, and
she turned very red, and then pale to the lips, but stammered out:
No, lady, it is not in mine heart. The dame looked grimly on her and
said: If thou try it and fail, thou shalt rue it once only, to wit,
lifelong; and thou canst but fail. She was silent a while, and then
spake in a milder voice: Be content here a while with me, and
thereafter thou shalt be more content, and that before long.

She said no more at that time; but her word clave to Birdalone's
heart, and for some time thereafter she was sorely oppressed with a
burden of fear, and knew not how to hold herself before the witch-
wife. But the days wore, and nought betid, and the maiden's heart
grew lighter, and still she wrought on at her gown and her smock, and
it was well-nigh done. She had broidered the said gown with roses
and lilies, and a tall tree springing up from amidmost the hem of the
skirt, and a hart on either side thereof, face to face of each other.
And the smock she had sewn daintily at the hems and the bosom with
fair knots and buds. It was now past the middle of June, hot and
bright weather.



CHAPTER VII. BIRDALONE HATH AN ADVENTURE IN THE WOOD



On a day she went to the wood, and sat down under her oak-tree, and
it was far and far out of sight of anyone standing in the meadow by
the lake; and in the wood Birdalone looked to see nought at all save
the rabbits and squirrels, who were, forsooth, familiar enough with
her, and fearless, so that they would come to her hand and sport with
her when she hailed them. Wherefore, as the day was exceeding hot,
she put off from her her simple raiment, that she might feel all the
pleasure of the cool shadow and what air was stirring, and the
kindness of the greensward upon her very body. So she sat sewing,
covered but by a lap of the green gown which her needle was painting.

But as she sat there intent on her work, and her head bent over it,
and it was now at the point of high noon, she heard as if some
creature were going anigh to her; she heeded it not, deeming that it
would be but some wandering hind. But even therewith she heard one
say her name in a soft voice, and she leapt up trembling, deeming at
first that it would be the witch come to fetch her: but yet more
scared she was, when she saw standing before her the shape of a young
woman as naked as herself, save that she had an oak wreath round
about her loins.

The new-comer, who was now close to her, smiled on her, and said in a
kind and sweet voice: Fear nought, Birdalone, for I deem thou wilt
find me a friend, and it is not unlike that thou wilt need one ere
long. And furthermore, I will say it, said she smiling, that since I
am not afraid of thee, thou needest not be afraid of me. Said
Birdalone, she also smiling: True it is that thou art nought
fearsome to look on. The new-comer laughed outright, and said: Are
we not well met then in the wildwood? and we both as two children
whom the earth loveth. So play we at a game. At what game? said
Birdalone. Spake she of the oak-wreath: This; thou shalt tell me
what I am like in thine eyes first, because thou wert afraid of me;
and then when thou art done, I will tell thee what thou seemest to
me.

Quoth Birdalone: For me that will be hard; for I have nought to
liken thee to, whereas save this sight of thee I have seen nought
save her that dwelleth in the House by the Water, and whom I serve.
Nay, said the other, then will I begin, and tell thee first whatlike
thou art, so that thou wilt know the better how to frame thy word
concerning me. But tell me, hast thou ever seen thyself in a mirror?
What thing is that? said Birdalone. It is a polished round of steel
or some other white metal, said the wood-maiden, which giveth back in
all truth the image of whatso cometh before it. Said Birdalone and
reddened therewith: We have at home a broad latten dish, which it is
my work, amongst other things, to brighten and keep bright; yet may I
not make it so bright that I may see much of mine image therein; and
yet. What wouldst thou? said the wood-woman. Said Birdalone: I
shall tell thee presently when thy part of the play is done.

Laughed the new-comer, and said: It is well; now am I to be thy
mirror. Thus it is with thee: thou standest before me a tall and
slim maiden, somewhat thin, as befitteth thy seventeen summers; where
thy flesh is bare of wont, as thy throat and thine arms and thy legs
from the middle down, it is tanned a beauteous colour, but otherwhere
it is even as fair a white, wholesome and clean, and as if the golden
sunlight, which fulfilleth the promise of the earth, were playing
therein. Fairer and rounder shall be thine arms and thy shoulders
when thou hast seen five more summers, yet scarce more lovesome, so
strong and fine as now they are. Low are thy breasts, as is meet for
so young a maiden, yet is there no lack in them; nor ever shall they
be fairer than now they are. In goodly fashion sits thine head upon
thy shoulders, upheld by a long and most well-wrought neck, that the
sun hath tanned as aforesaid. The hair of thee is simple brown, yet
somewhat more golden than dark; and ah! now thou lettest it loose it
waveth softly past thy fair smooth forehead and on to thy shoulders,
and is not stayed by thy girdlestead, but hideth nought of thy knees,
and thy legs shapely thin, and thy strong and clean-wrought ankles
and feet, which are with thee as full of thine heart and thy soul and
as wise and deft as be thy wrists and thine hands, and their very
fellows. Now as to thy face: under that smooth forehead is thy
nose, which is of measure, neither small nor great, straight, and
lovely carven at the nostrils: thine eyen are as grey as a hawk's,
but kind and serious, and nothing fierce nor shifting. Nay, now thou
lettest thine eyelids fall, it is as fair with thy face as if they
were open, so smooth and simple are they and with their long full
lashes. But well are thine eyen set in thine head, wide apart, well
opened, and so as none shall say thou mayst not look in the face of
them. Thy cheeks shall one day be a snare for the unwary, yet are
they not fully rounded, as some would have them; but not I, for most
pitiful kind are they forsooth. Delicate and clear-made is the
little trench that goeth from thy nose to thy lips, and sweet it is,
and there is more might in it than in sweet words spoken. Thy lips,
they are of the finest fashion, yet rather thin than full; and some
would not have it so; but I would, whereas I see therein a sign of
thy valiancy and friendliness. Surely he who did thy carven chin had
a mind to a master-work and did no less. Great was the deftness of
thine imaginer, and he would have all folk that see thee wonder at
thy deep thinking and thy carefulness and thy kindness. Ah maiden!
is it so that thy thoughts are ever deep and solemn? Yet at least I
know it of thee that they be hale and true and sweet.

My friend, when thou hast a mirror, some of all this shalt thou see,
but not all; and when thou hast a lover some deal wilt thou hear, but
not all. But now thy she-friend may tell it thee all, if she have
eyes to see it, as have I; whereas no man could say so much of thee
before the mere love should overtake him, and turn his speech into
the folly of love and the madness of desire. So now I have played
the play, and told thee of thee; tell me now of me, and play thy
play.

For a while stood Birdalone silent, blushing and confused, but whiles
casting shy glances at her own body, what she might see of it. At
last she spake: Fair friend, I would do thy will, but I am not deft
of speech; for I speak but little, save with the fowl and wild
things, and they may not learn me the speech of man. Yet I will say
that I wonder to hear thee call me fair and beauteous; for my dame
tells me that never, nor sayeth aught of my aspect save in her anger,
and then it is: Rag! and bag-of-bones! and when wilt thou be a
woman, thou lank elf thou? The new-comer laughed well-favouredly
hereat, and put forth a hand, and stroked her friend's cheek.
Birdalone looked piteous kind on her and said: But now I must needs
believe thy words, thou who art so kind to me, and withal thyself so
beauteous. And I will tell thee that it fills my heart with joy to
know that I am fair like to thee. For this moreover I will tell
thee, that I have seen nought in field or woodland that is as lovely
to me as thou art; nay, not the fritillary nodding at our brook's
mouth, nor the willow-boughs waving on Green Eyot; nor the wild-cat
sporting on the little woodlawn, when she saw me not; nor the white
doe rising up from the grass to look to her fawn; nor aught that
moves and grows. Yet there is another thing which I must tell thee,
to wit, that what thou hast said about the fashion of any part of me,
that same, setting aside thy lovely words, which make the tears come
into the eyes of me, would I say of thee. Look thou! I take thine
hair and lay the tress amongst mine, and thou mayst not tell which is
which; and amidst the soft waves of it thy forehead is nestling
smooth as thou saidst of mine: hawk-grey and wide apart are thine
eyen, and deep thought and all tenderness is in them, as of me thou
sayest: fine is thy nose and of due measure; and thy cheeks a little
hollow, and somewhat thin thy lovely lips; and thy round chin so
goodly carven, as it might not be better done. And of thy body else
I will say as thou sayst of mine, though I deem these hands have done
more work than thine. But see thou! thy leg and mine as they stand
together; and thine arm, as if it were of my body. Slim and slender
thou art, or it may be lank; and I deem our dame would call thee also
bag-of-bones. Now is this strange. Who art thou? Art thou my very
own sister? I would thou wert.

Spake then to Birdalone that image of her, and said, smiling kindly
on her: As to our likeness, thou hast it now; so alike are we, as if
we were cast in one mould. But thy sister of blood I am not; nay, I
will tell thee at once that I am not of the children of Adam. As to
what I am, that is a long story, and I may not tell it as now; but
thou mayst call me Habundia, as I call thee Birdalone. Now it is
true that to everyone I show not myself in this fair shape of thee;
but be not aghast thereat, or deem me like unto thy mistress herein,
for as now I am, so ever shall I be unto thee.

Quoth Birdalone, looking on her anxiously: Yea, and I shall see thee
again, shall I not? else should I grieve, and wish that I had never
seen thee at all. Yea, forsooth, said Habundia, for I myself were
most fain to see thee oft. But now must thou presently get thee back
home, for evil as now is the mood of thy mistress, and she is rueing
the gift of the green gown, and hath in her mind to seek occasion to
chastise thee.

Now was Birdalone half weeping, as she did on her raiment while her
friend looked on her kindly. She said presently: Habundia, thou
seest I am hard bestead; give me some good rede thereto.

That will I, said the wood-wife. When thou goest home to the house,
be glad of countenance, and joyous that thy gown is nigh done; and
therewith be exceeding wary. For I deem it most like that she will
ask thee what thou hast seen in the wood, and then if thou falter, or
thy face change, then she will have an inkling of what hath befallen,
to wit, that thou hast seen someone; and then will she be minded to
question thy skin. But if thou keep countenance valiantly, then
presently will her doubt run off her, and she will cease grudging,
and will grow mild with thee and meddle not. This is the first rede,
and is for to-day; and now for the second, which is for days yet
unborn. Thou hast in thy mind to flee away from her; and even so
shalt thou do one day, though it may be by way of Weeping Cross; for
she is sly and wise and grim, though sooth it is that she hateth thee
not utterly. Now thou must note that nowise she hindereth thee from
faring in this wood, and that is because she wotteth, as I do, that
by this way there is no outgoing for thee. Wherefore look thou to it
that it is by the way of the water that thou shalt fare to the land
of men-folk. Belike this may seem marvellous to thee; but so it is;
and belike I may tell thee more hereof when time serveth. Now cometh
the last word of my rede. Maybe if thou come often to the wood, we
shall whiles happen on each other; but if thou have occasion for me,
and wouldst see me at once, come hither, and make fire, and burn a
hair of my head therein, and I will be with thee: here is for thee a
tress of mine hair; now thou art clad, thou mayst take a knife from
thy pouch and shear it from off me.

Even so did Birdalone, and set the tress in her pouch; and therewith
they kissed and embraced each other, and Birdalone went her ways home
to the house, but Habundia went back into the wood as she had come.



CHAPTER VIII. OF BIRDALONE AND THE WITCH-WIFE



It went with Birdalone as Habundia had foretold, for she came home to
the house glad of semblance, flushed and light-foot, so that she was
lovely and graceful beyond her wont. The dame looked on her
doubtfully and grimly a while, and then she said: What ails thee, my
servant, that thou lookest so masterful? Nought ails me, lady, said
Birdalone, save that I am gay because of the summer season, and
chiefly because of thy kindness and thy gift, and that I have well-
nigh done my work thereon, and that soon now I shall feel these
dainty things beating about my ankles. And she held up and spread
abroad the skirt with her two hands, and it was indeed goodly to look
on.

The witch-wife snorted scornfully and scowled on her, and said:
Thine ankles forsooth! Bag-o'-bones! thou wisp! forsooth, thou art
in love with thy looks, though thou knowest not what like a fair
woman is. Forsooth, I begin to think that thou wilt never grow into
a woman at all, but will abide a skinny elf thy life long. Belike I
did myself wrong to suffer thee to waste these three or four months
of thy thrall's work, since for nought but thrall's work shalt thou
ever be meet.

Birdalone hung her head adown, and blushed, but smiled a little, and
swayed her body gently, as a willow-bough is swayed when a light air
arises in the morning. But the witch stood so scowling on her, and
with so sour a look, that Birdalone, glancing at her, found her heart
sink so within her, that she scarce kept countenance; yet she lost it
not.

Then said the witch sharply: Wert thou in the wood to-day? Yea,
lady, said the maiden. Then said the dame fiercely: And what sawest
thou? Quoth Birdalone, looking up with an innocent face somewhat
scared: Lady, I saw a bear, one of the big ones, crossing a glade.
And thou without bow and arrow or wood-knife, I warrant me, said the
witch. Thou shalt be whipped, to keep thee in mind that thy life is
mine and not thine. Nay, nay, I pray thee be not wroth! said the
maid; he was a long way down the glade, and would not have followed
me if he had seen me: there was no peril therein. Said the witch-
wife: Didst thou see aught else? Yea, said Birdalone, and was
weeping somewhat now; which forsooth was not hard for her to do,
over-wrought as she was betwixt hope and fear: yea, I saw my white
doe and her fawn, and they passed close by me; and two herons flew
over my head toward the water; and . . . But the witch turned
sharply and said: Thrall! hast thou seen a woman to-day in the wood?
A woman? said Birdalone, and what woman, my lady, said Birdalone.
Hath any woman come to the house, and passed forth into the wood?

The dame looked on her carefully, and remembered how she had faltered
and changed countenance that other day, when she had charged her with
being minded to flee; and now she saw her with wondering face, and in
no wise confused or afraid of guilt, as it seemed; so she believed
her tale, and being the more at ease thereby, her wrath ran off her,
and she spake altogether pleasantly to Birdalone, and said: Now I
have had my gird at thee, my servant, I must tell thee that in sooth
it is not all for nothing that thou hast had these months of rest;
for verily thou hast grown more of a woman thereby, and hast
sleekened and rounded much. Albeit, the haysel will wait no longer
for us, and the day after to-morrow we must fall to on it. But when
that is done, thou shalt be free to do thy green gown, or what thou
wilt, till wheat harvest is toward; and thereafter we shall see to
it. Or what sayest thou?

Birdalone wondered somewhat at this so gracious word, but not much;
for in her heart now was some guile born to meet the witch's guile;
so she knelt down and took the dame's hands and kissed them, and
said: I say nought, lady, save that I thank thee over and over again
that thou art become so good to me; and that I will full merrily work
for thee in the hay-field, or at whatsoever else thou wilt.

And indeed she was so light-hearted that she had so escaped from the
hand of the witch for that time, and above all, that she had gotten a
friend so kind and dear as the wood-woman, that her heart went out
even toward her mistress, so that she went nigh to loving her.



CHAPTER IX. OF BIRDALONE'S SWIMMING



Full fair was the morrow morn, and Birdalone arose betimes before the
sun was up, and she thought she would make of this a holiday before
the swink afield began again, since the witch was grown good toward
her. So she did on her fair shoes, and her new raiment, though the
green gown was not fully done, and said to herself that she would
consider what she would do with her holiday when she was amidst of
her bathing.

So she went down to the water-side, and when she was standing knee-
deep in the little sandy bight aforesaid, she looked over to Green
Eyot, and was minded to swim over thither, as oft she did. And it
was a windless dawn after a hot night, and a light mist lay upon the
face of the water, and above it rose the greenery of the eyot.

She pushed off into the deep and swam strongly through the still
water, and the sun rose while she was on the way, and by then she had
laid a hand on the willow-twigs of the eyot, was sending a long beam
across the waters; and her wet shoulders rose up into the path of it
and were turned into ruddy gold. She hoisted herself up, and
climbing the low bank, was standing amongst the meadow-sweet, and
dripping on to its fragrance. Then she turned about to the green
plain and the house and the hedge of woodland beyond, and sighed, and
said softly: A pity of it, to leave it! If it were no better
otherwhere, and not so fair?

Then she turned inward to the eyot, which had done her nought but
good, and which she loved; and she unbound her hair, and let it fall
till the ends of the tresses mingled with the heads of the meadow-
sweet, and thereafter walked quietly up into the grassy middle of the
isle.

She was wont to go to a knoll there where the grass was fine, and
flowery at this time with white clover and dog violet, and lie down
under the shade of a big thorn with a much-twisted bole: but to-day
some thought came across her, and she turned before she came to the
thorn, and went straight over the eyot  which was but a furlong over
at that place  and down to the southward-looking shore thereof.
There she let herself softly down into the water and thrust off
without more ado, and swam on and on till she had gone a long way.
Then she communed with herself, and found that she was thinking: If
I might only swim all the water and be free.

And still she swam on: and now a light wind had been drawn up from
the west, and was driving a little ripple athwart the lake, and she
swam the swiftlier for it awhile, but then turned over on her back
and floated southward still. Till on a sudden, as she lay looking up
toward the far-away blue sky, and she so little and low on the face
of the waters, and the lake so deep beneath her, and the wind coming
ever fresher from the west, and the ripple rising higher against her,
a terror fell upon her, and she longed for the green earth and its
well-wrought little blossoms and leaves and grass; then she turned
over again and swam straight for the eyot, which now was but a little
green heap far away before her.

Long she was ere she made land there, and the sun was high in the
heavens when she came, all spent and weary, to the shadow of the
hawthorn-tree; and she cast herself down there and fell asleep
straightway. Forsooth her swim was about as much as she had might
for.

When she awoke it lacked but an hour of noon-tide, and she felt the
life in her and was happy, but had no will to rise up for a while;
for it was ajoy to her to turn her head this way and that to the dear
and dainty flowers, that made the wide, grey, empty lake seem so far
away, and no more to be dealt with than the very sky itself.

At last she arose, and when she had plucked and eaten some handfuls
of the strawberries which grew plenteously on the sweet ground of the
eyot, she went down to the landward-looking shore, and took the
water, and swam slowly across the warm ripple till she came once more
to the strand and her raiment. She clad herself, and set her hand to
her pouch and drew forth bread, and sat eating it on the bank above
the smooth sand. Then she looked around, and stood up with her face
toward the house, to see if the dame would call to her. But she saw
the witch come out of the porch and stand there looking under the
sharp of her hand toward her, and thereafter she went back again into
the house without giving any sign. Wherefore Birdalone deemed that
she had leave that day, and that she might take yet more holiday; so
she stepped lightly down from her place of vantage, turned her face
toward the east, and went quietly along the very lip of the water.



CHAPTER X. BIRDALONE COMES ON NEW TIDINGS



Soon she had covered up the house from her, for on that eastern end,
both a tongue of the woodland shoved out west into the meadow, and,
withal, the whole body of the wood there drew down to the water, and
presently cut off all the greensward save a narrow strip along by the
lake, off the narrowest whereof lay the rocky eyot aforesaid, nigher
unto the shore than lay Green Eyot.

Now never had Birdalone gone so far east as to be over against Rock
Eyot. In her childish days the witch had let her know that she might
go where she would, but therewith had told her a tale of a huge
serpent which dwelt in the dark wood over against Rock Eyot, whose
wont it was to lap his folds round and round living things that went
there, and devour them; and many an evil dream had that evil serpent
brought to Birdalone. In after days belike she scarce trowed in the
tale, yet the terror of it abode with her. Moreover the wildwood
toward that side, as it drew toward the water, was dark and dreary
and forbidding, running into black thickets standing amidst
quagmires, all unlike to the sweet, clean upland ridges, oak begrown
and greenswarded, of the parts which lay toward the north, and which
she mostly haunted.

But this summer day, which was so bright and hot, Birdalone deemed
she might harden her heart to try the adventure; and she had a mind
to enter the wood thereby, and win her way up into the oakland
whereas she had met Habundia, and perchance she might happen on her;
for she would not dare to summon her so soon after their first
meeting. And if she met her, there would be the holiday worthily
brought to an end!

On went Birdalone, and was soon at the narrowest of the greensward,
and had the wood black on her left hand, for the trees of it were
mostly alder. But when she was come just over against Rock Eyot, she
found a straight creek or inlet of the water across her way; and the
said creek ran right up into the alder thicket; and, indeed, was much
overhung by huge ancient alders, gnarled, riven, mossy, and falling
low over the water. But close on the mouth of the creek, on
Birdalone's side thereof, lay a thing floating on the dull water,
which she knew not how to call a boat, for such had she never seen,
nor heard of, but which was indeed a boat, oarless and sailless.

She looked on it all about, and wondered; yet she saw at once that it
was for wending the water, and she thought, might she but have a long
pole, she might push it about the shallow parts of the lake, and
belike take much fish. She tried to shove it somewhat toward the
lake, but with her little might could make nothing of the work; for
the craft was heavy, like a barge, if there were nothing else that
withstood her.

About this new thing she hung a long while, wondering that she had
never heard thereof, or been set to toil therewith. She noted that
it was mostly pale grey of hue, as if it had been bleached by sun and
water, but at the stem and stern were smears of darker colour, as
though someone had been trying the tints of staining there.

Now so much did this new matter take up all her mind, that she
thought no more of going up into the wood; but though she had fain
abided there long to see whatever might be seen, she deemed it would
go ill with her did the witch happen on her there; wherefore she
turned about, and went back the way she had come, going very slowly
and pondering the tidings. And ever she called to mind what Habundia
had said to her, that it was by water she must flee, and wondered if
she had sent her this thing that she might escape therein; so
different as her going would be thereby to swimming the lake with her
wet body. Then again she thought, that before she might let herself
hope this, it were best, if she might, to find out from the witch
what was the thing, and if she knew thereof. Yet at last she called
to mind how little patient of questions was her mistress, and that if
she were unheedful she might come to raise an evil storm about her.
Wherefore she took this rede at the last, that she would keep all
hidden in her own breast till she should see Habundia again; and
meanwhile she might steal down thither from time to time to see if
the thing still abode there; which she might the easier do by
swimming if she chose her time heedfully, and go thither from Rock
Eyot, which now and again she visited.



CHAPTER XI. OF BIRDALONE'S GUILT AND THE CHASTISEMENT THEREOF



By this she was come back to the sandy bight, and the sun was
westering; and she looked up toward the house and saw that it was the
time of their evening meal, for the blue smoke of the cooking fire
was going up into the air. So she went thither speedily, and entered
gay of seeming. The witch looked on her doubtfully, but presently
fell to speaking with her graciously as yesterday, and Birdalone was
glad and easy of mind, and went about the serving of her; for always
she ate after the dame; and the mistress asked her of many matters
concerning the house, and the gathering of stuff.

So came the talk on the fishing of the brook that ran before their
door, and how the trouts therein were but little, and not seldom none
at all; and even therewith came these words into Birdalone's mouth,
she scarce knew how: My lady, why do we not fish the lake, whereas
there be shoal places betwixt us and the eyots where lie many and
great fish, as I have seen when I have been swimming thereover? And
now in that same creek whereas the serpent used to lurk when I was
little, we have a thing come, which is made to swim on the water; and
I, could I have a long pole to shove withal.

But no time she had to make an end, ere the witch-wife sprang up and
turned on her with a snarl as of an evil dog, and her face changed
horribly: her teeth showed grinning, her eyes goggled in her head,
her brow was all to-furrowed, and her hands clenched like iron
springs.

Birdalone shuddered back from her and cringed in mere terror, but had
no might to cry out. The witch hauled her up by the hair, and
dragged her head back so that her throat lay bare before her all
along. Then drew the witch a sharp knife from her girdle, and raised
her hand over her, growling and snarling like a wolf. But suddenly
she dropped the knife, her hand fell to her side, and she fell in a
heap on the floor and lay there hushed.

Birdalone stood gazing on her, and trembling in every limb; too
confused was she to think or do aught, though some image off light
through the open door passed before her: but her feet seemed of
lead, and, as in an evil dream, she had no might to move her limbs,
and the minutes went by as she stood there half dead with fear.

At last,  and belike it was no long while  the witch-wife came to
herself again, and sat up on the floor, and looked all about the
chamber, and when her eyes fell upon Birdalone, she said in a weak
voice, yet joyfully; Hah! thou art there still, my good servant!
Then she said: A sickness fell upon me suddenly, as whiles it is
wont; but now am I myself again; and presently I have a word for
thee.

Therewith she rose up slowly, Birdalone helping her, and sat in her
big chair silent awhile, and then she spake: My servant, thou hast
for the more part served me well: but this time thou hast done ill,
whereas thou hast been spying on my ways; whereof may come heavy
trouble but if we look to it. Well is it for thee that thou hast
none unto whom thou mightest babble; for then must I needs have slain
thee here and now. But for this first time I pardon thee, and thou
hast escaped the wrath.

Her voice was soft and wheedling; but for Birdalone the terror had
entered into her soul, and yet abode with her.

The witch-wife sat a while, and then arose and went about the
chamber, and came to a certain aumbry and opened it, and drew forth a
little flasket of lead and a golden cup scored over with strange
signs, and laid them on the board beside her chair, wherein she now
sat down again, and spake once more, still in the same soft and
wheedling voice: Yet, my servant, thy guilt would be required of me,
if I let this pass as if to-day were the same as yesterday; yea, and
of thee also would it be required; therefore it is a part of the
pardon that thou be corrected: and the correction must be terrible
to thee, that thou mayst remember never again to thrust thyself into
the jaws of death. And what may I do to correct thee? It shall be
in a strange way, such as thou hast never dreamed of. Yet the
anguish thereof shall go to thine heart's root; but this must thou
needs bear, for my good and thine, so that both we may live and be
merry hereafter. Go now, fill this cup with water from the spring
and come back with it. Birdalone took the cup with a sinking heart,
and filled it, and brought it back, and stood before the witch more
dead than alive.

Then the witch-wife took up the flasket and pulled out the stopple
and betook it to Birdalone, and said: Drink of this now, a little
sip, no more. And the maiden did so, and the liquor was no sooner
down her gullet than the witch-wife and the chamber, and all things
about her, became somewhat dim to her; but yet not so much so as that
she could not see them. But when she stretched out her arm she could
see it not at all, nor her limbs nor any other part of her which her
eyes might fall upon. Then would she have uttered a lamentable wail,
but the voice was sealed up in her and no sound came from her voice.
Then she heard the witch-wife how she said  and yet she heard it as
if her voice came from afar , Nay, thou canst not speak, and thou
canst not see thyself, nor may any other, save me, and I but dimly.
But this is but part of what I must lay upon thee; for next I must
give thee a new shape, and that both thyself and all other may see.
But, before I do that, I must speak a word to thee, which thy new
shape would not suffer the sense thereof to reach to thine heart.
Hearken!



CHAPTER XII. THE WORDS OF THE WITCH-WIFE TO BIRDALONE



Said the witch-wife: When thou comest to thyself  for it is not my
will that thou shouldest never have thine own shape again , doubtless
the first thing which thou shalt do with thy new-gained voice and thy
new-gained wit shall be to curse me, and curse me again. Do as thou
wilt herein; but I charge thee, disobey me not, for that shall bring
thee to thy bane. For if thou do not my bidding, and if thou pry
into my matters, and lay bare that which I will have hidden, then
will it be imputed unto thee for guilt, and will I, will I not, I
must be avenged on thee even to slaying: and then is undone all the
toil and pain I have had in rearing thee into a deft and lovely
maiden. Deem thou, then, this present anguish kind to thee, to keep
thee that thou come not to nought.

Now since I have begun speaking, I will go on; for little heretofore
have I spoken to thee what was in mine heart. Well I wot that thou
thinkest of me but as of an evil dream, whereof none can aught but
long to awake from it. Yet I would have thee look to this at least;
that I took thee from poverty and pinching, and have reared thee as
faithfully as ever mother did to child; clemming thee never, smiting
thee not so oft, and but seldom cruelly. Moreover, I have suffered
thee to go whereso thou wouldest, and have compelled thee to toil for
nought but what was needful for our two livelihoods. And I have not
stayed thy swimmings in the lake, nor thy wanderings in the wood, and
thou hast learned bowshot there, till thou art now a past-master in
the craft: and, moreover, thou art swift-foot as the best of the
deer, and mayest over-run any one of them whom thou wilt.

Soothly a merry life hast thou had as a child, and merry now would be
thy life, save for thine hatred of me. Into a lovely lily-lass hast
thou grown. That I tell thee now, though my wont has been to gird at
thee for the fashion of thy body; that was but the word of the
mistress to the thrall. And now what awaiteth thee? For thou mayst
say: I am lonely here, and there is no man to look on me. Of what
avail, therefore, is my goodliness and shapeliness? Child, I answer
thee that the time is coming when thou shalt see here a many of the
fairest of men, and then shalt thou be rather rose than lily, and
fully come to womanhood; and all those shall love and worship thee,
and thou mayst gladden whom thou wilt, and whom thou wilt mayst
sadden; and no lack soever shalt thou have of the sweetness of love,
or the glory of dominion.

Think of it then! All this is for thee if thou dwell here quietly
with me, doing my will till thy womanhood hath blossomed. Wherefore
I beseech and pray thee put out of thy mind the thought of fleeing
from me. For if thou try it, one of two things shall be: either I
shall bring thee back and slay thee, or make thee live in misery of
torment; or else thou wilt escape, and then what will it be? Dost
thou know how it shall go with thee, coming poor and nameless, an
outcast, into the world of men? Lust shalt thou draw unto thee, but
scarce love. I say an outcast shalt thou be, without worship or
dominion; thy body shall be a prey to ribalds, and when the fine
flower thereof hath faded, thou shalt find that the words of thy
lovers were but mockery. That no man shall love thee, and no woman
aid thee. Then shall Eld come to thee and find thee at home with
Hell; and Death shall come and mock thee for thy life cast away for
nought, for nought. This is my word to thee: and now I have nought
to do to thee save to change thee thy skin, and therein must thou do
as thou canst, but it shall be no ugly or evil shape at least. But
another time maybe I shall not be so kind as to give thee a new
shape, but shall let thee wander about seen by none but me. Then she
took the cup and took water in the hollow of her hand and cast it
into Birdalone's face, and muttered words withal; and presently she
saw herself indeed, that she was become a milk-white hind; and she
heard and saw again, but not as she, the maiden, was wont to hear and
see; for both her hearing and seeing and her thought was of a beast
and not of a maiden.

Said the witch-wife: It is done now, till I give thee grace again;
and now be off into the field; but if thou stray more than half a
bowshot from the brook, it shall be the worse for thee. And now the
day was done and night was come.



CHAPTER XIII. BIRDALONE MEETETH THE WOOD-WOMAN AGAIN



It was fifteen days thereafter that Birdalone awoke lying in her bed
on a bright morning, as if all this had been but a dream. But the
witch-wife was standing over her and crying out: Thou art late,
slug-a-bed, this fair-weather day, and the grass all spoiling for
lack of the scythe. Off! and down to the meadow with thee.

Birdalone waited not for more words, but sprang out of bed, and had
her work-a-day raiment on in a twinkling, and stayed but to wash her
in a pool of the brook, and then was amidst the tall grass with the
swathe falling before her. As she worked she thought, and could
scarce tell whether joy at her present deliverance, or terror of the
witch-wife, were the greatest. Sore was her longing to go see her
friend in the wood, but the haysel lasted more than a week, and when
that was done, whether it were of set purpose or no, the dame forgat
her other promise, to give Birdalone more holiday, and kept her close
to her work about meadow and acre. Otherwise her mistress nowise
mishandled or threatened her, though she had gone back to the
surliness and railing which was her wont. At last, on a morning when
the dame had bidden her to nought of work, Birdalone took her bow in
her hand and cast her quiver on her back, and went her ways into the
wood, and forgat not the tress of Habundia's hair; but she had no
need to use it, for when she was come to the Oak of Tryst,
straightway came Habundia forth from the thicket, and now so like to
Birdalone that it was a wonder, for as her friend she bare bow and
quiver, and green gown trussed up till her knees were naked.

So they kissed and embraced, and Birdalone wept upon her friend's
bosom, but was ashamed of the words which would have told her of her
case. Then Habundia set her down upon the greensward, and sat down
beside her, and caressed her and soothed her; then she smiled on
Birdalone, and said: Thy tale is partly told without words, and I
would weep for thee if I might shed tears. But thou mayest tell me
wherefore thou didst suffer this; though forsooth I have an inkling
thereof. Hast thou happened on the witch's ferry?

Even so it was, sister, quoth Birdalone. And therewith she plucked
up heart, and told her all the tale of the vanishing of her body and
the skin-changing. And Habundia answered: Well then, there is this
to be said, that sooner or later this must have happened, for thereby
lieth thy road of escape; wherefore it is better sooner than later.
But tell me again: was she fierce and rough in words with thee? for
what she said to thee thou hast not yet told me. Said Birdalone: In
her first fury, when she was like to have slain me, she had no words,
nought but wolfish cries. But thereafter she spake unto me
strangely, yet neither fiercely nor roughly; nay, it seemed to me as
if almost she loved me. And more than almost she besought me rather
than commanded me not to flee from her. And wert thou beguiled by
her soft speech? said Habundia. Nowise to cast aside my hope of
escape, nay, not even in that hour, said Birdalone; but amidst all
the confusion and terror somewhat was I moved to compassion on her.

Spake Habundia, looking anxiously on her: Dost thou deem that thou
art somewhat cowed by what she hath done to thee? Said Birdalone,
and flushed very red: Oh no, no! Nought save death or bonds shall
come betwixt me and my utmost striving for escape. That is better
than well, said Habundia; but again, canst thou have patience a
little, and be wary and wise the while? So meseemeth, said the
maiden. Said Habundia: Again it is well. Now is the summer
beginning to wane, and by my rede thou shalt not try the flight until
May is come again and well-nigh worn into June; for thou wilt be
bigger then, little sister, and tidings are waxing that shall get
matters ready for thy departure: moreover, thou must yet learn what
thou hast to do meanwhile, and thereof shall I tell thee somewhat as
now. For that boat, the thing which thou didst find, and for which
thou didst suffer, is called the Sending Boat, and therein thy
mistress fareth time and again, I deem to seek to some other of her
kind, but I know not unto whom, or whereto. Hast thou noted of her
that whiles she goeth away privily by night and cloud? Yea, verily,
said Birdalone, and this is one of the things which heretofore hath
made me most afraid. Said Habundia: Well now, that she wendeth
somewhither in this ferry I wot; but as I wot not whither, so also I
know not what she doth with the Sending Boat to make it obey her;
whereas, though I know all things of the wood, I know but little of
the lake. Wherefore, though there be peril to thee therein, follow
her twice or thrice when she riseth up for this faring, and note
closely what is her manner of dealing with the said Sending Boat, so
that thou mayst do in like wise. Wilt thou risk the smart and the
skin-changing, or even if it were the stroke of the knife, to gather
this wisdom? And thereafter thou shalt come hither and tell me how
thou hast sped. With a good heart will I, dear sister, said
Birdalone.

Then Habundia kissed her and said: It is a joy to me to see thee so
valiant, but herein may I help thee somewhat; here is a gold finger-
ring, see thou! fashioned as a serpent holding his tail in his mouth;
whenso thou goest on this quest, set thou this same ring on the
middle finger of thy left hand, and say thou above thy breath at
least:


To left and right,
Before, behind,
Of me be sight
As of the wind!


And nought then shall be seen of thee even by one who standeth close
beside. But wear not the ring openly save at such times, or let the
witch have sight thereof ever, or she will know that thou hast met
me. Dost thou understand, and canst thou remember?

Laughed Birdalone, and took the ring and set it on her finger, and
spake aloud even as Habundia had given her the words. Then quoth
Habundia, laughing: Now have I lost my friend and sister, for thou
art gone, Birdalone. Take off the ring, sweetling, and get thee to
thine hunting, for if thou come home empty-handed there will be
flyting awaiting thee, or worse.

So Birdalone took off the ring and came back to sight again laughing;
then the wood-woman kissed her and turned her heels to her, and was
gone; but Birdalone strung her bow, and got to her woodcraft, and
presently had a brace of hares, wherewith she went back home to the
dame; who indeed girded at her for her sloth, and her little catch in
so long a while; but there it ended.



CHAPTER XIV. OF BIRDALONE'S FISHING



Now were the days wearing toward wheat-harvest, and nought befel to
tell of, save that on a morn the witch-wife called Birdalone to her,
and said: Now is little to be done till the wheat is ready for the
hook, and thy days are idle; or what is that word that fell from thee
that other day, that there be good swims for fish about the eyots?
Canst thou swim across bearing thine angle, and back again therewith,
and thy catch withal? Yea, certes, said Birdalone gaily; with one
hand I may swim gallantly, or with my legs alone, if I stir mine arms
ever so little. I will go straightway if thou wilt, lady; but give
me a length of twine so that I may tie my catch about my middle when
I swim back again.

Therewith she went forth lightly to fetch her angle, which was in a
shed without; but just as she took it in her hand, a sudden thought
came to her, so wary as she was grown. She undid the bosom of her
gown, and took forth her serpent-ring; for she bore it next to her
skin, made fast to the bosom of her smock; but now she hid it
carefully in the thickest of her brow-hair, which was very thick and
soft. Withal the tress of Habundia's hair she bore ever mingled with
her own.

No sooner had she done it, but she was glad; for she heard the dame
calling her, who, when she came to the house-door, spake and said:
Now shall I fare with thee down to the water, and look to thy
garments lest they be fouled by some straying beast. And therewith
she looked curiously on Birdalone, and knit her brows when she saw
that the maiden changed countenance in nowise.

Down to the water went they, and the witch sat down close to where
Birdalone should take the water, and watched her do off her raiment,
and eyed her keenly when she was bare, but said nought. Birdalone
turned her head as she stood knee-deep, and said: How long shall I
abide, lady, if I have luck? As long as thou wilt, said the dame:
most like I shall be gone by then thou comest back, even if thou be
away no long while.

Fell Birdalone to swimming then, and when she was more than half
over, the witch, stirring no more than need was, got hold of her
raiment, which was but the old grey coat over a smock, and ransacked
it, but found nought, as well ye may wot. And when she had done, she
sat down again in heavy mood as it seemed, and watched Birdalone
swimming, and when she beheld her body come forth out of the water,
and pass out of sight amongst the flowers of the eyot, she arose and
went her ways home.

Birdalone looked through the willow-boughs, and saw her turn away;
then she fared to her fishing with a smile, and soon had plenteous
catch from under the willow-boughs. Then, whereas the day was very
calm and fair, and the dame had given her holiday, she wandered about
the eyot, and most in a little wood of berry-trees, as quicken and
whitebeam and dog-wood, and sported with the birds, who feared her
not, but came and sat on her shoulders, and crept about her feet.
She went also and stood a while on the southern shore, and looked on
the wide water dim in the offing under the hot-weather haze, and
longed to be gone beyond it. Then she turned away, and to the other
shore, and gat her fish and strung them on the string, and made them
fast to her middle, and so took the water back again to the yellow
strand, where now was no one awaiting her. But before she did on her
garments, she looked on them, and saw that they lay not as she had
left them, whereby she knew well that the witch-wife had handled
them.

Amidst all this the day was wearing to an end, and again she saw the
smoke of the cooking-fire going up into the air from the chimney of
the house; and she smiled ruefully, thinking that the witch might yet
find an occasion for ransacking her raiment. But she plucked up
heart, and came home with her catch, and the dame met her with a glum
face, and neither praised her nor blamed her, but took the fish
silently. Such ending had that day.



CHAPTER XV. BIRDALONE WEARETH HER SERPENT-RING



After this she went once and again fishing on to Green Eyot by the
bidding of the dame, who went not again to the shore with her. These
times she had half a mind to go see the Sending Boat, but durst not,
lest the thing itself might have life enough to tell of her.

And now was come the time of wheat-harvest, and Birdalone must wear
her days swinking in the acre-land, clad but in smock and shoes; and
the toil was hard, and browned her skin and hardened her hands, but
it irked her not, for the witch let her work all alone, and it was
holiday unto the maiden if her mistress were not anigh, despite those
words which had somewhat touched her heart that other day.

But when wheat-getting was done, there was again rest for her body,
and swimming withal and fishing from the eyot by the witch's leave.
And again by her own leave she went to seek Habundia in the wood, and
spent a happy hour with her, and came back with a fawn which she had
shot, and so but barely saved her skin from the twig-shower. Then
yet again she went into the wood on the witch's errand as well as her
own, and was paid by her friend's sweet converse, and by nought else
save the grudging girding of her mistress.

But on a night when September was well in, and the sky was moonless
and overcast, somewhat before midnight the dame came and hung over
Birdalone as she lay abed, and watched to see if she waked; forsooth
the witch's coming had waked her; but even so she was wary, and lay
still, nor changed her breathing. So the witch turned away, but even
therewith Birdalone made a shift to get a glimpse of her, and this
she saw thereby, that the semblance of her was changed, and that she
bore the self-same skin wherewith she had come to Utterhay, and which
she had worn twice or thrice afterwards when she had an errand
thither.

The witch now glided swiftly to the door, and out into the night.
Birdalone lay still a little, lest she should fall into a trap, and
then arose very quietly and did on her smock, which lay ever under
her pillow with the ring sewn thereto again, and so went out adoors
also, and deemed she saw the witch some way on ahead; but it was
nothing for her light feet to overtake her. So she stayed to take
the ring from her smock, and set it on her finger; then in a low
voice she said:


To left and right,
Before, behind,
Of me be sight
As of the wind!


Then boldly she sped on, and was soon close on the heels of the
witch, who made her way to the edge of the lake, and then turned
east, and went even as Birdalone had gone when she came across the
Sending Boat.

So fared the witch-wife straight to the creek-side, and Birdalone
must needs stick close to her, or she had known nought, so black was
the night amongst the alder-boughs. But the witch-wife fumbled about
a while when she was stayed by the creek, and presently drew somewhat
from under her cloak, and the maiden saw that she was about striking
flint upon steel, and quaked somewhat, lest her charm had played her
false. Presently the tinder quickened, and the dame had lighted a
lantern, which she held up, peering all about; and full she looked on
the place whereas was Birdalone, and made no show of seeing her,
though well-nigh the maiden looked for it to see her drop the lantern
and spring on her.

Now the witch, holding the lantern aloft, steps over the gunwale of
the boat, and sits down on the thwart; and it was a near thing but
that Birdalone followed her into the boat, but she feared the getting
forth again, so she but hung over it as close as she might. Then she
saw the witch draw out of her girdle that sharp little knife which
Birdalone had seen raised against her own throat; and then the witch
bared her arm, and pricked it till the blood sprang from that barren
white skin; thereat she stood up, and went to the bows of the craft
and hung over them, and drew her arm to and fro over the stem to
bloody it; and went thereafter to the stern, and took blood into her
right hand and passed it over the place of the steerage  for there
was no rudder  and came back and sat down on the thwart again; and,
so far as Birdalone might see, busied herself in staunching the
little wound on her arm. Then deemed Birdalone that she knew what
manner of paint was that which had made the rusty smears which she
had seen on the boat by daylight.

But now as the witch sat there, a harsh voice began to stir in her
throat, and then words came out of her, and she sang in a crow's
croak:


The red raven-wine now
Hast thou drunk, stern and bow;
Then wake and awake
And the wonted way take!
The way of the Wender forth over the flood,
For the will of the Sender is blent with the blood.


Therewithal began the boat to stir, and anon it glided forth out of
the creek into the waters of the lake, and the light of the lantern
died, and it was but a minute ere Birdalone lost all sight of it.
She abode a little longer, lest perchance boat and witch might come
back on her hands, and then turned and went swiftly back again. She
would have drawn off her ring straightway, but the thought came on
her, that she had seen the witch depart in her second semblance; how
if she were abiding her at home in her wonted skin? So she came to
the house even as she was, and opened the door, and looked in,
quaking; but there was no image of a child of Adam therein, and no
living thing, save the cat drowsing before the fire; wherefore
Birdalone took the ring from her finger and went to the hearth, and
stirred up the cat with her foot till he arose and fell to rubbing
himself against her legs, and she was fain of him.

Thereafter she made her ring fast to her smock again, and set the
smock under her pillow as her wont was, and betook herself to bed,
and fell asleep sweetly, leaving all troublous thoughts for the
morrow; and that the more as she was free of the witch-wife for that
night at least.



CHAPTER XVI. BIRDALONE MEETETH HABUNDIA AGAIN; AND LEARNETH HER
FIRST WISDOM OF HER



When morning was, Birdalone arose, and longed sore to go into the
wood to seek Habundia again, but durst not, lest the witch-wife
should come to hand again earlier than might be looked for. So she
abode quiet and did what was toward near about the house. All that
day the witch came not back, nor the next; but the morrow thereafter,
when Birdalone arose, she found the wonted aspect of her mistress in
the wonted place, who, when she saw the maiden, greeted her, and was
somewhat blithe with her; and Birdalone would have asked her leave to
go to the wood, but she trusted little in her unwonted soft mood;
which yet lasted so long that on the third day she herself bade
Birdalone go take her pleasure in the wood, and bear back with her
what of venison she might.

Forthwith went Birdalone as glad as might be, and met her friend at
the Oak of Tryst, and told her closely how all had betid; and
Habundia said: Here, then, thou hast learned how to sail the lake.
But hast thou learned enough to try the adventure and not to fail?
Even so I deem, said Birdalone; but this I would say, that meseemeth
it better that I follow the witch down to the boat one more time at
least; for this first time it was dark; and moreover shall I not be
surer of the spell if I hear it said oftener, lest it be not ever the
same words? What sayest thou? She said: Thou art right herein,
and, since the adventure may not be tried till next June is at hand,
there is time enough and to spare. And now for this hour that is we
need talk no more of it. Only, my sweet, I beseech thee be wary; and
above all suffer not the witch-wife to set eye or hand on the ring.
Truly mine heart oft aches sorely for thy peril; for therein the
image of thee abideth rather as of my daughter than my friend. Yea,
now thou laughest, but kindly, so that the sound of thy laughter is
as sweet music. But know that though thou art but a young maiden,
and I in all wise like unto thee of aspect, yet have I dwelt many and
many a year upon the earth, and much wisdom have learned. Trowest
thou me?

Yea, yea, said Birdalone, with all my heart. Then she hung her head
a while and kept silence, and thereafter looked up and spake: I
would ask thee a thing and crave somewhat of thee, as if thou wert
verily my mother; wilt thou grant it me? Yea, surely, child, said
Habundia. Said Birdalone: This it is then, that thou wilt learn me
of thy wisdom. Habundia smiled full kindly on her, and said: This
of all things I would have had thee ask; and this day and now shall
we begin to open the book of the earth before thee. For therein is
mine heritage and my dominion. Sit by me, child, and hearken!

So the maiden sat down by her likeness under the oak, and began to
learn her lesson. Forsooth forgotten is the wisdom, though the tale
of its learning abideth, wherefore nought may we tell thereof.

When it was done, Birdalone kissed her wood-mother and said: This is
now the best day of my life, this and the day when first I saw thee.
I will come hither now many times before the day of my departure.
Yea, but, sweet child, said Habundia, beware of the witch and her
cruelty; I fear me she shall yet be grim toward thee. So will I be
wary, said Birdalone, but I will venture some little peril of pain
but if thou forbid me, mother. And I pray thee by thy love to forbid
me not. And this I pray thee the more, because after one of these
grim times then mostly doth she meddle the less with me for a while,
wherefore I shall be the freer to come hither. Habundia kissed her
and embraced her, and said: Valiant art thou for a young maiden, my
child, and I would not refrain thee more than a father would refrain
his young son from the strokes of the tilt-yard. But I pray thee to
forget not my love, and my sorrow for thy grief.

Therewith they sundered, and it was drawing toward evening.
Birdalone sought catch, and brought home venison to the dame, who was
yet blithe with her, and spake that evening as she eyed her: I
cannot tell how it is, but thou seemest changed unto me, and lookest
more towards thy womanhood than even yesterday. I mean the face of
thee, for wert thou stripped, lean enough I should see thee,
doubtless. But now look to it, I beseech thee, to be both deft and
obedient, so that I may be as kind to thee as I would be, and kinder
than I have been heretofore.



CHAPTER XVII. THE PASSING OF THE YEAR INTO WINTER



Wore the days now, till on a night of October, toward the end
thereof, the witch went a-night-tide to the Sending Boat, and
Birdalone followed her as erst. This time the night was wild and
windy, but the moon was high aloft and big, and all cloud save a few
flecks was blown from off the heavens; so that the night was as light
as could be; and even at the tree-hung creek it was easy to see all
that was done. And so it was that the witch did and spake in all
wise as she did before.

Another time, when November was well-nigh out, the dame arose for her
lake-faring; but this night the snow lay deep betwixt house and
water, and Birdalone thought that it would scarce do to follow.
Forsooth she knew not whether her feet would the less leave their
print in the snow because they were not to be seen. When she asked
Habundia thereof, she laughed and said: Once more thou hast been
wise, my child, for though it had been no harder to put this might
into thy ring, that whoso wore it should not touch the ground, yet it
hath not been done.

It must be told, that in this while Birdalone went oft to the
Trysting Tree, and called on her mother  as now she called her  to
come to her, and ever more and more of wisdom she won thereby.
Though the witch was oft surly with her, and spared not her girding,
yet, the needful work done, she meddled little with her. But on a
day she straightly banned her the wood, and Birdalone went
notwithstanding, and when she was there with the wood-mother nought
she told her thereof, but was blithe and merry beyond her wont. She
came back home thereafter empty handed, and stepped into the chamber
proudly and with bright eyes and flushed cheeks, though she looked
for nought save chastisement; yea, it might be even the skin-
changing. Forsooth the witch was sitting crouched in her chair with
her hands on the elbows and her head thrust forward, like a wild
beast at point to spring; but when her eye fell on Birdalone, she
faltered and drew back into herself again, and muttered somewhat
unheard; but to Birdalone spake nought of good or bad.

Now was winter-tide upon them, when there was nought to do in field
and acre, and but a little in the byre. In years bygone, and even in
the last one, the witch had not spared Birdalone toil any the more,
but had made errands for her amidst the snow and biting winds, or
over the lake when it was laid with ice. But now she bade her to
nought save what she had a will to; whereby she lost but little,
whereas Birdalone was well willing to strive against wind and weather
and the roughness of the winter earth, and overcome if she might, so
that all were well done that had to be done about the stead.

Still did the witch give her hard words and rail at her for the most
part, but from the teeth outward only, and because she was wont
thereto. Inwardly indeed she began to fear Birdalone, and deemed
that she would one day have the mastery; and this led her into fierce
and restless moods; so that she would sit staring at the maiden's
beauty handling her knife withal, and scarce able to forbear her.
And in such a mood she once made occasion to chastise her as her wont
had been erst, and looked to see Birdalone rebel against her; but it
fell out otherwise, for Birdalone submitted herself to her meekly and
with a cheerful countenance. And this also was a terror to the
witch, who deemed, as indeed it was, that the purpose was growing in
her thrall. So from that time she meddled with her no more. All
this while, as may be thought, Birdalone went yet oftener to the Oak
of Tryst, despite frost and snow and wind, and gat much lore of her
wood-mother, and learned wisdom abundantly. And her days were happy.



CHAPTER XVIII. OF SPRING-TIDE AND THE MIND OF BIRDALONE



Now was the winter gone and the spring-tide come again, and with the
blossoming of the earth blossomed Birdalone also. Nought sweeter of
flesh might she be than erst, but there was now a new majesty grown
into her beauty; her limbs were rounded, her body fulfilled, her skin
sleeked and whitened; and if any mother's son had beheld her feet as
they trod the meadow besprinkled with saffron and daffodil, ill had
it gone with him were he gainsaid the kisses of them, though for the
kissing had he fared the worse belike.

That spring-tide, amidst of April, she followed the witch-wife down
to the Sending Boat for the third time; and there went everything as
erst, and she deemed now that the lesson was well learned, and that
she was well-nigh as wise as the witch herself therein.

But the day after she went about somewhat pensive, as though a
troublous thought were on her; and when, three days thereafter, she
met the wood-mother, she spake to her even as they parted, and said:
Mother, much wisdom hast thou learned me, and now this at the last
withal, that hitherto there has been shame in my life; and now fain
were I to be done with it. Fair child, said Habundia, little is the
shame though this woman hath had the upper hand of thee and hath used
thee cruelly: how mightest thou, a child, strive with her? But now
I see and know that there is an end of that; that she feareth thee
now, and will never again raise a hand against thee save thou fall
wholly into her power; as thou shalt not, my child. Be comforted
then for what is gone by! Nay, mother, said Birdalone, it is not
that which troubleth me; for, as thou sayest, what else might I do?
But thy wisdom which thou hast set in my heart hath learned me that
for these last months I have been meeting guile with guile and lies
with lies. And now will I do so no more, lest I become a guileful
woman, with nought good in me save the fairness of my body.
Wherefore hearken, sweet mother! What is done, is done; but when it
cometh to the day, which is speedily drawing nigh, that I must part
from thee, it may be for a long while, then will I not fare to the
Sending Boat by night and cloud and with hidden head, but will walk
thither in broad day, and let that befall which must befall.

Changed then Habundia's face and became haggard and woeful, and she
cried out: O if I could but weep, as ye children of Adam! O my
grief and sorrow! Child, child! then will betide that falling into
her hands which I spake of e'en now; and then shall this wretch, this
servant of evil, assuredly slay thee there and then, or will keep
thee to torment thee till thy life be but a slow death. Nay, nay, do
as I should do, and fare with hidden head, and my ring on thy finger.
Or else, O child, how wilt thou hurt me!

Birdalone wept; but presently she fell to caressing the mother's
hand, and said: This is thy doing, wherein thou hast made me wise.
Yet fear not: for I deem that the witch-wife will not slay me,
whereas she looketh to have some gain of me; moreover, in the evil of
her heart is mingled some love toward me, whereof, as erst I told
thee, I have a morsel of compassion. Mother, she will not slay me;
and I say that she shall not torment me, for I will compel her to
slay me else. It is my mind that she will let me go. Said the
mother: Yea, mayhappen, yet but as a bird with a string to its leg.
If it be so, said Birdalone, then let my luck prevail over her guile;
as well it may be, since I have known thee, O wise mother!

The wood-wife hung her head and spake nought for a while; then she
said: I see that thou wilt have it so, and that there is something
in thine heart which we, who are not children of Adam, may not
understand; yet once wert thou more like unto us. Now all I may say
is, that thou must rule in this matter, and that I am sad.

Then she looked down again and presently raised a brighter face, and
said: Belike all shall be better than I thought. Then she kissed
Birdalone and they parted for that time.



CHAPTER XIX. THEY BID FAREWELL, BIRDALONE AND THE WOOD-MOTHER



Now April was gone, and May was come with the thorn a-blossoming, and
there was Birdalone waxing still in loveliness. And now the witch
had left all girding at her even, and spake to her but little, save
when she needs must. But to Birdalone it seemed that she watched her
exceeding closely.

Birdalone went oft to the wood, and learned yet more of lore: but of
the matter of the Departure, how it was to be gone about they spake
no more, and great was the love betwixt them.

At last when May was worn nigh to June came Birdalone to the Oak of
Tryst, and found the wood-mother there; and when they had talked a
while, but ever from the teeth out, spake Habundia: Though thou be
now the wiser of us two maybe, yet have I wisdom to wot that this is
the hour of our sundering, and that to-morrow thou wilt try the
adventure of the Sending Boat: is it not so? Yea, mother, said
Birdalone; I bid thee farewell now: woe is me therefor! Said
Habundia: And thou wilt deliver thyself into the hands of the witch,
wilt thou, as thou saidst that other day? Quoth Birdalone: Is it
not wisdom, dear mother, if I trust in my goodhap? Alas, said the
mother, it may be so when all is said. But O my sad heart! and how I
fear for thee!

My mother, my mother! said Birdalone, that I should make the days
grievous unto thee! and thou who hast made my days so joyous! But
now canst thou not say of thy wisdom that we shall meet again?

The wood-woman sat down, and let her head fall over her knees, and
was silent a long while; then she rose up and stood before Birdalone,
and said: Yea, we shall meet again, howsoever it may be. Let us
depart with that sweet word in the air between us. Yet first thou
shalt give me a tress of thine hair, as I did to thee when first we
met; for by means of it may I know to-morrow how thou hast sped.

Even so did Birdalone, and this was the end of their talk, save
broken words of lamentation as they said farewell. And therewith for
that while they sundered.



CHAPTER XX. OF BIRDALONE AND THE SENDING BOAT



Birdalone woke up in the morning, and arose and clad herself, and she
saw not the witch-wife in the chamber, though her bed looked as if it
had been slept in. Birdalone accounted little thereof, whereas the
dame would oft go on one errand or another much betimes in the
morning. Yet was she somewhat glad, for she was nowise wishful for a
wrangle with her. Withal, despite her valiancy, as may well be
thought, she was all a-flutter with hopes and fears, and must needs
refrain her body from overmuch quaking and restlessness if she might.

Now she mingled the tress of the wood-mother's hair with her own
hair, but deemed it nought perilous to leave the ring yet sewn to her
smock: she set some deal of bread and flesh in her scrip, lest her
voyage should be long, and then all simply stepped over the threshold
of the House of her Captivity.

She went straight to the strand aforesaid, seeing nought of the
witch-wife by the way; and when she came there, was about to turn
straightway to her left hand down to the creek, when it came into her
mind that she would first swim over to Green Eyot for this last of
times. For the eyot indeed she loved, and deemed it her own, since
never had her evil dream, the witch, set foot thereon. Moreover, she
said to herself that the cool lake would allay the fever of her
blood, and make her flesh firmer and less timorous for the adventure.
And again, that if the witch should see her from afar, as she could
scarce fail to do, she would deem the maiden was about her wonted
morning swimming, and would be the less like to spy on her.

So now, when she had let her garments slip from off her on to the
sand close to the water's edge, she stood a while, with her feet
scarce covered by the little ripple of the bight, to be a token of
safety to her mistress. To say sooth, now it was come so nigh to the
deed, she shrank aback a little, and was fain to dally with the time,
and, if it might be, thrust something of no import betwixt her and
the terror of the last moment.

Now she took the water, and rowed strongly with her lovely limbs till
she came to the eyot, and there she went aland, and visited every
place which had been kind to her; and kissed the trees and flowers
that had solaced her, and once more drew the birds and rabbits to
sport with her; till suddenly it came into her head that the time was
wearing overfast. Then she ran down to the water and plunged in, and
swam over to the strand as fast as she might, and came aland there,
thinking of nothing less than what had befallen.

For lo! when she looked around for her raiment and her scrip, it was
nowhere to be seen; straightway then it came into her mind, as in one
flash, that this was the witch's work; that she had divined this deed
of the flight, and had watched her, and taken the occasion of her
nakedness and absence that she might draw her back to the House of
Captivity. And this the more as the precious ring was sewn to
Birdalone's smock, and the witch would have found it there when she
handled the raiment.

Birdalone wasted no time in seeking for the lost; she looked down on
to the smooth sand, and saw there footprints which were not her own,
and all those went straight back home to the house. Then she turned,
and for one moment of time looked up toward the house, and saw
plainly the witch come out adoors, and the sun flashed from something
bright in her hand.

Then indeed she made no stay, but set off running at her swiftest
along the water-side toward the creek and the Sending Boat. As is
aforesaid she was as fleet-foot as a deer, so but in a little space
of time she had come to the creek, and leapt into the boat, panting
and breathless. She turned and looked hastily along the path her
feet had just worn, and deemed she saw a fluttering and flashing
coming along it, but some way off; yet was not sure, for her eyes
were dizzy with the swiftness of her flight and the hot sun and the
hurry of her heart. Then she looked about a moment confusedly, for
she called to mind that in her nakedness she had neither knife, nor
scissors, nor bodkin to let her blood withal. But even therewith
close to hand she saw hanging down a stem of half-dead briar-rose
with big thorns upon it; she hastily tore off a length thereof and
scratched her left arm till the blood flowed, and stepped lightly
first to stem and then to stern, and besmeared them therewith. Then
she sat down on the thwart and cried aloud:


The red raven-wine now
Hast thou drunk, stern and bow;
Then wake and awake
And the wonted way take!
The way of the Wender forth over the flood,
For the will of the Sender is blent with the blood.


Scarce had she time to wonder if the boat would obey her spell ere it
began to stir beneath her, and then glided out into the lake and took
its way over the summer ripple, going betwixt Green Eyot and the
mainland, as if to weather the western ness of the eyot: and it went
not a stonecast from the shore of the said mainland.

Hither to meet it now cometh the witch, running along the bank, her
skirts flying wild about her, and a heavy short-sword gleaming in her
hand. Her furious running she stayed over against the boat, and
cried out in a voice broken for lack of breath:


Back over the flood
To the house by the wood!
Back unto thy rest
In the alder nest!
For the blood of the Sender lies warm on thy bow,
And the heart of the Wender is weary as now.


But she saw that the Sending Boat heeded her words nothing, whereas
it was not her blood that had awakened it, but Birdalone's. Then
cried out the witch: O child, child! say the spell and come back to
me! to me, who have reared thee and loved thee and hoped in thee! O
come back!

But how should Birdalone heed her prayer? She saw the sax; and
withal had her heart forgotten, her flesh might well remember. She
sat still, nor so much as turned her head toward the witch-wife.

Then came wild yelling words from the witch's mouth, and she cried:
Go then, naked and outcast! Go then, naked fool! and come back
hither after thou hast been under the hands of the pitiless! Ah, it
had been better for thee had I slain thee! And therewith she whirled
the sax over her head and cast it at Birdalone. But now had the boat
turned its head toward the ness of Green Eyot and was swiftly
departing, so that Birdalone but half heard the last words of the
witch-wife, and the sax fell flashing into the water far astern.

There the witch stood tossing her arms and screaming, wordless; but
no more of her saw Birdalone, for the boat came round about the ness
of Green Eyot, and there lay the Great Water under the summer heavens
all wide and landless before her. And it was now noon of day.


Here ends the First Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is
called Of the House of Captivity. And now begins the Second Part,
which is called Of the Wondrous Isles.




THE SECOND PART: OF THE WONDROUS ISLES




CHAPTER I. THE FIRST ISLE



So glided Birdalone over the lake and was come forth from the House
of Captivity; it might well be that she was but swimming unto death;
naked as she was, fireless, foodless, and helpless, at the mercy of
mere sorcery. Yet she called to mind the word of the wood-mother
that they should meet again, and took heart thereby; and she was glad
in that she had had her will, and shaken off the guile and thraldom
of the witch. Much she thought of the wood-mother, and loved her,
and wondered had she yet sought into and seen her welfare by the
burning of a hair of that tress of hers; and therewith she looked on
that tress of Habundia's hair and kissed it.

All day the Sending Boat sped on, and she saw no land and nought to
tell of. It was but wave and sky and the familiar fowl of the lake,
as coot, and mallard, and heron, and now and then a swift wood-dove
going her ways from shore to shore; two gerfalcons she saw also, an
osprey, and a great ern on his errand high up aloft.

Birdalone waked in her loneliness till the day was spent, and
somewhat worn of the night; then she fell asleep for weariness; but
so it was, that before dusk she had deemed that a blue cloud lay
before her in the offing which moved not.

She slept the short night through, and was awakened by the boat
smiting against something, and when her eyes opened she saw that she
was come aland and that the sun was just risen. She stood up, and
for the first minute wondered where she was, and she beheld her
nakedness and knew not what it meant; then she loosened her hair, and
shook its abundance all about her, and thereafter she turned her eyes
on this new land and saw that it was fair and goodly. The flowery
grass came down to the very water, and first was a fair meadow-land
besprinkled with big ancient trees; thence arose slopes of vineyard,
and orchard and garden; and, looking down on all, was a great White
House, carven and glorious. A little air of wind had awakened with
the sunrise, and bore the garden sweetness down to her; and warm it
was after the chill of the wide water. No other land could she see
when she looked lakeward thence.

She stepped ashore, and stood ankle-deep in the sweet grass, and
looked about her for a while, and saw no shape of man astir. She was
yet weary, and stiff with abiding so long amongst the hard ribs of
the boat, so she laid herself down on the grass, and its softness
solaced her; and presently she fell asleep again.



CHAPTER II. BIRDALONE FALLETH IN WITH NEW FRIENDS



When she next awoke, the sun was not yet high, and the morning young,
yet she stood upon her feet much refreshed by that short slumber.
She turned toward the hill and the gay house, and saw one coming over
the meadow to her, a woman to wit, in a shining golden gown, and as
she drew nigh Birdalone could see that she was young and fair, tall,
white-skinned and hazel-eyed, with long red hair dancing all about
her as she tripped lightly and merrily over the greensward.

Now she comes up to Birdalone with wonder in her eyes, and greets her
kindly, and asked her of her name, and Birdalone told it all simply;
and the new-comer said: What errand hast thou hither, that thou art
come thus naked and alone in this ill-omened ferry? Birdalone
trembled at her words, though she spake kindly to her, and she said:
It is a long story, but fate drave me thereto, and misery, and I knew
not whither I was bound. But is there no welcome for me in this
lovely land? I lack not deftness wholly; and I will be a servant of
servants, and ask no better if it must be so. Said the new-comer:
Unto that mayst thou come, but sore will be thy servitude. I fear me
thy welcome here may be but evil. Said Birdalone: Wilt thou not
tell me how so? Quoth that lady: We know thy ferry here, that it is
the craft wherein cometh hither now and again the sister of our lady
the Queen, into whose realm thou art now come, and who liveth up in
the white palace yonder, and whom we serve. And meseems thou wilt
not have come hither by her leave, or thou wouldst be in other guise
than this; so that belike thou wilt be the runaway of thy mistress.
Wherefore I fear that thou wilt be sent back to thy said mistress
after a while, and that that while will be grievous to thee, body and
soul.

Birdalone's heart sank, and she was pale and trembling; but she said:
O dear lady, might I then depart as I have come hither, without the
wotting of this Queen! after thou hast given me a morsel of bread,
for I am hungry. Said the gold-clad one, looking on her pitifully:
Nay, maiden, I cannot choose but bring thee before our mistress,
whereas most like she hath already seen thee from above there. For
she is far-sighted beyond the wont of folk who be more manlike. But
as for the bread, see thou! I have brought a manchet in my pouch,
and cheese withal, as I came hurrying; for I thought, she will be
hungry. And she reached the victual out to her. And Birdalone took
it and kissed the golden lady's hands, and she might not refrain her
tears, but wept as she ate.

Meanwhile the golden lady spake unto her and said: Nevertheless,
thou poor maiden, somewhat may be done for thine helping, and I will
presently speak to my sisters thereon, who are, both of them, wiser
than I. Sisters by blood are we not, but by love and fellowship.
And I doubt not but that as we go up into the house we shall happen
upon them in the garden. But now I look upon thee, how fair a woman
art thou!

Thou art kind and friendly, said Birdalone, smiling amidst of her
tears, might I know by what name to call so dear a woman? Thou shalt
call me Aurea, said the other; and my next sister is Viridis, and the
third, Atra; for that is according to the hues of our raiment, and
other names we have not now. And lo! here cometh Viridis over the
meadow.

Birdalone looked, and saw a woman coming toward them clad all in
green, with a rose-wreath on her head. And she drew nigh, and
greeted Birdalone kindly, and she also was a very beauteous woman;
not great of body, whereas Aurea was tall and big-made, though
excellently shapen. Light brown and goodly waved of hair was
Viridis, her eyes brown, and rather long than great; her lips full
and ruddy, her cheeks soft and sweet and smooth, and as rosy-tinted
pearl; her hands small and delicate of fashion; her whole body soft-
shapen as an egg; a kind, wheedling look her face bore.

When she had looked a while on Birdalone, she kissed her, and said:
I would thou wert happier, for thou art beauteous, and all but the
evil must love thee. Therewith she drew a cate from her pouch, and
said: Eat somewhat, for thou wilt be hungry; and let us go meet our
other sister, who is wiser than we.

So they went, all three of them, and came from off the meadow on to
the garden-slopes, and at the entry thereof was come Atra to meet
them; she was clad all in black, a tall, slim woman, with the grace
of the willow-bough in the wind, with dark plenteous hair and grey
hawk-eyes; her skin privet-white, with but little red in her cheeks.
She also greeted Birdalone kindly, but sadly withal. She gave her
strawberries to eat laid on a big kale-blade; and she said: Sisters,
here are we hidden by the trees, and cannot be seen from the house;
therefore we may sit here for a minute or two, while we talk together
as to what may perchance be done for the helping of this unhappy
maiden, who is so fair and lovely, and hath strayed into so ugly a
trap. Then she said to Birdalone: Thou must know, poor wanderer,
that this Queen, our mistress, who is sister to the Witch Under the
Wood, is big and strong, well-made, and white-skinned, so that she
deems herself a Queen of all beauty: keen-eyed is she to see a fly
where others would see nought smaller than a coney; fine-eared
withal; wise in wizardry; not altogether dull-witted, though she be
proud, and crueller than the cruellest. But herein she faileth, that
her memory is of the shortest for matters of the passing hour, albeit
she remembers her spells and witch-songs over well. But other
matters will scarce abide in her head for four and twenty hours.
Wherefore, sisters, if we may keep this maiden out of her sight
 after she hath seen her and given doom upon her  till the dead of
to-morrow night, we may perchance do some good for her; and it is in
my mind that then she may do good for us also.

Now they rejoiced in this word of Atra the wise; and Atra prayed
Birdalone to tell them somewhat more of her story; and she told them
much; but, whyso it were, she said nought concerning the wood-wife,
whose outward semblance was the same as hers. Then they pitied her,
and caressed her; but Atra said: We must tarry here no more, but go
straight up to the lady, or maybe we shall lose all.

So they went their ways and came into the pleasance, and trod the
sweet greensward betwixt the garland flowers and the beauteous trees;
which now indeed, though Birdalone saw them all clear and over-clear,
were become nought to her. Those three also spake gently to her, and
now and then asked her somewhat, as if to show her that she was one
of themselves; but she spake not, or answered at random, and to say
sooth scarce heard their words: forsooth she was now become heart-
sick, and was half dead for fear; and her nakedness, which would have
troubled her little across the water, was now grown a shame and a
terror unto her, and every deal of her body quivered with the anguish
thereof.



CHAPTER III. BIRDALONE IS BROUGHT BEFORE THE WITCH-WIFE'S SISTER



So came they at last to the very house, and whereas it stood high on
the bent, a great stair or perron of stone went up to it, and was of
much majesty. They went through the porch, which was pillared and
lovely, and into a great hall most nobly builded, and at the other
end thereof, on a golden throne raised upon a dais, sat a big woman
clad in red scarlet. The three damsels led Birdalone to some four
paces of the great lady, and then stood away from her, and left her
standing there alone, the scarlet-clad woman before her; on the right
and the left the tall pillars going up gleaming toward the roof, and
about her feet the dark polished pavement, with the wallowing of
strange beasts and great serpents and dragons all done on the coal-
blue ground.

When she was so left alone, at first she tottered, and went nigh to
falling; but then came back some little heart to her, as she said to
herself that now she should verily die once for all, and that no long
while would be the passing from life into death. She looked up and
beheld the lady-witch, that she was somewhat like to her sister,
white-skinned and of plenteous golden-hair as was she, but younger of
aspect, and nowise so ill-looked as that other had now become; for
somewhat well-shapen of body she was; but her face forbidding; her
lower lip thrust out, her cheeks flaggy and drooping, her eyes little
more than half open; to be short, a face both proud, foolish, and
cruel; terrible indeed, sitting in judgment in that place on a
shrinking naked creature.

Now she spake; and if there were no majesty or solemnity in the
voice, there was ugly glee and malice therein; but she said to those
damsels: Is this the woman that my keen eyes beheld come aland from
my sister's Sending Boat e'en now? Aurea knelt on one knee, and
said: Yea, so please you, my lady.

Then said the witch: Ho thou! Wilt thou plead some errand hither
from my sister? Dost thou deem me so witless as not to know that if
she had sent thee hither thou wouldst not have come in this plight?
Nay, I know; thou hast stolen thyself from her: thou art a thief,
and as a thief shalt thou be dealt with.

Spake Birdalone in a clear voice: No errand do I feign from thy
sister, lady: when I could bear my life there no longer, I took
occasion to flee from her: this is all the tale. Yet once and again
it hath been in my mind that it was thy sister who stole me from them
that loved me.

Hah, thrall! said the lady, thou art bold; thou art over-bold, thou
naked wretch, to bandy words with me. What heed I thy tale now thou
art under my hand? Her voice was cold rather than fierce, yet was
there the poison of malice therein. But Birdalone spake: If I be
bold, lady, it is because I see that I have come into the House of
Death. The dying may well be bold.

The House of Death! cried the stupid lady; and wilt thou call my
noble house the House of Death? Now art thou no longer bold,
stripped thrall, but impudent.

Scorn rose into Birdalone's heart at this word, but she refrained
her, and spake: I meant that I have stirred the wrath in thee, and
that thou wilt slay me therefor; and that it availeth not to crave
mercy of thee.

Laughed the lady: Thou art a fool, thrall, said she; if a sparrow
fled hither from my sister, I should not wring its neck, but keep it
for her. So shall I do with thee. I shall not slay thee, and so
destroy my sister's chattel; nor shall I spoil thee, and spoil her
possession. I shall send thee back unto her, the stolen thrall in
the stolen boat, when I have learned thee a lesson here. Forsooth it
was for that cause meseemeth that she let thee slip through her
fingers, for she is wise enough to have stayed thee from this holiday
had she willed it. But she is tender-hearted, and kind, and soft,
and might well deem that if thy chastisement were done to her hand
here, it were better done than by her mercy. Now, thrall, I have
spoken enough to thee, or more than enough: get thee back out of
earshot!



CHAPTER IV. OF THE WITCH'S PRISON IN THE WAILING-TOWER



Birdalone did as she was bidden, and the witch called unto her Atra,
who came and stood humbly on the footpace beside her, and held
converse with her mistress a while. Then she went backward from her
a little, and then came to Birdalone, and in a somewhat harsh voice
bade her come with her. Birdalone followed her, quaking, and they
came out of the hall and into a long passage, which led to a wide
stair winding round a newel; and all was builded exceeding fair, had
Birdalone's heart suffered her eyes to see it; but her flesh was
weak, and quaked before the torment to come, so that her knees well-
nigh failed her.

But now Atra lays a hand kindly on her shoulder and stays her, and
says: Now meseems the walls of the Wailing-Tower, for so it hight,
have no ears to hear, and we may talk together. Wottest thou why I
have brought thee hither? Said Birdalone in a faint voice: Hast
thou been bidden to whip me? And if I had been so bidden, dear
maiden, said Atra laughing, nowise would I do it. Hold up thine
heart! For all hath gone well so far, and now meseems betwixt us
three we shall save thee.

Birdalone's spirit came back to her at that word, and she put her
hands to her face and fell a-weeping. But Atra was kind to her and
made much of her; and she kissed her and wiped her tears, and
Birdalone smiled again amidst her sobs, and she thanked Atra; who
said to her: First of all I must tell thee that I am taking thee to
prison by the witch's bidding. Yea, said Birdalone, and what is
prison? Said Atra: A prison is a grim place where poor folk who
have done that which pleaseth not rich folk are shut up, that they
may be grieved and tormented by not being able to fare abroad, or go
where they would; and by suffering whatsoever their masters may lay
upon them, as darkness, and cold, and hunger, and stripes. Somewhat
so, or worse, our lady would have it for thee; but so would not we.
Therefore for thee shall this prison be a place where thou shalt be
safe till we may bring thee forth when the night hath worn towards
its ending. For she will have forgotten thee by to-morrow; and this
she knoweth; wherefore just now, when thou stoodest out of earshot,
she was bidding me, amongst other matters, to bring thee before her
to-morrow morning, and tell her the tale of thee, that she might call
it to mind then what she had will to this morning.

Yea, said Birdalone, but will she not remember that she hath given
thee a charge concerning me? But little thereof, said Atra, and with
a few words I may easily confuse her memory so that speech thereon
will fail her. Keep up thine heart, sweetling; but let us up this
stair now forthwith, for I were fain to have thee hid away in this
prison, and then will I down to her and tell her that thou art lying
therein in all misery and terror, lest it come into her head to send
for thee ere her memory is grown dim.

Again did Birdalone take heart, and they hastened a long way up the
stair, till Atra stayed at last at a door all done with iron, endlong
and over-thwart. Then she took a leash of keys from her girdle, one
big and two little, and set the big one in the lock and turned it,
and shoved the heavy door and entered thereby a chamber four-square
and vaulted; and the vault was upheld by a pillar of red marble,
wherein, somewhat higher than a man's head, were set stanchions of
latten, that could be clasped and unclasped. This chamber was in a
way goodly, but yet grim to look on; for the walls were all of black
ashlar stone close-jointed, and the floor black also, but of marble
polished so wholly that it was as dark water, and gave back the image
of Birdalone's dear feet and legs as she went thereon. The windows
were not small, and the chamber was light in every corner because of
them, but they were so high up under the vaulting that none might see
thereout aught save the heavens. There was nought in the chamber
save a narrow bench of oak and three stools of the same, a great and
stately carven chair dight with cushions of purple and gold, and in
one corner a big oaken coffer.

Now spake Atra: This is our lady's prison, and I fear me we cannot
make it soft for thee, dear stranger. Yea, I must tell thee  and she
reddened therewith  that it is part of my charge to set thee in
irons. Birdalone smiled on her, and was over weary to ask what that
meant, though she knew not. But Atra went to the big coffer and
opened it and thrust in her hands, and there was a jangling
therewith, and when she turned about to Birdalone again she had iron
chains in her hands, and she said: This shameth me, dear friend; yet
if thou wouldst wear them it might be well, for she may have a mind
to go visit her prison, and if she find thee there unshackled she
shall be wroth, and oftenest her wrath hath a whip in its hand. And
these are the lightest that I might find.

Birdalone smiled again, and spake not, for she was very weary, and
Atra did the irons on her wrists and her ankles; and said thereafter:
Yet bear in mind that it is a friend that hath the key of these
things. And now I will go away for a little, but I shall be on thine
errands; for first I shall tell the mistress that thou art lying here
shackled and in all wanhope; and next, by the will and command of
her, I am to see that thou be well fed and nourished to-day that thou
mayst be the stronger for to-morrow. Now if I may give thee rede, it
is that thou forbear to open the coffer yonder; for ugly things shalt
thou find there, and that may dishearten thee again.

Therewith she kissed her kindly on the cheek and went her ways, and
the great key turned in the lock behind her.

There then was Birdalone left to herself; and she was over weary even
to weep; true it is that she made a step or two towards the coffer,
but reframed her, and took two of the pillows from the great chair
and turned aside into the other corner, her chains jingling as she
went. There she laid herself down, and nestled into the very wall-
nook, and presently fell asleep, and slumbered dreamlessly and
sweetly a long while.



CHAPTER V. THEY FEAST IN THE WITCH'S PRISON



Birdalone was awakened by the sound of the key in the lock, and the
door opened, and there was Atra bearing dishes and platters, and
behind her Viridis with the like gear, and beakers and a flagon to
boot, and both they were smiling and merry.

Birdalone's heart leapt up to meet them, and in especial was she
gladdened by the coming of Viridis, who had seemed to be the kindest
of them all.

Viridis spake: Now is come the meat for the dear sister, and it is
time, for surely thou art famished, and it is now long past high
noon. Do off her irons, Atra. Said Atra: Maybe it were well to let
the fetters abide on her ankles, lest the mistress should come; but
for the wrists, reach out thine hands, wayfarer. So did Birdalone,
and Atra laid her things on the ground, and unlocked the hand-
shackles, and did them off: and meanwhile Viridis spread forth the
banquet, partly on the floor, and partly on that ill-omened coffer.
Then she went up to Birdalone and kissed her, and said: Now shalt
thou sit in our lady's throne, and we shall serve thee, and thou
shalt deem thee a great one.

Nought else would they have, and Birdalone laid her nakedness on the
purple cushions, and then they fell all three to the feast. The
victual was both plenteous and dainty, of venison and fowl, and cream
and fruits and sweetmeats, and good wine they had withal: never had
Birdalone feasted in like manner, and the heart came back unto her,
and her cheeks grew rosy and her eyes glittered. But she said: How
if your lady were to come upon us here, and we so merry? Said Atra:
Out of the chair must thou when thou hearest the key in the lock, and
then is all well, and she would have nought against us; for she
herself bade us, and me in special, to keep thee company here, and
talk with thee; and Aurea also would have been here, but that she is
serving the lady as now. Hath she then some pity on me, said
Birdalone, that she hath bidden thee do by me what is most to my
pleasure?

Laughed Viridis thereat, and Atra said: She hath no pity, nor ever
shall have; but so hard of heart is she, that she may not deem that
we could love thee, a stranger, and unhappy, who can serve us in
nowise; so she feareth not the abatement of thy grief from any
compassion of us. Rather she hath sent us, and me in especial, not
to comfort thee, but to grieve thee by words; for she biddeth me tell
thee fair tales, forsooth, of what to-morrow shall be to thee, and
the day after; and of how she shall begin on thee, and what shall
follow the beginning, and what thou mayst look for after that. For
by all this she deemeth to lower thy pride and abate thy valour, and
to make every moment of to-day a terror to thy flesh and thy soul, so
that thereby thou mayest thole the bitterness twice over. Such is
her pity for thee! And yet belike this cruelty hath saved thee, for
but for that she had not refrained her from thee to-day, and to-
morrow thou shalt be far away from her.

Meanwhile, said Viridis, in her soft sweet voice, none of all these
things will we talk over with thee, but things comfortable and kind;
and we will tell each to each of our story. Will we not, Atra? Yea,
verily, said she.

Birdalone looked upon them and said: Wondrous is your compassion and
loving-kindness unto me, and scarce do I know how to bear the burden
thereof. But tell me one thing truly; will ye not suffer in my place
when this witch cometh to know that ye have stolen me away from her?

Nay, said Atra, I have told thee that by to-morrow she will have
altogether, or at least almost, forgotten thee and thy coming hither.
Moreover, she is foreseeing, and hath come to know that if she raise
a hand against any of us three, it will lead her to her bane, save it
be for heavy guilt clearly proven against us. Forsooth, in the
earlier days of our captivity such a guilt we fell into, and did not
wholly escape, as Viridis can bear me witness. But we are now grown
wiser, and know our mistress better, and will give her no such joy.

Viridis cast her eyes down at those words and Atra's smile, and
turned red and then pale, and Birdalone looked on her wondering what
ailed her; then she said: Do ye sisters work in the field and the
garden? I mean at milking the kine and the goats, and digging the
earth, and sowing and reaping, and the like. Nay, said Atra; either
our mistress or someone else who is of marvellous might, hath so
ordained, that here everything waxeth of itself without tillage, or
sowing or reaping, or any kind of tending; and whatso we need of
other matters the mistress taketh it for us from out of her Wonder-
coffer, or suffereth us to take it for ourselves. For thou must know
that this land is one of the Isles of the Lake, and is called the
Isle of Increase Unsought.

Meseemeth then, said Birdalone, were the mistress of you to gainsay
you the gifts of the Wonder-coffer, ye were undone. Yea, verily,
said Atra; then would be but the fruits of the earth and the wild
creatures for our avail, and these, we have not learned how to turn
them into dinner and supper. And they all laughed thereat; but
Birdalone said: See ye then how I was right to offer myself unto you
as a servant, for in all matters of the house and the byre and the
field have I skill. But since ye would not or could not have me, I
wonder not that ye be ill at ease here, and long to be gone, for as
plenteous and lovely as the isle is, and though ye live here without
present mishandling or pining. For, sooth to say, ye have over you a
tyrant and a fool.

Viridis answered: Yet is there something else, dear friend, that
whets our longing to depart. Tell her thereof, Atra.

Atra smiled and said: Simple it is: there are they who long for us
and for whom we long, and we would be together. Said Birdalone: Be
these kinsfolk of yours, as fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, or
the like?

Reddened Viridis again; but Atra spake, and she also blushed
somewhat, though she smiled: Those whom we love, and who love us, be
not queans, but carles; neither be they of our blood, but aliens,
till love overcometh them and causeth them to long to be of one flesh
with us; and their longing is beyond measure, and they desire our
bodies, which they deem far fairer than belike they be. And they
would bed us, and beget children on us. And all this we let them do
with a good will, because we love them for their might, and their
truth, and the hotness of their love toward us.

Looked up Viridis thereat, and her eyes gleamed amidst the flushing
of her cheeks, and she said: Sister, sister! even in such wise, and
no other, as they desire us do we desire them; it is no mere good
will toward them from us, but longing and hot love.

Now must Atra blush no less than Viridis; yet she but said: I have
told thee hereof, Birdalone, because I deem that thou hast lived
simply and without the sight of men; but it is what all know in the
world of the sons of Adam. Said Birdalone: Thou sayest sooth
concerning me. Yet about this love have I learned somewhat even ere
to-day, and now, as ye speak and I, meseems the lore of it comes
pouring in on me and fills my heart with its sweetness. And O, to
have such love from any, and with such love to be loved withal!

Dear sister, said little Viridis, fear not; such as thou shall not
fail of the love of some man whom thou must needs love. Is it not
so, sister Atra? Said Atra: Yea; such love shall come unto her as
surely as death.

They were silent now a little, and it was as if some sweet incense
had been burned within the chamber. For Birdalone the colour came
and went in her cheeks, her flesh quaked, her heart beat quick, and
she was oppressed by the sweetness of longing. More daintily she
moved her limbs, and laid foot to foot and felt the sleekness of her
sides; and tender she was of her body as of that which should one day
be so sorely loved.

Now she spake timidly to the others, and said: Each one of you then
has a man who loves her, and longs for her and for none else? So it
is, said Viridis. How sweet that shall be! said Birdalone; and now
all the more I wonder that ye could trouble yourselves over me, or
think of me once; and the kinder I think it of you.

Said Atra smiling on her: Nay, now must the cat be out of the bag,
and I must tell thee that thou art to think of us as chapmen who with
our kindness would buy something of thee, to wit, that thou wouldst
do an errand for us to those three lovers of ours. Surely, said
Birdalone, it were a little payment to set against your saving of my
life and my soul; and had I to go barefoot over red gleeds I would do
it. And yet, if I may go hence to your lovers, why not all three of
you along with me?

Said Atra: For this reason; thy ferry, the Sending Boat, wherein ye
came hither, is even somewhat akin to thy mistress and ours; and the
mistress here hath banned it against bearing us; and now, were we so
much as to touch it, such sore turmoil would arise, and such hideous
noise as if earth and heaven were falling together; and the lady
would be on us straightway, and we should be undone; and, as thou
shalt hear presently, this hath been proved. But thou, thou art free
of the said ferry. Forsooth I wot not why thy mistress banned it not
against thee; maybe because she deemed not that thou wouldst dare to
use it or even go anigh it.

Birdalone considered, and thought that even so it was; that the witch
deemed that she would not dare use the Sending Boat, nor know how to,
even if she came upon it, and that if she did so find it, she would
sicken her of the road thereto. So now she told her friends the
whole tale thereof more closely than she had afore, save again what
pertained to Habundia; withal she told every word of what her
mistress had said to her at that time when she changed her into a
hind. And Viridis heard and wondered, and pitied her. But Atra sat
somewhat downcast a while. Then she said: However this may be, we
will send thee forth to-morrow in the dawn, and take the risk of what
may befall thereafter; and thou shalt bear a token for each of those
three that love us. For we deem that they have not forgotten aught,
but are still seeking us.

Birdalone said: Whatsoever ye bid me; that will I do, and deem me
your debtor still. But now I pray you, pleasure a poor captive
somewhat more. Wherein? said they both; we be all ready thereto.
Said the maiden: Would ye do so much as to tell me the tale of how
ye came hither, and then how it hath been with you from your first
coming until now? With a good will, said Atra; hearken!



CHAPTER VI. ATRA TELLS OF HOW THEY THREE CAME UNTO THE ISLE OF
INCREASE UNSOUGHT



We were born and bred in the land that lies south-west along this
Great Water, and we waxed happily, and became fellows when we were
yet but children, and thus grew up dear friends into maidenhood and
womanhood. We were wooed by many men, but our hearts turned to none
of them save unto three, who were goodly, kind, and valiant; and thou
mayst call them the Golden Knight, who is Aurea's man; the Green
Knight, who is man of Viridis; and my man, the Black Squire. But in
this was unhap, that because of certain feuds which had endured from
old time, this love was perilous unto them and us; so that we lived
in doubt and unrest.

Came a day, now three years ago, when the king of the whole land
brought his folk into our lakeside country, and there held a court
and a mote in a fair great meadow anigh to the water. But even as
the mote was hallowed, and the Peace of God proclaimed at the blast
of the war-horn, came we three woeful ladies clad in black and knelt
before the lord king, and prayed him hearken us. And he deemed that
we were fair, so he had compassion on us, and raised us up, and bade
us speak.

So we told our tale, how that strife and wounds and death stood
betwixt us and love; and we wept, and bewailed it, that our love must
be slain because men were wroth with each other and not with us.

The king looked on us kindly, and said: Who be the swains for whom
these lovely damsels make such a piece of work? So we named them,
and said that they were there in the mote; and the king knew them for
valiant men who had done him good service; and he cried out their
names, and bade them stand forth out of the throng. So forth they
stood, the Golden Knight, the Green Knight, and the Black Squire  and
he also was now a knight ; but now were they all three clad in black,
and they were unarmed, save for their swords girt to their sides,
without which no man amongst us may come to the mote, be he baron or
earl or duke, or the very lord king himself.

So the king looked upon us and them, and laughed and said: Fair
ladies, ye have got me by the nose, so needs must my body follow. Do
ye three knights, whom I know for valiant men and true, take each his
love by the hand, and let the weddings be to-morrow. Who then were
joyful but us? But even at the word the king spake arose great
turmoil in the mote, for they smote the feud and contention awake,
and men thronged forward against each other, and swords were drawn
and brandished. But the king arose in his place and spake long and
deftly, and waxed exceeding wroth, while none heeded him nor
hearkened. And there stood our three men, who laid no hand to hilt,
but abode heart-whole by seeming amid the tumult. And lovely they
were to look on. At last the wise men and old barons went between,
and by fair words appeased the trouble, and the mote grew hushed.
Then spake the king: What is this, my thanes? I had deemed that my
foemen were far away, and that ye that here are were all friends unto
me and unto each other. But now must we try another rede. Therewith
he turned unto our men and said: Ye champions, are ye so much in
love with Love that ye will fight for him? They all yeasaid that,
and then the king said: Then do I declare that these three will hold
the field against all comers from matins till high noon, and that he
who vanquisheth any one of them shall have his lady and wed her if he
will, and, if he will, shall ransom her. And this field shall be
foughten after two months' frist in these fair meadows, when I return
from the outermost marches of the south, whereto I am now wending.
But when the battle is done, then let all men bow to the judgment of
God, whether he be well content or not, and this on peril of life and
limb. And now let there be deep peace between all men meanwhile; and
if any break the peace, be he high or low, rich or unrich, churl or
earl, I swear it by the souls of my fathers that he shall lose nought
save his life therefor.

At these words was there a rumour of yeasay, and all men were
content, save we three poor maidens, into whose hearts had now
entered fear of loss and death.

But our kindreds on both sides were glad and proud, and they were not
so bitter against us as they had been; they put hand to pouch, and
let rear for us a fair pavilion of painted timber, all hung with silk
and pictured cloths and Saracen tapestry, by the very lake-side; and
gay boats gaily bedight lay off the said pavilion for our pleasure;
and when all was done, it yet lacked a half month of the day of
battle, and thither were we brought in triumph by the kindreds on a
fair day of May, and there was not a sword or a spear amongst the
whole company, and peaceful and merry was all by seeming. But we
were not suffered to meet our lovers all this while, from the time
when the mote was.

Now on a day came a messenger on the spur, and did us to wit that the
king would be with us on the morrow, and that the day after, the
fateful field should be foughten. Then, though the coming of this
day had been so longed for by us, yet now it was at hand it cast us
into all unrest and trouble, so that we scarce knew whether to go, or
stand, or sit, or what to do with our bodies. Our folk, and all
other men withal, were so busy making ready for the morrow of to-
morrow, that they left us alone to wear through the day as we might.

Now it was afternoon, and the day hot and hazy, and we stood on the
very lip of the land wearied with hope and fear, and striving to keep
good countenance to each other; and there came a boat unto the shore
gaily painted and gilded, and bedight with silken cloths and
cushions; and the steerer thereof was a woman, not young, by seeming
of fifty winters; red-haired she was, thin-lipped and narrow-eyed,
flat-breasted and strait-hipped; an ungoodly woman, though her skin
was white and smooth as for her age. Hast thou ever seen such an
one, guest? Said Birdalone, smiling: Forsooth that have I; for such
an one is my mistress to behold.

Well, said Atra, this dame stretched out her hands to us, and said:
Will not the pretty ladies, the dear ladies, who have nought on hand
this afternoon, come into my boat and look on the face of the water,
so calm and fair as it is, and let their lovely hands go over the
gunwale and play with the ripple, and so beguile this heavy time for
a two hours; and then give a little gift of a piece or two of silver
to a poor carline, who loveth all fair ladies and bright warriors,
and who needeth a little livelihood?

Now the woman seemed nought lovely unto us, and to me forsooth she
seemed hateful; but we looked on each other, and we found that we
were utterly weary of going up and down on the meadow, and lying
about in the pavilion, and it seemed as if this would give us a
little rest; withal we saw not that the woman could do us any hurt,
whereas we were three, and strong enough as women go; nor were we
mariners so evil but that we might sail or steer a boat at a pinch.
So we stepped into the boat straightway, and the woman sat aft and
paddled deftly with the steering oar, and we glided away from the
land.

Soon we were come so far that we could but just see our pavilion
through the haze, which had somewhat thickened, and we said to the
woman that she should go about and make for the shore, and that then
we would go to and fro a while along by our stead. She nodded
yeasay, and began by seeming to dight the craft for return. But
therewith the haze was grown suddenly into a low cloud, which came
down upon us from the south-west in the arms of a cold breeze, that
grew stronger every minute, so no wonder it was though the steerer
might not keep head to wind; and then who was afraid and ashamed save
ourselves?

But the woman said, and there seemed to be a mock in her voice: Ill
luck, pretty ladies! Now is there nought for it but to drive, if we
would not drown. But belike this duskiness will clear presently, and
then at least we shall know whither we be going; and we may either
turn back, or seek some other shelter, for I know the lake well; I
know, I know.

We were too terror-stricken to speak, for we felt that still the wind
grew stronger, and the lake began to rise into waves, and the craft
to wallow; but well-nigh therewith was the dusk and the mist gone;
the sky was bright blue overhead, and the westering sun shone
cloudless; but on no land it shone, or on aught save the blue waters
and the white wave-crests.

Then wept Aurea, and this Viridis here, but as to me, I grew wroth
and cried out to the steerer: Accursed carline! thou hast betrayed
us; never now may we get back to our pavilion till the fight is
foughten, and our lovers will deem that we have forsaken them, and we
are shamed for ever. Well, well, said the carline, what remedy save
patience for the winds and waves? And she laughed mockingly. Quoth
I: There is this remedy, that we three arise and lay hands on thee,
and cast thee outboard, save thou straightway turn the boat's head
and back to the main. Forsooth I doubt not but that as thou hast
raised this foul wind against us, thou canst raise a fair wind for
us.

Hearken to the lovely lady! quoth the carline, how she deemeth me to
be none other than the great God himself, to hold the winds in the
hollow of my hand, and still the waves with a word! What! am I
wrought somewhat after his image, kind ladies? And she grinned
horribly therewith. Then she said again: As to thy remedy,
sweetling, meseemeth it nought. For how shall ye sail this stormy
water when your captain is gone, and ye but holiday sailors belike?

As she spake, a great wave came up from the windward, and brake over
us, and half filled the craft, and lifted her bows up towering, and
then down we went into the trough; and I sat cowed and quaking, and
spake never another word.

Now began the sun to sink, and the wind abated, and the sea went
down, but the boat sped on as swift as ever over the landless waters.

Now the sun was down, and dusk was at hand, and the carline spake,
and drew a bright-gleaming sax from under her raiment: Damsels, I
warn you that now it were best that ye obey me in all things; for
though ye be three and I one, yet whereas I have here an edge-friend,
I may take the life of any one of you, or of all three, as simply as
I could cut a lamb's throat. Moreover it will serve you better in
the house whereto ye are wending, that I make a good tale of you
rather than a bad. For the mistress of that house is of all might;
and I must say it of her, though she is my very sister, yet she is
not so sweet-tempered and kind of heart as I am, but somewhat rough
and unyielding of mood, so that it is best to please her. Wherefore,
maidens, I rede you be sage.

Our unhappy hearts were now so sunken in wan-hope, that we had no
word wherewith to answer her, and she spake: Now obey ye my bidding
and eat and drink, that ye may come hale and sound to your journey's
end, for I would not give starvelings to my dear sister. Therewith
she brought forth victual for us, and that nought evil, of flesh and
bread, and cheese and cakes, and good wine withal; and we were
hunger-weary as well as sorrow-weary; and hunger did at that moment
overcome sorrow, so we ate and drank, and, would we, would we not,
something of heart came back to us thereby. Then again spake the
carline: Now my will is that ye sleep; and ye have cushions and
cloths enough to dight you a fair bed; and this bidding is easy for
you to obey. Forsooth, so weary were we with sorrow, and our hunger
was now quenched, that we laid us down and slept at once, and forgat
our troubles.

When we awoke it was after the first dawn, and we were come aland
even where thou didst this morning, guest. And thou mayst deem it
wondrous, but so it was, that close to where our boat took land lay
the ferry which brought thee hither.

Now the carline bade us get ashore, and we did so, and found the land
wondrous fair, little as that solaced us then. But she said unto us:
Hearken! now are ye come home; and long shall ye dwell here, for
never shall ye depart hence save by the will of my sister and me,
wherefore, once more, I rede you be good, for it will be better for
you. Go forth now unto yonder house, and on the way ye shall meet
the Queen of this land, and ye have nought to do but to say to her
that ye are the Gift; and then shall she see to your matter.

Therewith she gat into her own craft, the Sending Boat, and therein
did the deed and spake the words ye wot of, and was gone north-away;
and when we turned to seek for our boat wherein we had come hither,
it was gone.

We stood miserably for a while on the lip of the land, and then I
said that we might as well go meet our fate as die there of grief and
hunger. So we went, and came into those fair gardens, and as we went
slowly up toward the house came on us a woman clad in red scarlet and
grandly dight. A big woman she was, and like to her that beguiled
us, but far younger and fairer of favour, foolish and proud of
visage. She stared on us, and seemed half afeard of us at first, but
asked us what we were, and I answered that we were the Gift. The
Gift? said she, what meaneth that? Will ye obey me in all things?
If ye gainsay it, ye will perish, unless ye can eat grass; for on
this isle everything cometh from my hand.

What might we do? We all knelt down before her, and swore to do her
will. Then she said, after she had stared on us a while: Now I
know: ye are they of whom my sister spake, that she would fetch me a
gift of a leash of damsels for my service. Now I take the Gift and
thank her good heart. But if ye would do my will, then . . . But
she broke off here and stared at us a long while, and then she said:
Now I know; she bade me treat you well, and hold my hand from you, or
evil would come of it, belike at last my bane. So go ye home to the
house, and I will give you meat and drink, and show you my stores and
the Wonder-coffer, and ye shall serve me in honour.

Even so did we; and we ate and drank and rested, and nought we
lacked, save leave to depart home to our lovers, and some mistress
better than this stupid and proud lump of flesh. But the next
morning when we came before the lady, she knew nought of what we
were; and again we had to tell her that we were the Gift, and again
she glared at us balefully, and again she called to mind her sister
and her rede concerning us. And this went on for many days, till at
last she got to know what we were; and she followed her sister's rede
in that she never mishandled us, though we could see that it irked
her to forbear, nor did she speak to us more roughly than her fool's
wont was; and we had in our hands all that was needed for our
sustenance, and lived easily enough.

Now our coming hither betid three years ago, and a month thereafter
comes thy witch hither in her ferry, and she greeted us when we met,
and asked us, grinning, had she not been kind to win us such good
days? Yea, and over kind, said she, ye would deem me, knew ye what
would have betid you save for my good word. Forsooth we deemed it no
kind deed to steal us from our lovers; but we kept good tongues in
our heads, for thralls must needs kiss the rod.

She went away in two days, but came again many times thereafter, till
we won the secret of the Sending Boat, and her spell therewith; but
we knew not that was banned against us. Wherefore on a day in the
grey of the morning, when we had been on this isle somewhat less than
a year, we went down to it and stepped in, and reddened stem and
stern and said the spell-words. But straightway arose an hideous
braying and clatter, and thunder came therewith, and trembling of the
earth, and the waters of the lake arose in huge waves; nor might we
move from our seats in the boat till the two witches came running
down to us, and haled us out ashore, and had us up into the house,
and into this very prison-chamber, wherein we are now sitting so
merry. And here we bore what was laid upon us, whereof, dear guest,
we shall tell thee nought. But this came of it, that never
thereafter durst we try the adventure of the Sending Boat, but have
lived on in lazy sorrow and shameful ease, till thou, dear guest and
sister, wert sent hither by heaven for our helping.

Now what became of the king's court, and the hazelled field of our
champions, we wot not, or whether they be yet alive we cannot tell
thee; but if they be alive, it is to them that we would have thee do
our errand, and thereof will we tell thee closely to-morrow. And so,
sweetling, an end of my tale.



CHAPTER VII. THE THREE DAMSELS TAKE BIRDALONE OUT OF THE WITCH'S
PRISON



Birdalone thanked Atra much for her tale, and strange it was to her
to hear of such new things and the deeds of folk; but the dealing of
the witches with those three was familiar to her and was of her
world.

Now they talked merrily, till there came a footstep to the door and
one without knocked. Viridis paled thereat, and a pang of fear smote
Birdalone, and she swiftly got from out the chair and sat down on a
stool; but when Atra opened, it was but Aurea come from her service
to bid Atra take her place. So she went, and again was there
pleasant converse betwixt Aurea and the other twain; and certain
matters did Aurea tell Birdalone which had been left untold by Atra.
And chiefly, when Birdalone asked if any other folk had come into the
isle while they dwelt there, she said yea; once had come a knight
with a lady, his love, fleeing from war and mishap, and these had the
witch overcome by wizardry, and destroyed them miserably: and that
again another had strayed thither, and him also the witch undid,
because he would not do her will and lie in her bed. Withal had come
drifting there a young damsel, a castaway of the winds and waves; her
the witch kept as a thrall, and after a while took to mishandling her
so sorely, that at last, what for shame and what for weariness of
life, she cast herself into the water and was drowned. None of these
folk might the damsels help so as to do them any good, though they
tried it, and went nigh to suffer therefor themselves.

Now the day wore, and in a while Atra came back, and Viridis must
serve. At last the dusk and the dark was come. Then said Atra: Now
must we twain begone to wait upon our lady, as the wont is: and that
is now for our good hap, for if we be with her all three, and
especially, to say sooth, if I be with her, we may well keep her from
visiting thee here; since belike she shall yet dimly remember that
thou art in her prison. Therefore thou must forgive it if I shackle
thy wrists again. And now if thou wilt follow my rede, thou shalt
try to sleep some deal, and it were well if thou might'st sleep till
we come for thee in the grey dawn.

Therewith they left her there, and she nestled in the corner once
more, and there did verily fall asleep, and slept till the key in the
lock and the opening door awakened her, and Atra came stealing soft-
footed into the prison. Eager she was and panting, and she kneeled
before Birdalone and unlocked her leg-shackles, and then stood up and
did the like by the irons on her wrists. Then she said: Look up,
dear friend, to thy prison windows, and behold the dawn beginning to
break on the day of thy deliverance, and ours maybe. But come now at
once: and again, wilt thou pardon me, that we clothe thee not here
for thy journey? For from our own bodies must we clothe thee, and if
by any hap our lady were to see any one of us more or less unclad, it
might draw her on to see what was toward, and we might yet be found
out, for our undoing.

Therewith she took her hand, and led her forth of the prison, and
locked the door behind her; and then downstairs they went, and out-a-
doors by a little wicket at the stair-end. The dawn drew on apace
now, and Birdalone saw at once the other twain lurking in the wall-
nook hard by. No word was spoken between them, and with noiseless
feet they went forth into the orchard, where the blackbirds and
thrushes were beginning their first morning song, and ere they came
out on to the meadow the full choir of them was a-singing.



CHAPTER VIII. IN WHAT WISE BIRDALONE WAS CLAD, AND HOW SHE WENT HER
WAYS FROM THE ISLE OF INCREASE UNSOUGHT



When they were all clear of the orchard trees the three damsels kept
Birdalone between them closely, so that her white body should not be
seen if the lady were awake and looking forth. Thus they brought her
to where a few thorn-bushes made a cover for them close to the
water's edge, some twenty yards from the Sending Boat. There they
stood together, and Atra said:

Now, dear guest, and dearest messenger, it is our matter to clothe
thee from our very bodies; and do thou, Viridis, begin.

Viridis came forward blushing, as her wont was, and took off her
green gown and laid it on the grass; then she set her hand to her
smock, and did it off, and stood naked, knee set to knee, and swaying
like the willow branch; and then was seen all the dainty fashion of
her body, and how lovely of hue and sweet of flesh she was.

But she said: Dear sister Birdalone, here is my smock, which I lend
thee, but as to my love, I give it thee therewith; therefore grudge
it not, though thou give me back the linen, for happy will be the day
to me when I have it again; for now none may do it on me save the
Green Knight, my own love. Therewith she gave her the smock, and
kissed her, and Birdalone did it on, and felt the valianter and
mightier when she had a garment upon her.

Then Aurea did off her golden gown, and stood in smock alone, so that
her naked arms shone more precious than the golden sleeves that had
covered them. And she spake: Birdalone, dear messenger, take now my
golden gown, and send it back to me when thou hast found the man unto
whom it is due; and think meanwhile that, when thou wearest it, thou
wearest my love, and that when thou pullest it off, thou art clad
with my love instead of it.

So Birdalone did on the gown, and became to look on as the daintiest
of the queens of the earth; and she turned her head about to look on
her gold-clad flanks, and wondered.

Thereafter Atra knit up her skirts into her girdle, and then did off
her shoon, so that her slim feet shone like pearls on the green
grass; and she said:

Birdalone, sweet friend! wilt thou be my messenger to bear these
shoon to my Black Squire, and meanwhile put my love for thee under
thy feet, to speed thee and to bear thee up? Wherefore be good to
me.

Birdalone then shod herself, and though pity it were to hide her feet
from the eyes of Earth, yet felt she the stouter-hearted thereby, and
her cheeks flushed and her eyes brightened.

Thereafter Aurea gave her withal a golden collar for the neck, and
Viridis a girdle of silver well-wrought, and Atra a gold finger-ring
set with a sapphire stone; and all these she did on her; but yet she
knew that they were tokens to be delivered to the three lovers
according as was due.

Then spake Atra: Lo, sister, we pray thee to bear these lendings on
thy body in such wise that when thou comest to the mainland they may
be seen by knights seeking adventures, and that thou mayst answer to
any who may challenge thee thereof and say that thou bearest this
raiment and these jewels from Aurea and Viridis and Atra to Baudoin
the Golden Knight, and to Hugh the Green Knight, and to Arthur the
Black Squire. And if thou deem that thou hast found these, then
shall they tell thee a token, such as we shall tell thee, that they
be truly these and none other; and thereafter, when thou art made
sure, they shall take of thee the raiment, the gems, and the Sending
Boat, and come hither if they may. And God look to the rest! But as
for the token to be told aforesaid, we have determined that each of
us shall tell thee privily what question thou shalt ask for her, and
what answer thou must look for.

When she had done speaking, each came up to Birdalone and spake
something into her ear amidst blushes enough forsooth. And what they
said will be seen hereafter. Then again said Atra: Now by this
errand shall we be well paid for the care we have had of thee. It
may be, forsooth, that thou shalt not find our speech-friends; for
they may be dead, or they may deem us untrue, and may have forsaken
us and their land; and in any such case thou art free of our errand;
but whatsoever may betide us, God speed thee!

Then Viridis drew forth a basket from under a bush, and said: We
know not how long thy voyage may be, but some little provision for
the way we may at least give thee: now wilt thou bear this aboard
thyself; for we dare not touch thy craft, nay, nor come nigh it, no
one of us. And she set down the basket and cast her arms about her,
and kissed her and wept over her; and the other twain, they also
kissed her lovingly. Birdalone wept even as Viridis, and said: May
ye do well, who have been so kind to me; but now am I both so glad
and so sorry, that the voice of me will not make due words for me. O
farewell!

Therewith she took up her basket, and turned and went speedily to the
Sending Boat; and they beheld her how she stepped aboard and bared
her arm, and drew blood from it with the pin of her girdle-buckle,
and therewith reddened stem and stern; and a pang of fear smote into
their hearts lest their lady had banned it for Birdalone as for them.
But Birdalone sat down on the thwart, and turned her face south, and
spake:


The red raven-wine now
Hast thou drunk, stern and bow;
Awake then, awake!
And the southward way take:
The way of the Wender forth over the flood,
For the will of the Sender is blent with the blood.


No cloud barred the gateway of the sun as she spoke; no wave rose
upon the bosom of the lake; no clatter nor tumult was there; but the
Sending Boat stirred, and then shot out swiftly into the wide water;
and the sun arose as they looked, and his path of light flashed on
Birdalone's golden gown for a moment, and then it grew grey again,
and presently she was gone from before their eyes.

So they turned up into the orchard: and now was Viridis of good
cheer, and Aurea no less; but Atra lagged behind, and as she went,
some passion took her, she knew not wherefore; her bosom swelled, her
shoulders heaved therewith, and she wept.



CHAPTER IX. HOW BIRDALONE CAME TO THE ISLE OF THE YOUNG AND THE OLD



All went well with Birdalone when she had left the Isle of Increase
Unsought, much as it had on her first voyage, save that now she was
both clad and victualled, and her heart, if yet it harboured fear,
was also full of new and strange hope; and oft, even as she sat there
amidst the waste of waters, she wondered what new longing this was
which wrought so sweet a pain in her, that it made her cheeks burn,
and her eyes dim, and her hands and her limbs restless. And then
would she set her mind to her friends and their errand, and would
hope and pray for them; but again would she fall to picture to
herself what manner of men they were who were so sore longed for by
those three beauteous women; and she deemed that since they were thus
desired, they must be fairer even than her friends of the isle; and
again the nameless longing overtook her, and held her till it wearied
her into sleep.

When she awoke again the boat had stayed, and she was come aland; but
the dawn was not yet come, and the night was moonless, yet was there
light enough to see, from the water and the stars, that the bows of
the boat were lying safe on a little sandy beach. So she stepped out
and looked around, and deemed she could see great trees before her,
and imagined also dark masses of she knew not what. So she walked
warily up the said strand till she came on to soft grass, and smelled
the scent of the clover as her foot-soles crushed it. There she sat
down, and presently lay along and went to sleep.

After a while she awoke, and felt happy and well at ease, and had no
will to move: the sun was shining brightly, but had not been up
long: the song of birds was all about her, but amidst it she deemed
she heard some speech of man, though it were not like to what she had
heard in her life before. So she raised herself on her elbow, and
looked up and saw a new thing, and sat up now, and beheld and
wondered.

For there stood before her, gazing wide-eyed on her, two little
children, some three winters of age, a man and a woman as it seemed.
The man-child with light and fine white-golden hair, falling straight
down and square over his brow, and blue-grey eyes which were both
kind and merry, and shyly seeking as it were. Plump and rosy he was,
sturdy and stout-limbed. No less fair was the woman; her hair
golden-brown, as oft it is with children who grow up dark-haired, and
curling in fair little rings all over her head; her eyes were big and
dark grey; she was thinner than the lad, and somewhat taller.

These two babes had between them a milk-white she-goat, and had been
playing with her, and now she turned her head to this and that one of
them, bleating, as if to crave more of the game; but they had no eyes
for her, but stood staring with might and main on the new-comer and
her shining golden gown.

Birdalone laughed with joy when she saw the little ones, and a dim
memory of the days of Utterhay passed before her: she stretched out
a hand to them, and spake softly and caressingly, and the little lad
came forward smiling, and took her hand, and made as if he would help
her up for courtesy's sake. She laughed on him, and arose; and when
she stood up, tall and golden, he seemed somewhat afeard of so big a
creature, but stood his ground valiantly. Then she stooped down to
him and kissed him, and he naysaid her not, but seemed rather glad
when it was over; but when Birdalone went to the little maid, and
kissed her, the child clung to her as if she were her mother, and
babbled to her.

Then comes the lad to her, and takes her hand, and would draw her
away, and speaks to her in his prattle, and she understood him to
mean that she should come with him to see the father. So she went,
wondering what should next betide; and the little maiden went on the
other side of her, holding by a fold of her skirt. Forsooth the goat
followed bleating, not well pleased to be forgotten.

Now had Birdalone time to look about her, though the two babes fell
to prattling with her in their way, and she thought it sweet to look
down on the two little faces that looked up to her so pleased and
merry.

She was in a grassy plain, somewhat over rough and broken to be
called a meadow, and not enough be-timbered to be called a wood; it
rose up a little and slowly as they left the water, but scarce so
much as one might call it a hill. Straight before her on the way
that they were going went up into the air great masses of grey stone
builded by man's hand, but looking, even from this way off, ragged
and ruinous. It may well be thought that Birdalone wondered what
things might lie betwixt the trees and the towers.

Now as they went they came on other goats, who seemed tame, and these
joined them to their fellow, and suffered the younglings to play with
them. Moreover there were rabbits great plenty scuttling in and out
of the brakes and the rough ground upon the way, and the younglings
beheld them, and the little lad said, after his fashion: Why do the
rabbits run away from us, and the goats follow us? Now, sooth to
say, Birdalone scarce knew why, and had no word ready for the child;
but she said at last: Mayhappen they will come to me; so it was once
when I dwelt away from here. Shall I go fetch thee one? The little
ones yeasaid that, though somewhat shyly and doubtfully. Then said
Birdalone: Do ye, sweetlings, abide me here, and go not away. They
nodded their heads thereat, and Birdalone kilted her skirts and went
her ways to some broken bushed ground, where was a many rabbits
playing about; but she went not out of eye-shot of the babes. Before
she was well-nigh to the little beasts, she fell to talking to them
in a low sweet voice, as had been her wont when she was little; and
when they heard it, those who had not scuttled away at first glance
of her, fell to creeping little short creeps one to the other, as
their manner is when they be alone together and merry; and they
suffered her to come quite amongst them, and crept about her feet
while she stood, still talking unto them. Then she stooped down and
took up one in her arms and caressed it, and then laid him down and
took up another, and so with three or four of them; and she fell to
pushing them, and rolling them over with her foot; then she turned a
little away from them toward the children, and then a little more,
and the rabbits fell to following her, and she turned and took up one
in her arms, and went straight on toward the children, but turning
and talking to the rabbits now and again.

As to the babes, she saw the goats, of whom were now a dozen, or
thereabouts, standing together in a kind of ring, and the little ones
going from one to the other playing with them happily. But presently
the lad turned and saw her coming with her tail of little beasts, and
he cried out a great Oh and ran toward her straightway, and the
maiden after him; and he held out his arms to have the rabbit she
bore, and she gave it to him smiling, and said: Lo now! here be
pretty playmates; but look to it that ye be soft and kind with them,
for they are but feeble people. So the younglings fell to sporting
with their new friends, and for a little forgat both goats and golden
lady; but the goats drew nigh, and stood about them bleating, nor
durst they run at the rabbits to butt them, because of Birdalone and
the little ones.

There then stood the slim maiden, tall and gleaming above her little
flock; and her heart was full of mirth and rest, and the fear was all
forgotten. But as she looked up toward the grey walls, lo, new
tidings to hand! For she saw an old man with a long white beard
slowly coming toward them: she started not, but abode his coming
quietly, and as he drew nigh she could see of him that he was big and
stark, and, old as he was, not yet bowed with his many years. He
stood looking on this Queen and her court silently a while, and then
he spake: Such a sight I looked not to see on this Isle of the Young
and the Old. She said: But meseemeth it is full meet that these
younglings should sport with the creatures. He smiled and said:
Such a voice I looked not to hear on the Isle of the Young and the
Old.

Birdalone became somewhat troubled, and said: Am I welcome here? for
if I be not, I will pray thy leave to depart. He said: Thou art as
welcome as the very spring, my child; and if thou have a mind to
abide here, who shall naysay thee? For surely thou art young; nay,
in regard to me thou art scarce older than babes. All blessings be
with thee. But though thou art true and kind, as is clear to be seen
by thy playing with these children and the landward beasts in peace
and love, yet it may be so that thou hast brought hither somewhat
less than peace. And he smiled upon her strangely.

She looked somewhat scared at his last words, and said: But how so?
If I might I would bear nought but peace and happiness to any place.
The old carle laughed outright now, and said: How so, dear child?
because ladies so sweet and lovesome as thou be sent by love, and
love rendeth apart that which was joined together.

She wondered at his word, and was bewildered by it, but she held her
peace; and he said: Now we may talk hereof later on; but the matter
to hand now is the quenching of thine hunger; for I will not ask thee
whereby thou camest, since by water thou needs must have come.
Wherefore now I bid thee to our house, and these little ones shall go
with us, and the three of these horned folk whom we are wont to
tether amidst the wrack and ruin of what once was fair; the rest have
our leave to depart, and these nibblers also; for we have a potherb
garden by our house, and are fain to keep the increase of the same
for ourselves. Birdalone laughed, and shook her skirts at the
coneys, and they all scuttled away after the manner of their kind.
Thereat the little lad looked downcast and well-nigh tearful, but the
maid stamped her foot, and roared well-favouredly.

Birdalone did her best to solace her, and plucked a bough from a
hawthorn bush far above the little ones' reach whereon was yet some
belated blossom, and gave it to her and stilled her. But the old man
picked out his milch-goats from the flock  whereof was the white ,
and drave them before him, while the two babes went on still beside
Birdalone, the little carle holding her hand and playing with the
fingers thereof; the maiden sometimes hanging on to her gown,
sometimes going loose and sporting about beside her.

So came they to where the ground became smoother, and there was a
fair piece of greensward in a nook made by those great walls and
towers, which sheltered it from the north. The said walls seemed to
be the remnant of what had once been a great house and castle; and up
aloft, where was now no stair to come at them, were chimneys and
hearths here and there, and windows with fair seats in them, and
arched doors and carven pillars, and many things beautiful, but now
was all ruined and broken, and the house was roofless and floorless:
withal it was overgrown with ash-trees and quicken-beam, and other
berry-trees and key-trees, which had many years ago seeded in the
rent walls, and now grew there great and flourishing. But in the
innermost nook of this mighty remnant, and using for its lowly walls
two sides of the ancient ashlar ones, stood a cot builded not over
trimly of small wood, and now much overgrown with roses and woodbine.
In front of it was a piece of garden ground, wherein waxed potherbs,
and a little deal of wheat; and therein was a goodly row of bee-
skeps; and all without it was the pleasant greensward aforesaid,
wherein stood three great ancient oaks, and divers thorns, which also
were ancient after their kind.

The elder led his guest into the cot, which had but simple plenishing
of stools and benches, and a table unartful, and then went to tether
his goats in the ruined hall of the house, and the children must
needs with him, though Birdalone had been glad of one of them at
least; but there was no nay, but that they must go see their dear
white goat in her stall. Howsoever all three came back again
presently, the old carle with a courteous word in his mouth, and he
took Birdalone's hand, and kissed it and bade her welcome to his
house, as though he had been a great lord at home in his own castle.
Therewith must the little ones also kiss her hand and be courteous;
and Birdalone suffered it, laughing, and then caught them up in her
arms, and clipped and kissed them well-favouredly; wherewith belike
they were not over-well pleased, though the boy endured it kindly.
Thereafter the elder set forth his banquet, which was simple enough:
upland cheer of cream and honey, and rough bread; but sweet it was to
Birdalone to eat it with good welcome, and the courtesy of the old
man.

When they were done, they went out-a-doors, and Birdalone and the old
man laid them down under an oak-tree, and the children sported about
anigh them. Then spake Birdalone: Old man, thou hast been kind unto
me; but now wouldest thou tell me about thee, what thou art, and what
are these walls about us here? Said he: I doubt if I may do so,
this day at least. But belike thou shalt abide with us, and then
some day the word may come into my mouth. She held her peace, and
into her mind it came that it would be sweet to dwell there, and
watch those fair children waxing, and the lad growing up and loving
her; yea, even she fell to telling up the years which would make him
a man, and tried to see herself, how she would look, when the years
were worn thereto. Then she reddened at the untold thought, and
looked down and was silent. But the elder looked on her anxiously,
and said: It will be no such hard life for thee, for I have still
some work in me, and thou mayst do something in spite of thy slender
and delicate fashion. She laughed merrily, and said: Forsooth, good
sire, I might do somewhat more than something; for I am deft in all
such work as here ye need; so fear not but I should earn my
livelihood, and that with joy. Merry days shall we have then, said
he.

But therewith her eye caught the gleam of her golden sleeve, and she
thought of Aurea, and her heart smote her for her errand; then she
laid her hand on her girdle and called to mind little Viridis, and
the glitter of the ring on her finger brought the image of Atra
before her; then she rose up and said: Thou art kind, father, but I
may not; I have an errand; this day must I depart from thee. He
said: Thou hast broken my heart; if I were not so old, I would weep.
And he hung adown his head.

She stood before him abashed, as if she had done him a wrong. At
last he looked up and said: Must it be to-day? Wilt thou not abide
with us night-long, and go thy ways in the early morning?

Now she scarce knew how to gainsay him, so wretched as the old carle
looked; so it came to this, that she yeasaid the abiding till to-
morrow. Then suddenly he became gay and merry, and he kissed her
hand, and fell to much speaking, telling tales of little import
concerning his earlier days. But when she asked him again of how he
came there, and what meant the great ruined house, then he became
foolish and wandering, and might scarce answer her; whereas otherwise
he was a well-spoken old carle of many words, and those of the
grandest.

Then changed his mood again, and he fell to bewailing her departure,
and how that henceforth he should have none to speak to him with
understanding. Then she smiled on him and said: But yonder babes
will grow up; month by month they will be better fellows unto thee.
Fair child, he said, thou dost not know. My days to come are but
few, so that I should see but little of their waxing in any case.
But furthermore, wax they will not; such as they be now, such shall
they be till I at least see the last of them and the earth.

Birdalone wondered at this word, and the place seemed changed to her,
yea, was grown somewhat dreary; but she said to the carle: And thou,
dost thou change in any wise, since these change not? He laughed
somewhat grimly, and said: The old that be here change from old to
dead; how could I change to better? Yea, the first thing I had to do
here was to bury an old man. Quoth she: And were there any children
here then? Yea, said he; these same, or I can see no difference in
them. Said Birdalone: And how long ago is that? And how camest
thou hither? His face became foolish, and he gibbered rather than
spake: No, I wot not; no, no, no, not a whit, a whit. But presently
after was he himself again, and telling her a tale of a great lady of
the earl-folk, a baron's dame, and how dear he was unto her. He lay
yet on the grass, and she stood before him, and presently he put
forth a hand to her gown-hem and drew her to him thereby, and fell to
caressing her feet; and Birdalone was ashamed thereat, and a little
angry. He was nought abashed, but sat up and said: Well, since thou
must needs depart to-morrow, be we merry to-day. And I pray thee
talk much with me, fair child, for sweet and sweet is thy voice to
hearken. Then he arose and said: Now will I fetch thee somewhat to
eke the joy of us both. And he turned therewith and went into the
house.

Birdalone stood there, and was now perplexed and downhearted; for now
the look of the elder scarce liked her, and the children began to
seem to her as images, or at the best not more to her than the
rabbits or the goats; and she rued her word that she would abide
there the night through. For she said to herself: I fear some trap
or guile; is the witch behind this also? for the old man is yet
stark, and though he be foolish at whiles, yet may wizardry have
learned him some guile.

With that cometh out the carle again, bearing a little keg and a
mazer roughly wrought; and he came to Birdalone, and sat down, and
bade her sit by him, and said to her: Maybe I shall hear more of thy
sweet voice when thy sweet lips have been in the cup. Therewith he
poured forth into the mazer, and handed it to Birdalone, and lo! it
was clear and good mead. She sipped thereof daintily, and, to say
sooth, was well-pleased therewith, and it stirred the heart in her.
But then she gave back the cup to the elder, and would no more of it.
As for him, he drank what was left in the cup, looking over the rim
thereof meanwhile; and then filled himself another, and another, and
yet more. But whereas it might have been looked for that his tongue
should be loosened by the good mead into foolishness and gibbering,
he became rather few-spoken, and more courteous and stately even than
he had been at the first. But in the end, forsooth, he was
forgetting Birdalone, what she was, and he fell a-talking, always
with much pomp and state, as if to barons and earls, and great
ladies; till suddenly his head fell back, he turned over on his face,
and all wit was gone from him.

At first, then, Birdalone was afraid that he was dead, or nigh unto
death, and she knelt down and raised his head, and fetched water and
cast it over his face. But when she saw that he was breathing not so
ill, and that the colour was little changed in his lips and cheeks,
she knew that it was but the might of the mead that had overcome him.
Wherefore she laid him so that he was easy, and then stood up and
looked about her, and saw the children playing together a little way
off; and nought else anigh her, save the birds in the brake, or
flying on their errands eagerly from place to place. Then, as it
were, without her will being told them, her limbs and her feet turned
her about to the shore where lay the Sending Boat, and she went
speedily but quietly thitherward, her heart beating quick, for fear
lest something should yet stay her, and her eyes glancing from brake
to bush, as if she looked to see some enemy, old or new, come out
thence.

So now her will was clear enough to her feet, and they brought her
down to the water-side and the long strand, past which the wide water
lay windless and gleaming in the hot afternoon. Then lightly she
stepped aboard, and awoke the Sending Boat with blood-offering, and
it obeyed her, and sped swiftly on the way to the southward.



CHAPTER X. BIRDALONE COMES TO THE ISLE OF THE QUEENS



Birdalone awoke the next morning while the boat was yet speeding over
the water, and the sun was up: but she was hard on the land, which
sat low and green, like a meadow exceeding fair, on the bosom of the
water, and many goodly trees were sprinkled about the greenland. But
from amidst the trees, no great way from the water's edge, rose a
great house, white and fair, as if it were new-builded, and all
glorious with pinnacles, and tabernacles set with imagery.

Presently the boat's bows ran into the reed and rush at the brim of
the water, and Birdalone stepped ashore without more ado, and the
scent of the meadow-sweet amongst which she landed brought back unto
her the image of Green Eyot that while agone.

But now when she was ashore the dread took hold of her again, and her
knees trembled under her, so that she might scarce stand, so fearful
was she of walking into some trap; especially when she beheld that
goodly house, lest therein awaited her some proud and cruel lady, and
no kind damsels to deliver her.

She looked about her, and saw in all the fair meadow neither man nor
woman, nor draught-beast nor milch-beast, nought but the little
creatures of the brake and the bent-grass, which were but as the
blossoms thereof; and the birds running in the herbage or singing
amidst the tree-boughs.

Then she thought that she must needs go forward, or belike her errand
would not speed; that the Sending Boat might not obey her, unless she
saw through the adventure to the end; so she went on toward the house
quaking.

Soon was she at the porch of the white palace, and had seen no man
nor heard any voice of men; much she marvelled, despite her dread, at
the beauty of the said house, and the newness thereof; for it was as
one flower arisen out of the earth, and every part of it made the
beauty of the other parts more excellent; and so new it was, that it
would have seemed as if the masons thereof had but struck their
scaffold yesterday, save that under the very feet of the walls the
sweet garden flowers grew all uncrushed.

Now comes Birdalone through the porch unto the screens of the great
hall; and she stopped a little to recover her breath, that she might
be the quieter and calmer amongst the great folk and mighty whom she
looked to find therein. So she gathered heart; but one thing daunted
her, to wit, that she heard no sound come from that great and goodly
hall, so that she doubted if it were perchance left desert by them
who had been its lords.

She raised her hand to the door of the screen, and it opened easily
before her, and she entered, and there indeed she saw new tidings.
For the boards end-long and over-thwart were set, and thereat were
sitting a many folk, and their hands were reached out to knife and to
dish, and to platter and cup; but such a hush there was within, that
the song of the garden birds without sounded to her as loud as they
were the voices of the children of Adam.

Next she saw that all that company, from the great folk on the dais
down to those who stood about the hall to do the service, were women,
one and all; not one carle might she see from where she stood:
lovely were they many of them, and none less than comely; their
cheeks were bright, and their eyes gleamed, and their hair flowed
down fair of fashion. And she stood, and durst not move a long
while, but expected when someone would speak a word, and all should
turn their heads toward the new-comer. But none moved nor spake.
And the fear increased in her amidst that hush, and weighed so heavy
on her heart, that at last she might endure it no longer, but fell
swooning to the floor.

When she came to herself; and the swoon-dreams had left her, she saw
by the changing of the sun through the hall-windows, that she had
lain there long, more nearly two hours than one; and at first she
covered her face with her hands as she crouched there, that she might
not see the sight of the silent hall, for yet was it as hushed as
before. Then slowly she arose, and the sound of her raiment and her
stirring feet was loud in her ears. But when she was upright on her
feet, she hardened her heart, and went forth into the hall, and no
less was her wonder than erst. For when she came close to those
ladies as they sat at table, and her raiment brushed the raiment of
the serving-women as she passed by, then saw she how no breath came
from any of these, and that they neither spake nor moved, because
they were dead.

At first, then, she thought to flee away at once, but again she had
mind of her errand, and so went up the hall, and so forth on to the
dais; and there again, close by the high table, she saw new tidings.
For there was set a bier, covered with gold and pall, and on it was
laid a tall man, a king, belted and crowned; and beside the said
bier, by the head of the king, knelt a queen of exceeding goodly
body, clad all in raiment of pearl and bawdekin; and her hands were
clasped together, and her mouth was drawn, and her brow knit with the
anguish of her grief. But athwart the king's breast lay a naked
sword all bloody; and this Birdalone noted, that whereas the lady was
of skin and hue as if she were alive, the king was yellow as wax, and
his cheeks were shrunken, and his eyes had been closed by the wakers
of the dead.

Long Birdalone looked and wondered; and now if her fear were less,
her sorrow was more for all that folk sitting there dead in their
ancient state and pomp. And was not the thought clean out of her
head, that yet they might awake and challenge her, and that she might
be made one of that silent company. Withal she felt her head
beginning to fail her, and she feared that she might swoon again and
never waken more, but lie for ever beside that image of the dead
king.

So then she refrained her both of fear and sorrow, and walked
speedily down the hall, looking neither to the right nor left: and
she came forth into the pleasance, but stayed there nought, so nigh
it seemed to that hushed company. Thence came she forth into the
open meadow, and sweet and dear seemed its hot sunshine and noisy
birds and rustling leaves. Nevertheless, so great was the tumult of
her spirits, that once more she grew faint, and felt that she might
scarce go further. So she dragged herself into the shade of a thorn-
tree, and let her body sink unto the ground, and lay there long
unwitting.



CHAPTER XI. AND NOW SHE COMES TO THE ISLE OF THE KINGS



When Birdalone came to herself it was drawing toward the glooming,
and she rose up hastily, and went down to the Sending Boat, for she
would not for aught abide the night in that fearful isle, lest the
flock of the hall should come alive and walk in the dusk and the
dark. She stepped aboard lightly, and yielded her blood to the pride
of that ferry, and it awoke and bore her forth, and she went through
the night till she fell asleep.

When she awoke it was broad day and the sun just arising, and lo!
before her, some half mile off, an isle rugged and rocky, and going
up steep from the shore; and then, held as it were by the fangs of
the rocks and pikes of the higher land, was a castle, white, high,
and hugely builded, though, because of the rock-land belike, it
spread not much abroad. Like to the lovely house of yesterday, it
seemed new-builded; and, little as Birdalone knew of such matters,
her heart told her that this new house was fashioned for battle.

She was downcast when she saw the isle so rugged and forbidding, but
when the boat came aland in a stony bight, whence the ground went up
somewhat steeply toward the heights, she went ashore straightway, and
toiled up toward the white battlement. Presently she found herself
in a strait and rugged path betwixt two walls of rock, so that she
lost sight of the castle a while, till she came out on to a level
place which looked down from aloft on to the blue water, but all over
against her close at hand were the great towers and walls. She was
worn by the rough road, and over helpless she felt her, and all too
little to deal with that huge morsel of the world; and her valiancy
gave way, and her trust in her errand. She sat down on a stone and
wept abundantly.

After a while she was amended, and she looked up and saw the huge
hold, and said: Yea, but if it were less by the half than it is, it
would still be big enough to cow me. Yet she stood not up. Then she
put forth a foot of her, and said aloud: Sorely hath this rough road
tried Atra's shoon and their goodly window-work; if they are to be
known I must be speedy on my journey or go barefoot.

As she spoke she stood up, and the sound of her own voice frighted
her, though nought noiseless was the place; for the wind was there,
and beat to and fro the castle and the rock, and ran baffled into
every corner of that market-place of nothing. For in that garth was
neither knight nor squire nor sergeant; no spear-head glittered from
the wall, no gleam of helm showed from the war-swales; no porter was
at the gate; the drawbridge over the deep ghyll was down, the
portcullis was up, and the great door cast wide open.

Birdalone steeled her heart and went forward swiftly, and over the
bridge, and entered the basecourt, and came without more ado to the
door of the great hall, and opened it easily, as with the door of
yesterday, looking to find another show like unto that one; and even
so it fell out.

Forsooth the hall was nought light and lovely, and gay with gold and
bright colours, as that other, but beset with huge round pillars that
bore aloft a wide vault of stone, and of stone were the tables; and
the hallings that hung on the wall were terrible pictures of battle
and death, and the fall of cities, and towers a-tumbling and houses
a-flaming.

None the less there also were the shapes of folk that moved not nor
spake, though not so thronged was that hall as the other one; and it
seemed as if men were sitting there at a council rather than a feast.
Close by Birdalone's right hand as she entered were standing in a row
along the screen big men-at-arms all weaponed, and their faces hidden
by their sallets; and down below the dais on either side of the high
table was again a throng of all-armed men; and at the high-table
itself; and looking down the hall, sat three crowned kings, each with
his drawn sword lying across his knees, and three long-hoary wise men
stood before them at the nether side of the board.

Birdalone looked on it all, striving with her fear: but yet more
there was, for she deemed that needs must she go through the hall up
to the dais, lest the Sending Boat deny its obedience. Up toward the
dais she went then, passing by weaponed men who sat as if abiding the
council's end at the end-long tables. And now, though no shape of
man there spake or breathed, yet sound lacked not; for within the
hall went the wind as without, and beat about from wall to wall, and
drave clang and clash from the weapons hung up, and waved the arras,
and fared moaning in the nooks, and hummed in the vault above.

Came she up to the dais then, and stood beside one of the wise men,
and looked on the kings, and saw the mightiness which had been in
them, and quaked before them. Then she turned from them and looked
down to the floor, and lo! there, just below the dais, lay a woman on
a golden bier; exceeding fair had she been, with long yellow hair
streaming down from her head; but now waxen white she was, with ashen
lips and sunken cheeks. Clad was she in raiment of purple and pall,
but the bosom of her was bared on one side, and therein was the road
whereby the steel had fared which had been her bane.

Now when Birdalone had gazed thereon a while, she deemed that if she
tarried there long amidst those fierce men by the dead woman, she
should lose her wit full soon, so sore the fear, held back, beset her
now. Wherefore she turned and went hastily down the hall, and out-a-
doors, and over the bridge, and ran fleet-foot down the rocky way
whereby she had come, till she could run no further, and lay down
under a great stone breathless and fordone; yet her heart upheld her
and suffered her not to swoon, belike because she had given her limbs
such hard work to do.

There she lay awake and troubled for an hour or more, and then she
fell asleep, and slept till the day was worn toward sunset, and
nought meddled with her. She arose and went to her ship somewhat
downhearted, wondering how many such terrors should befall her; nay,
whether the Sending Boat would so lead her that henceforth she should
happen on no children of Adam but such as were dead images of the
living. Had all the world died since she left the Isle of the Young
and the Old?

Howsoever, she had nought to do save to board her ferry, and content
its greedy soul with her blood, and drive it with the spell-words.
And thereafter, when it was speeding on, and the twilight dusking
apace, she looked aback, and seemed to see the far-off woodland in
the northern ort, and the oak-clad ridge, where she had met her wood-
mother; and then it was as if Habundia were saying to her: Meet
again we shall. And therewith straightway became life sweeter unto
her.

Deepened then the dusk, and became night, and she floated on through
it, and was asleep alone on the bosom of the water.



CHAPTER XII. OF BIRDALONE, HOW SHE CAME UNTO THE ISLE OF NOTHING



Long before sunrise, in the very morn-dusk, she awoke and found that
her ferry had taken land again. Little might she see what the said
land was like; so she sat patiently and abode the day in the boat;
but when day was come, little more was to see than erst. For flat
was the isle, and scarce raised above the wash of the leeward ripple
on a fair day; nor was it either timbered or bushed or grassed, and,
so far as Birdalone might see, no one foot of it differed in aught
from another. Natheless she deemed that she was bound to go ashore
and seek out the adventure, or spoil her errand else.

Out of the boat she stepped then, and found the earth all paved of a
middling gravel, and nought at all growing there, not even the
smallest of herbs; and she stooped down and searched the gravel, and
found neither worm nor beetle therein, nay nor any one of the sharp
and slimy creatures which are wont in such ground.

A little further she went, and yet a little further, and no change
there was in the land; and yet she went on and found nothing; and she
wended her ways southward by the sun, and the day was windless.

At last she had gone a long way and had no sight of water south of
the isle, nor had she seen any hill, nay, not so much as an ant-heap,
whence she might look further around; and it seemed to her that she
might go on for ever, and reach the heart of Nowhither at last.
Wherefore she thought she would turn back and depart this ugly isle,
and that no other adventure abided her therein. And by now it was
high noon; and she turned about and took a few steps on the backward
road.

But even therewith it seemed as if the sun, which heretofore had been
shining brightly in the heavens, went out as a burnt-down candle, and
all was become dull grey over head, as all under foot was a dull dun.
But Birdalone deemed she could follow a straight course back again,
and so walked on sturdily. Hour after hour she went and stayed not,
but saw before her no glimpse of the northern shore, and no change in
the aspect of the ground about her.

It had so happened that a little before she had turned to go back,
she had eaten her dinner of a piece of bread and a morsel of cheese,
and now as she stooped and peered on the ground, looking for some
sign of the way, as her foot-prints going south, and had her eyes low
anigh the earth, she saw something white at her feet in the gathering
dusk  for the day was wearing , and she put her hand to it and lifted
it, and found it a crumb of bread, and knew that it must have come
from her dinner of' seven hours ago, whereas till that time her bread
had lain unbroken in her scrip. Fear and anguish smote her
therewith, for she saw that in that dull land, every piece whereof
was like every other piece, she must have gone about in a ring, and
come back again to where she first turned to make for the northern
shore.

Yet would she not cast aside all hope, but clad herself in her
valiancy. Forsooth she knew it availed nought to try to move on in
the twilight; so she laid herself down on that waste, and made up her
mind to sleep if she might, and abide the new day there, and then to
strive with the way once more, for belike, she thought, it may be
fair to-morrow, and the sun shining. And as she was very weary with
tramping the waste all day, she fell asleep at once, and slept the
short night through.

But when she awoke, and saw what the new day was, her heart fell
indeed, for now was she encompassed and shut in with a thick dark
mist  though it seemed to be broad day , so that had there been aught
to see she would not have seen it her own length away from her. So
there she stood, hanging her head, and striving to think; but the
master-thought of death drawing nigh scattered all other thoughts, or
made them dim and feeble.

Long she stood there; but suddenly something came into her mind. She
set her hand to the fair-broidered pouch which hung from Viridis'
loin-girdle, and drew out thence flint and steel and tinder, which
matters, forsooth, had served her before in the boat to make fire
withal. Then she set her hand to her head, and drew forth the tress
of hair which Habundia had given her, and which was coiled up in the
crown of her own abundant locks which decked her so gloriously; she
drew two hairs from the said tress, and held them between her lips
while she did up the tress in its place again, and then, pale and
trembling, fell to striking a light, and when she had the tinder
burning, she cried out:

O wood-mother, wood-mother! How then may we meet again as thou didst
promise me, if I die here in this empty waste? O wood-mother, if
thou mightest but come hither for my deliverance!

Then she burned the hairs one after another, and stood waiting, but
nought befell a great while, and her heart sickened, and there she
stood like a stone.

But in awhile, lo! there came as it were a shadow amidst the mist, or
rather lying thereon, faint and colourless, and it was of the shape
of the wood-mother, with girt-up gown and bow in hand. Birdalone
cried aloud with joy, and hastened toward the semblance, but came to
it no nigher, and still she went, and the semblance still escaped
her, and she followed on and on; and this lasted long, and faster and
faster must she follow lest it vanish, and she gathered her skirts
into her girdle, and fell to running fleet-foot after the fleeing
shadow, which she loved dearly even amidst the jaws of death; and all
her fleetness of foot had Birdalone to put forth in following up the
chase; but even to die in the pain would she not miss that dear
shadow.

But suddenly, as she ran, the mist was all gone from before her, the
sun shone hot and cloudless; there was no shadow or shape of Habundia
there, nought but the blue lake and the ugly lip of that hideous
desert, with the Sending Boat lying a half score yards from her feet;
and behind her stood up, as it were a wall, the mist from out of
which she had come.

Forsooth Birdalone was too breathless to cry out her joy, but her
heart went nigh to breaking therewith, and lovely indeed to her was
the rippled water and the blue sky; and she knew that her wood-mother
had sped a sending to her help, and she fell a-weeping where she
stood, for love of her wise mother, and for longing to behold her:
she stretched out her arms to the north quarter, and said blessings
on her in a voice faint for weariness. Then she laid her down on the
desert, and rested her with sleep, despite the hot sun, and when she
awoke, some three hours thereafter, all was as before, save that the
sky had now some light-flying clouds, and still was the wall of mist
behind her. Wherefore she deemed she had yet time, and the blue
rippling water wooed her much-besweated limbs; so she did off her
raiment and took the water, and became happy and unweary therein.
Then she landed and stood in the sun to dry her, and so, strengthened
with that refreshing, clad her, and went aboard and did the due
rites, and sped over the waters, and had soon lost sight of that ugly
blotch on the fair face of the Great Water.


Here ends the Second Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which
is called Of the Wondrous Isles, and begins the Third Part of the
said tale, which is called Of the Castle of the Quest.




THE THIRD PART: OF THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST




CHAPTER I. BIRDALONE COMES TO THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST



Empty was the day to Birdalone save for her thoughts, and she slept
not a good while of the night. When she awoke in the morning there
was no land before her, and she began to fear somewhat that so it
might be many days, and that she might have to fare the water
landless, and perchance till she starved for hunger; for now was
there but little victual left of that which the kind Viridis had
given her. So she wore the day somewhat uneasily, and by then night
fell had eaten but little; yet was that little the last crumb and
gobbet of her store. Wherefore it is no wonder though she were
dismayed when she awoke early on the morrow, and beheld nought before
her save the landless water.

But about noon she deemed she saw a little cloud in the offing that
moved not as the other clouds, and she watched it closely at first,
and it changed not any the more, and she grew weary of watching it
and strove to sleep, turning her head to the after part of her ferry;
and thus betwixt sleeping and waking she wore away three hours: then
she stood up and looked ahead, and lo, the white cloud had taken
shape, and was a white castle far away  for the day was exceeding
clear , sitting, as it seemed, on the very face of the water. The
boat sped on swiftly thitherward, so that it was not right long ere
Birdalone beheld the green shore on either side of the said castle,
and at last, three hours before sunset, she was drawing nigh thereto,
and beheld it all clearly, what it was.

It was brand-new, and was fair enough, builded part of stone and
lime, part of framed work, but was but middling big. As she drew
nigher yet, she saw that there were folk on the walls of it, and they
seemed to see her, for a horn was winded from the battlement, and
folk were running together to somewhither. And now was Birdalone
come so near, that she saw the water-gate of the castle, and folk
coming out thereby on to the landing-place; and she saw presently,
that a very tall man with grizzled hair stood foremost of them, and
he waved his hand to her, and spake something, but the wind bore the
words away from her; yet she seemed to know that this folk would do
her to wit that they would have none of her; and her heart died
within her, so faint and hungry as she was.

Howsoever the ferry sped on its way swiftly, and in a minute or two
had stayed itself at the landing-stair, whereabout were gathered a
score of men, some armed some unarmed, and they seemed for the more
part to be grey-headed and past middle-age.

Birdalone stood up in her craft, and the aforesaid tall grey man, who
was unarmed, but clad in knightly raiment, stood on the stair and
spake unto her, and said: Lady, this is an house where women enter
never since first the roof was done thereon, which forsooth was but a
year ago. We will pray thee therefore to turn thy boat's head away,
and seek some other lodging by the water, either eastward or
westward.

Little knew Birdalone of worldly courtesy, or she had made him a
sharp answer belike; but she only looked on him ruefully, and said:
Good warrior, I am come a long way, and may not turn back from mine
errand; and I am now lacking victual and hungry, and if ye help me
not, it is like that I shall die. Much lieth on mine errand, if ye
knew it. She was weeping-ripe, but refrained her tears, though her
lip quivered. She stretched out her hands to the greybeard, and he
looked on her and found her exceeding fair; and he deemed her to be
guileless, both because of her simple speech and sweet voice, and the
goodliness of her face and eyes. But he said: Lady, thine errand
hath nought to do with it, it is thy womanhood that bars our door.
For all we are bound by oath not to suffer a woman to abide in this
castle till our lords take the bann off, and bid us open to women.
She smiled faintly, and said: If I might but see thy lords then,
since thou art not master here. He said: They are away, and will
not be back till to-morrow morning; and I wot not the hour of their
return. And yet, said he, I would we might help thee somewhat. O I
pray thee, I pray thee! she said, or mine errand will come to nought
after all.

Therewith came another man down the stair, and stood by the old
knight and plucked his sleeve, and fell to talk with him softly.
This man was by his habit a religious, and was a younger man than the
others, it might be of five and thirty winters, and he was fair of
favour. While they spake together Birdalone sat her down again, and
was well-nigh spent.

At last the old man spake: Damsel, he said, we deem we may suffer
thee to enter the castle since thy need is so great, and have a
meal's meat at our hands, and yet save our oath, if thou depart
thence by the landward gate before sunset. Will this serve thee?
Fair sir, said Birdalone, it will save my life and mine errand; I may
say no more words for my faintness, else would I thank thee.

She stood up on her feet, and the old man-at-arms reached out his
hand to her, and she took it and came her ways up the stair, but
found herself but feeble. But the priest  forsooth he was chaplain
of the castle  helped her on the other side. But when she stood on
the level stones by the water-gate, she turned to the old man and
said: One thing I will ask of thee, Is this place one of the
Wondrous Isles? The elder shook his head. We know not the Wondrous
Isles, said he; this castle is builded on the mainland. Her face
flushed for joy at the word, and she said: One thing I will crave of
thee, to wit, that thou wilt leave my barge lying here untouched till
thy masters come back, and wilt give command that none meddle
therewith.

He would have answered, but the priest brake in, and said: This will
he do, lady, and he is the castellan, and moreover he will swear to
obey thee herein. And therewith he drew forth a cross with God
nailed thereon, and the castellan swore on it with a good will.

Then the priest drew Birdalone on, and between them they brought her
into the great hall, and set her down in a chair and propped her with
cushions. And when she was thus at rest, she began to weep somewhat,
and the castellan and the priest stood by and comforted her; for
themseemed, despite her grief, that she had brought the sun into
their house.

Next were victual brought unto her of broth and venison, and good
wine and cates and strawberries; and she was not so famished but she
might eat and drink with a good will. But when she was done, and had
rested a little, the castellan stood up and said: Lady, the sun is
gone off the western windows now, and I must save mine oath; but ere
thou depart, I were fain to hear thy voice giving me pardon for my
evil cheer and the thrusting of thee forth. And therewith he put one
knee to the ground, and took her hand and kissed it. But Birdalone
was grown merry again, and she laughed and said: What pardon thou
canst have of me, kind knight, thou hast; but now methinks thou
makest overmuch of me, because I am the only woman who hath come into
thy castle. I am but a simple maiden, though mine errand be not
little.

Forsooth she wondered that the stark and gruff old man was so changed
to her in little space; for nought she knew as yet how the sight of
her cast a hot gleed of love into the hearts of them who beheld her.

Now Birdalone arose; but the castellan knelt at her feet, and kissed
her hand again, and again, and yet again. Then he said: Thou art
gracious indeed. But methinks the father here will lead thee out-a-
gates; for he may show thee a lair, wherein thou shalt be safe enough
to-night; and to-morrow may bring new tidings.

So the priest made obeisance to her and led her down the hall, and
the castellan's eyes were following them till the screen hid them.
The priest left her in the hall-porch a while, and went into the
buttery, and came back with a basket of meat and drink, and they went
forth at the great gate together, and there was the last of the sun
before them.



CHAPTER II. OF BIRDALONE, AND HOW SHE RESTED THE NIGHT THROUGH IN A
BOWER WITHOUT THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST



On a fair smooth road went they amidst of a goodly meadow-land,
wherein were little copses here and there. When they were fairly out
of the gate, the priest reached for Birdalone's hand, and she let him
take it and lead her along thereby, thinking no evil; but he might
scarce speak for a while, so great was the stir in his heart at the
touch of her bare flesh. But Birdalone spake and said: Thou art
kind, father, to lead me on my way thus.

He answered in a husky voice with his eyes cast down, and forsooth
set on the feet of her: It is not far that I am leading thee; there
is a broken cot by the copse at the turn of the road yonder, where
thou mayst abide to-night; it is better lodging than none, evil as it
is for such an one as thou. Birdalone laughed: Worse have I had,
said she, than would be the copse without the cot. And she thought
withal of the prison in the Isle of Increase Unsought.

Her voice seemed so cheery and friendly to the priest, that he shook
off somewhat the moodiness of his desire, and looked up and said: I
shall tell thee, lady, that I suppose thou hast more errand with my
lords than to crave lodging of them despite the custom of the castle.
Nay, I have an inkling of what thine errand may be, whereof more
anon; but now shall I tell thee what is best for thee to do so as to
have speech of them the soonest. They have gone forth with some of
our lads to gather venison, or it may be beeves and muttons for our
victualling, and somewhat of battle may they have had on the way, for
ill neighbours have we. But if they come back unfoughten they will
be wending this road, and must needs pass by thy copse-side; and if
thou be sleeping the noise of them will full surely awaken thee.
Then all thou hast to do is to come forth and stand in the way before
them, that they may see thee; and when once they have seen thee, how
may they pass thee by unspoken with?

I thank thee heartily for thy rede, said Birdalone; but I would ask
thee two things: first, what is the name of the castle behind us?
and second, why have ye the custom of shutting the door upon women?
Said the priest: The castle is called in this country-side, the
White Ward by the Water; but within there we call it the Castle of
the Quest; and thus is it called because my lords are seeking their
loves whom they have lost; and they have sworn an oath that no woman
shall enter therein till their own loves have trodden its floors.

Rose the heart of Birdalone at that word, and she deemed indeed that
she was come thither whereas her she-friends would have had her. The
priest beheld her and saw how her beauty was eked by that gladness,
and he scarce knew how to contain himself; and might speak no word
awhile; then he said: Hearken further concerning thy matter; if my
lords be tarried, and come not by matin-song, then I doubt not but
the castellan will send folk to see to thee. He looked down
therewith and said: I will come to thee myself; and will bring thee
men-at-arms, if need be. But sometime to-morrow morning my lords
will come, save mischief hath betid, which God forbid. And he
crossed himself; then he looked up and full in her face, and said:
But keep thine heart up; for whatsoever may betide, thou shalt not be
left uncared for.

Said Birdalone: I see of thee that thou art become my good friend,
and it rejoiceth my heart; I shall be well at ease to-night in thy
cot, and to-morrow morn I shall be valiant to do thy bidding.

The sweetness of her speech so overcame him, that he but looked
confusedly on her, as if he scarce heard her; and they went on
together without more words, till he said: Here are we at the cot,
and I will show thee thy chamber. So he led her to a little thatched
bower, built with walls of wattle-work daubed with clay, which stood
without the remnant of the cot: it was clean and dry, for the roof
was weather-tight; but there was nought in it at all save a heap of
bracken in a corner.

There stood the priest, still holding Birdalone's hand, and spake
not, but looked about, yet always covertly on Birdalone; but in a
while he let go her hand, and seemed to wake up, and said: This it
is; a sorry place enough, were it even for a gangrel body. Even so
am I, quoth she laughing; and thou mayest look to it, that herein I
shall rest full happily. Then he gave her a horn, drawing it from
out of the basket of victual, which he now set down on the ground;
and he said: If thou shouldst deem thee hard bestead, then wind this
horn, and we shall know its voice up there and come to help thee.
Now I give thee good-night.

She thanked him sweetly, and he went slowly out of the bower, but was
scarce gone ere he came back again, and said: One thing I may
perchance tell thee without drawing thine anger on my head; to wit,
that I it was who said to the castellan that he should take thee in.
Wilt thou say aught to this? She said: I will thank thee again and
again; for it was the saving of my life and mine errand. And clearer
is it now than ever that thou art a good friend unto me.

As she looked on him and caressed him with kind eyes, she saw that
his brow was knit, and his face troubled, and she said to him: What
ails thee? art thou wroth with me in any wise? O no, said he; how
should I be wroth with thee! But there is a thing I would ask of
thee. Yea, and what? said she. He said: Nay, I may not, I may not.
It shall be for to-morrow, or another day. He spake it looking down,
and in a broken voice; and she wondered somewhat at him, but not
much, deeming that he was troubled by something which had nought to
do with her, and which he might refrain from thinking of, even before
a stranger.

But presently he caught her hand and kissed it, and bade her good-
night again, and then went hastily out of the bower; and when he was
well without, he muttered, but not so as she might hear him: Durst I
have asked her, she would have suffered me to kiss her cheek. Alas!
fool that I was! Birdalone turned then to her bracken bed, and found
it sweet and clean; and she was at rest and peace in her mind, albeit
her body was exceeding weary. She felt happy in the little lonely
cot, and her heart had gone out to the sweet meadow-land, and she
loved it after all the trouble of the water; and herseemed that even
now, in the dusk a-growing into dark, it loved and caressed her. So
she laid her down, nor unclad herself at all, lest she should have to
arise on a sudden, and show those tokens of the three damsels on her
body.

A little while she lay there happily, hearkening the voices of the
nightingales in the brake, and then she fell into a dreamless sleep,
unbroken till the short night passed into day.



CHAPTER III. HOW BIRDALONE DIGHT HER FOR MEETING THE CHAMPIONS OF
THE QUEST



It was the birds beginning their first song once more that awakened
Birdalone before the sun was up; but she had no will to stir a while,
whereas she felt so happy and restful; and that all the more when she
remembered where she was, and told herself that her errand was now
like to be accomplished; and she thought of her friends whom she had
left on the Isle of Increase Unsought, and blessed them for their
kindness, and the love of them was sweet to her heart, and amidst
such thoughts she fell asleep again.

When she awoke thereafter there was a flood of sunshine lying on the
meadows, and she sprang up in haste lest she had overslept herself,
but when she was come out of the bower, she soon saw that the
sunbeams lay low on the land, and that it was yet the first hour of
the sun; so she turned about, and went through the copse to the other
side, and lo! a little clear stream running before her. So she spake
to herself softly and said: Fie on it! I was weary with the boat
and my hunger last night, and I went to bed unwashen; and this morn I
am weary for the foulness of my unwashen body. Unseemly it were to
me to show myself sluttish before these lords; let me find time for a
bath at least.

Therewith she went swiftly down to the water, undoing her girdle and
laces by the way. She came to the stream and found it running
between blue-flowering mouse-ear and rushes, into a pool which
deepened from a sandy shallow: so anon her borrowed raiment was
lying on the grassy lip of the water, and she was swimming and
disporting her in the pool, with her hair loose and wavering over her
white back like some tress of the water-weed. Therein she durst not
tarry long, but came hurrying out on to the grass, and clad herself
in haste. But she covered not her shoulders with the golden gown,
nor laced it over her bosom, so that Viridis' smock might be the
plainer to see: which smock was noteworthy, for the breast thereof
was broidered with green boughs, whence brake forth little flames of
fire, and all so dainty-wrought as if the faery had done it.

Withal she gathered up the gown into her girdle, and let the skirt-
hem clear her ankles, so that Atra's shoon might be seen at once; and
they were daintily dight with window-work and broidery of gold and
green stones, and blue. And forsooth it was little likely that any
man should stand before her a minute ere his eyes would seek to her
feet and ankles, so clean and kindly as they were fashioned.

Therewith she set her hands to her head, and trussed up her hair, and
bound it closely to her head, so that it might hide no whit of her
borrowed attire.

There she stood, with Aurea's collar lying on her dear neck, and
Viridis' girdle about her shapen loins, and Atra's ring on her
lovesome finger. And she hearkened a while and heard no sound of
coming men; and there came into her heart a gentle fear, which
grieved her not. Over the water before her hung an eglantine bush,
with its many roses either budding or but just out. Birdalone stole
thither softly, and said, smiling: Nay, if I have nothing that is
mine on my body, I will take this of the maiden's bath and make it
mine. And therewith she plucked a spray of the bush and turned it
into a garland for her head; and then when she had stood shyly a
while in that same place, she turned and went swiftly to her place
beside her night-harbour, and stood there hearkening with that sweet
fear growing upon her, her colour coming and going, and her heart
beating fast.

Now the thought of that kind priest who had led her to the bower last
night came into her mind, and she wondered why he had been so
troubled. And she thought, would those others be so kind to her, or
would they deem her an impudent wench or a foolish, or pass her by?

Forsooth if any had passed her by it had been not that he should miss
seeing her beauty, but that he should fear it, and deem her some
goddess of the Gentiles of old time come before him for his
ensnaring.



CHAPTER IV. AND NOW SHE MEETS THE CHAMPIONS



Now, as she stood hearkening, she deemed she heard something that was
not so loud as the song of the blackbird in the brake, but further
off and longer voiced: and again she hearkened heedfully, and the
sound came again, and she deemed now that it was the voice of an
horn. But the third time of her hearing it she knew that it was
nought less; and at last it grew nigher, and there was mingled with
it the sound of men shouting and the lowing of neat.

Then she stepped down to the very edge of the way, and now she saw
the riding-reek go up into the clear air, and she said: Now are they
coming without fail, and I must pluck up a heart; for surely these
dear friends of my friends shall neither harm a poor maiden nor scorn
her.

Soon came the leading beasts from out of the dust-cloud, and behind
them was the glitter of spear-heads; and then presently was a herd of
neat shambling and jostling along the road, and after them a score or
so of spearmen in jack and sallet, who, forsooth, turned to look on
Birdalone as they passed by, and spake here and there a word or two,
laughing and pointing to her, but stayed not; and all went on
straight to the castle.

Thereafter was a void, and then came riding leisurely another score
of weaponed men, whereof some in white armour; and amongst them were
five sumpter horses laden with carcasses of venison. And all these
also went by and stayed not, though the most of them gazed on
Birdalone hard enough.

Last of all came three knights riding, one with a gold surcoat over
his armour, and thereon a cleft heart of red; the second with a green
surcoat, and on the same a chief of silver with green boughs thereon,
their ends a-flaming; but the third bore a black surcoat besprinkled
with silver tears. And all these three rode bare-headed, save that
the Black Knight bore an oak-wreath on the head.

Now did Birdalone take to her valiancy, and she stepped out into the
road till she was but a ten paces from those men, who reined up when
they beheld her; and she said in a clear voice: Abide, warriors! for
if ye be what I deem you, I have an errand unto you.

Scarce were the words out of her mouth, ere all three had leapt off
their horses, and the Golden Knight came up to her, and laid his hand
upon her side, and spake eagerly and said: Where is she, whence thou
gattest this gown of good web? And thou, said she, art thou Baudoin
the Golden Knight? But he set his hand to the collar on her neck,
and touched her skin withal, and said: This, was she alive when thou
camest by it? She said: If thou be Baudoin the Golden Knight, I
have an errand to thee. I am he, said the knight; O tell me, tell
me, is she dead? Said Birdalone: Aurea was alive when last I saw
her, and mine errand is from her to thee, if thou be verily her
lover. Now with this word I pray thee to be content a while, said
she, smiling kindly upon him, for needs must I do mine errand in such
wise as I was bidden. And thou seest also that thy friends would
have a word of me.

Forsooth, they were thrusting in on her, and the Green Knight gat a
hold of her left wrist in his left hand, and his right was on her
shoulder, and his bright face close to her bosom whereon lay Viridis'
smock; and thereat she shrank aback somewhat, but said: Sir, it is
sooth that the smock is for thee when thou hast answered me a
question or two. Meanwhile I pray thee forbear a little; for, as I
trow, all is well, and thou shalt see my dear friend Viridis again.

He withdrew him a little, flushed and shamefaced. He was a young man
exceeding beauteous, clear-skinned and grey-eyed, with curly golden
hair, and he bore his armour as though it were silken cloth.
Birdalone looked upon him kindly though shyly, and was glad to the
heart's root that Viridis had so lovely a man to her darling. As for
the Golden Knight, as Birdalone might see now, he stood a little
aloof; he was a very goodly man of some five and thirty winters; tall
he was, broad-shouldered and thin-flanked, black-haired, with
somewhat heavy eyebrows, and fierce hawk-eyes; a man terrible of
aspect, when one first beheld him.

Now when the Black Squire had hearkened Birdalone's word concerning
Viridis, he threw himself down on the ground before her, and fell to
kissing her feet; or, if you will, Atra's shoon which covered them.
When she drew back a little, he rose on one knee and looked up at her
with an eager face, and she said: To thee also I have an errand from
Atra, thy speech-friend, if thou be Arthur the Black Squire. He
spake not, but still gazed on her till she reddened. She knew not
whether to deem him less goodly than the other twain. He also was a
young man of not over five and twenty years, slim and lithe, with
much brown hair; his face tanned so dark that his eyes gleamed light
from amidst it; his chin was round and cloven, his mouth and nose
excellently fashioned; little hair he had upon his face, his cheeks
were somewhat more hollow than round. Birdalone noted of his bare
hands, which were as brown as his face, that they were very trim and
shapely.

Now he rose to his feet, and the three stood together and gazed on
her; as how might they do otherwise? Birdalone hung her head, and
knew not what next to do or say. But she thought within herself,
would these three men have been as kind to her as her three friends
of the Isle, had she happened on them in like case as she was that
time? And she settled with herself that they would have been no less
kind.

Now spake the Golden Knight, and said: Will the kind maiden do her
errand to us here and now? for we be eager and worn with trouble.
Birdalone looked adown and was somewhat confused. Fair sirs, said
she, I will do your will herein.

But the Black Squire looked on her and saw that she was troubled, and
he said: Your pardon, fair fellows, but is it not so that we have an
house somewhat anigh, not ill purveyed of many things? By your leave
I would entreat this kind and dear lady to honour us so much as to
enter the Castle of the Quest with us, and abide there so long as she
will; and therein may she tell us all her errand at her leisure; and
already we may see and know, that it may not be aught save a joyous
one.

Then spake the Golden Knight, and said: I will ask the lady to
pardon me, and will now join my prayer to thine, brother, that she
come home with us. Lady, he said, wilt thou not pardon me, that in
the eager desire to hear tidings of my speech-friend I forgat all
else.

And therewithal he knelt before her, and took her hand and kissed it;
and for all his fierce eyes and his warrior's mien, she deemed him
kind and friendly. Then needs must the Green Knight kneel and kiss
also, though he had no pardon to crave; but a fair sweet lad she
thought him, and again her heart swelled with joy to think that her
friend Viridis had so dear a speech-friend to long for her.

Then came the turn of the Black Squire, and by then were the two
others turned away a little toward their horses; and he knelt down on
both knees before Birdalone and took her right arm above the wrist,
and looked at the hand and kissed it as if it were a relic, but stood
not up; and she stood bending over him, and a new sweetness entered
into her, the like of which she had never felt. But as for the Black
Squire, it seemed that one hand would not suffice him, and he took
her left hand and fell to kissing it, and then both the hands
together all over the backs of them, and then the palms thereof, and
he buried his face in the two palms, and held them to his cheeks; and
the dear hands suffered it all, and consented to the embracing of his
cheeks. But Birdalone deemed that this was the kindest and sweetest
of the three kind warriors, and sorry she was when he let go her
hands and stood up.

His face was flushed, but his speech calm, as he spake so that the
other knights might hear him: Now will we straight to the castle,
lady, and we will ask thee which of us three thou wilt honour by
riding his horse there; shall it be Baudoin's bright bay, or Hugh's
dapple-grey, or my red roan? And therewith he took her by the hand
and led her toward the horses. But she laughed, and turning a
little, pointed to the castle, and said: Nay, sweet lords, but I
will fare afoot, such a little way as it is, and I all unwont to the
saddle.

Spake the Green Knight: If that be so, lady, then shall we three
walk afoot with thee. Nay, nay, she said; I have nought to carry but
myself; but ye have your byrnies and your other armour, which were
heavy for you to drag on afoot, even a little way. Moreover, I were
fain to see you mount your horses, and ride and run about the meadow
with tossing manes and flashing swords, while I trudge quietly toward
the gate; for such things, and so beauteous, are all new unto me, as
ye shall learn presently when I tell you my story. Do so much to
pleasure me, kind knights.

The tall Baudoin nodded to her, smiling kindly, as much as to say
that he thought well of her desire. But the Green Knight ran to his
horse with a glad shout, and anon was in the saddle with his bright
sword in his fist; then he spurred, and went a-gallop hither and
thither over the mead, making his horse turn short and bound, and
playing many tricks of the tilt-yard, and crying, A Hugh, A Hugh, for
the Green Gown! The Golden Knight was slower and more staid, but in
manywise he showed his war-deftness, riding after Hugh as if he would
fall on him, and staying his way just as it became perilous; and he
cried, Baudoin, Baudoin, for Gold-sleeves! And all this seemed to
Birdalone both terrible and lovely.

But for the Black Squire, he was slow to let loose Birdalone's hand;
but thereafter he was speedy to vault into his saddle, and he made
courses over the meadow, but ever came back to Birdalone as she went
her ways, riding round and round her, and tossing his sword into the
air the while and catching it as it fell. And no less lovely did
this seem to Birdalone, and she smiled on him and waved her hand to
him.

Going slowly in this wise, she came at last to the castle gate; and
now had all those three out-gone her and stood afoot in the wicket to
welcome her, and the Golden Knight, who was the oldest of the three,
was the speaker of the welcome.

Over the threshold of the Castle of the Quest went Birdalone's feet
then, and she was grown so happy as she had never deemed she should
be all her life long.



CHAPTER V. BIRDALONE HAS TRUE TOKENS FROM THE CHAMPIONS OF THE QUEST



Now they brought Birdalone into a very fair chamber, where was
presently everything she might need, save a tiring woman, which,
forsooth, was no lack unto her, since never had she had any to help
her array her body. So she did what she might to make herself the
trimmer; and in a while came two fair swains of service, who brought
her in all honour into the great hall, where were the three lords
abiding her. There were they served well and plenteously, and fair
was the converse between them; and in especial was the talk of Arthur
the Black Squire goodly and wise and cheery, and well-measured; and
the Green Knight's speech merry and kind, as of an happy child; and
the Golden Knight spake ever free and kindly, though not of many
words was he. And who was happy if Birdalone were not?

But when they had eaten and washed their hands, then spake the Golden
Knight: Dear maiden, now are we ready to hear the innermost of thine
errand, all we together, if thou wilt.

Birdalone smiled and reddened withal, as she said: Fair lords, I
doubt not but ye are even they unto whom I was sent, but they who
sent me, and who saved me from death and worse, bade me do mine
errand in such a way, that I should speak with each one of you
privily, and that for a token each should tell me a thing known but
to him and his love, and to me unto whom she hath told it. Now am I
all ready to do mine errand thus, and no other wise.

Laughed they now, and were merry, and the Green Knight blushed like a
maiden; forsooth like to his very speech-friend Viridis. But the
Black Squire said: Fair fellows, get we all into the pleasance this
fair morn, and sit there on the grass, and our sweet lady shall take
us one after other into the plashed alley, and have the tokens of us.

Even so they did, and went into the pleasance, which was a goodly
little garth south of the castle, grassed, and set thick with roses
and lilies and gillyflowers, and other fragrant flowers. There then
they sat on the daisied greensward, the three lords together, and
Birdalone over against them, and they three watched her beauty and
loveliness and wondered thereat.

But she said: Now it comes to the very point of mine errand;
wherefore I bid thee, Baudoin the Golden Knight, to come apart with
me and answer to my questions, so that I may know surely that I am
doing mine errand aright.

Therewith she arose to her feet, and he also, and he led her into the
plashed alley, out of earshot of the other twain, who lay upon the
grass biding their turn with but little patience.

But when those two were in the deep shade of the alley, Birdalone
said: Thou must know, Sir Golden Knight, that the three lovers of
you three were good to me in my need, and clad my nakedness from
their very bodies, but this raiment they lent me, and gave it not;
for they bade me give it up piece by piece each unto the one who had
given it to his love, whom I should know by the token that he should
tell truly the tale of its giving. Now, fair sir, I know well, for I
have been told, what was the tale of thy giving this golden gown to
Aurea, and that same tale shalt thou now tell me, and if thou tell it
aright, then is the gown thine. Begin, then, without more tarrying.

Lady, said the knight, thus it was: Aurea, my sweetling, abode with
an ancient dame, a kinswoman of hers, who was but scantly kind to
her; and on a day when we had met privily, and were talking together,
my love lamented the niggard ways of her said kinswoman, and told how
she had no goodly gown to make her fair when feasts were toward; but
I laughed at her, and told her that so clad as she was  and her
attire was verily but simple  she was fairer than any other; and
then, as ye may wot, there was kissing and clipping between us; but
at last, as from the first I meant it, I promised her I would purvey
her such a gown as no lady should go with a better in all the
country-side; but I said that in return I must have the gown she went
in then, which had so long embraced her body and been strained so
close to her body and her sides, and was as it were a part of her.
That she promised me with kisses, and I went away as merry as a bird.
Straightway thereafter I did do make this very gown, which thou
bearest, dear maiden, and on the appointed day she came out to me
unto the same place clad as she was before; but the new gown I had
with me. Hard by our trysting-place was a hazel-copse thick enow,
for it was midsummer, and she said she would go thereinto and shift
gowns, and bear me out thence the gift of the old clout  so she
called it, laughing merrily . But I said: Nay, I would go into the
copse with her to guard her from evil things, beasts or men; and
withal to see her do off the old gown, that I might know before I
wedded her whatlike stuffing and padding went to make the grace of
her flanks and her hips. And again was she merry, and she said:
Come, then, thou Thomas unbelieving, and see the side of me. So we
went into that cover together, and she did off her gown before mine
eyes, and stood there in her white coat with her arms bare, and her
shoulders and bosom little covered, and she was as lovely as a woman
of the faery. Then I made no prayer unto her for leave, but took my
arms about her, and kissed her arms and shoulders and bosom all she
would suffer me, for I was mad with love of her naked flesh. Then
she did on this golden gown, and departed when she had given me the
old clout aforesaid, and I went away with it, scarce feeling the
ground beneath my feet; and I set the dear gown in a fair little
coffer, and here in this castle I have it now, and many times I take
it forth and kiss it and lay my head upon it. Now this is a simple
tale, lady, and I am ashamed that I have made it so long for thee.
And yet I know not; for thou seemest to me so kind and loving and
true, that I am fain that thou shouldest know how sorely I love thy
friend and mine.

Birdalone deemed Baudoin a good man indeed, and the tears came into
her eyes as she answered and said: True is thy tale, dear friend,
and I have deemed it rather short than long. I see well that thou
art Aurea's very lover; and it joys me to think that thou, O terrible
champion, art yet so tender and true. Now is the golden gown thine,
but I will pray thee to lend it me a little longer. But this jewel
shalt thou have from my neck here and now; and thou knowest whence it
came, thine Aurea's neck forsooth.

Therewith she betook it him, and he held it in his hand doubtfully a
while, and then he said: Dear maiden, I thank thee, but I will take
this collar, and lay it in my casket, and be glad thereof; and that
the more, as, now I look on thee, I see nought missing from the
loveliness of thine own neck.

Go to thy fellows now, said Birdalone, and send me the Green Knight,
the goodly lad. So went he, and presently came Hugh thither merry
and smiling, and said: Thou hast been long about the first token,
sweet mistress; I fear me I shall make no such goodly story as hath
Baudoin. And yet, said she, Viridis' tale was the longest of all. I
doubt thou mayst fail in the token. And she laughed; and he no less,
and took her by the shoulders, and kissed her cheek frankly, and in
such wise that she feared him nought, and said: Now that is to pay
thee for thy gibe; what wouldst thou have of me? Said Birdalone: I
would have thee tell me how it was that Viridis came by the smock
with the green boughs aflame, which now I bear upon me.

Hearken, darling lady, said he: On a day Viridis and I were alone in
the meadow, and so happy, that we might find nought to do save to
fall into strife together; and I said it to her, that she loved me
not as well as I loved her; which, by the way, was no less than a
lie, for of all things living she is the most loving, and when we be
together she knoweth not how to make enough of me. Well, we fell to
wrangling after the manner of lovers, till I, having nothing else to
say, bade her remember that since we had first come to love each
other, I had given her many things, and she had given me nothing.
Lo, then! my dear, what an ill-conditioned lad was I. But, little as
I meant it, she took it all amiss, and leapt up, and fell to running
back home over the meadow; thou mayst think how easily I caught up
with her, and how little loth she was to be dragged back by the
shoulders. So when we were sitting again under the thorn-bush, we
had well-nigh done our wrangle; but she unlaced her gown and drew
down a corner thereof, to show me her shoulder, how I had hurt it
e'en now; and forsooth some little mark there was on the rose-leaf
skin; and that made good time for kissing again, as ye may well wot.
Then she said unto me: And how may I, a poor damsel, give thee
gifts, and my kindred all greedy about me? Yet would I give thee a
gift, such as I may, if I but knew what thou wouldst take. Now my
heart was afire with that kissing of her shoulder, and I said that I
would have that very same smock from her body, which then she bore,
and that thereof I should deem that I had a rich gift indeed. What!
said she, and wouldst thou have it here and now? And indeed I think
she would have done it off her that minute had I pressed her, but I
lacked the boldness thereto; and I said: Nay, but would she bring it
unto me the next time we met; and forsooth she brought it folded in a
piece of green silk, and dearly have I loved it and kissed it
sithence. But as for thy smock, I had it fairly wrought and
embroidered with the flaming green branches, as thou seest it, and I
gave it to her; but not on the day when she gave me the gift; for the
new one was long about doing. Now this is all the tale, and how
Viridis might eke it into a long one, I wot not. But let it be, and
tell me, have I won thy smock, or lost it?

Birdalone laughed on him and said: Well, at least thou shalt have it
as a gift; and thou mayst call it given either by Viridis or me,
which thou wilt. But with it goes another gift; which thou mayst
have at once since thou must lend me the smock a little longer. And
therewith she betook him her girdle, and he kissed it, but said:
Nay, fair lady, this befitteth well the loveliness of thy body that
thou shouldst wear it; and well it befitteth the truth and love of
thy soul toward it for me; I pray thee to keep it. Nevertheless, she
said, I will not have it, for it goeth with mine errand that thou
take it of me. Now I bid thee depart, and send hither thy fellow,
the Black Squire.

Went he then, and anon comes the Black Squire, and now that he was
alone with Birdalone this first time, he seemed moody and downcast,
all unlike the two others. He stood a little aloof from Birdalone,
and said: What wouldst thou ask of me? Her heart was somewhat
chilled by his moodiness, for erst had she deemed him the kindest of
the three; but she said: It is of mine errand to ask of thee
concerning this foot-gear which Atra lent me until I give it unto
thee, if thou be verily her lover. Said he: I was verily her lover.
Birdalone said: Then canst thou tell me the manner of thy giving
these fair shoon unto Atra?

He said: Even so; we were walking together in this country-side and
came to a ford of the river, and it was somewhat deep and took me to
over the knee, so I bore her over in my arms; then we went on a
little further till we must cross the river back again in another
place, and there the ford was shallower, and, the day being hot, Atra
must needs wade it on her own feet. So she did off hosen and shoon,
and I led her by the hand, and it took her but up to mid-leg. But
when we came up out of the water and were on the grass again, I
craved the gift of her foot-gear for the love of her, and she gave it
straightway, and fared home barefoot, for it was over the meads we
were wending in early summer, and the grass was thick and soft. But
thereafter I did do make the fair shoon which thou hast on thy feet,
and gave them to her. And, for a further token that my tale is true,
I shall tell thee that the name of the first ford we waded that day
is the Grey-nag's Wade, and the second is called Goat Ford. This is
all my tale, lady; is the token true?

True it is, squire, said Birdalone, and was silent awhile, and he
also. Then she looked on him friendly, and said: Thou art out of
heart as now, my friend. Fear not, for thou shalt without doubt see
thy speech-friend again. Moreover here is a ring which she set upon
my finger, bidding me give it thee. And she held it out unto him.

He took the ring, and said: Yea, it is best that I have it of thee,
lest unluck come thereof. She saw trouble in his face, but knew not
what to say to cheer him, and they stood silently facing one another
for awhile. Then he said: Let us back to our fellows, and talk it
over, what is now to be done.

So they went their ways to where lay the other two upon the green
grass, and the Black Squire lay down beside them; but Birdalone stood
before them and spake unto the three.



CHAPTER VI. HOW THE CHAMPIONS WOULD DO BIRDALONE TO BE CLAD ANEW IN
THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST



Lords, she said, now is it clear by the tokens that mine errand is to
you and none other; now therefore am I to tell you what to do to come
unto your speech-friends and deliver them and bring them back hither.
For this is their case, that they are in captivity in a wonder-isle
of this great water, and it is called the Isle of Increase Unsought.

Spake the Golden Knight: Fair lady, we have heard before that our
friends fared hence, or rather were taken hence over the water. And
that is the cause why we builded this castle on the water's edge, on
the very stead where was raised the pavilion, the house made for the
ladies to abide therein the battle of the Champions. Since that
time, moreover, many a barge and keel have we thrust out into the
water, that we might accomplish the Quest whereunto we were vowed;
but ever one way went our seafaring, that when we were come so far
out into the water as to lose sight of land, came upon us mist, rose
against us dusk and darkness; and then a fierce driving wind that
drave us back to this shore. It is but six days ago since we tried
this adventure for the last time, and belike the same shall befall us
the next time we try it. Wherefore I must ask thee, lady, dost thou
know any way whereby we may come to the said isle? For if thou dost,
full surely we will try it, whatsoever may be the risk thereby to our
bodies or our souls.

Full surely I do, said Birdalone; else how had I come from thence
hither mine own self? And therewith she told them of the Sending
Boat, what it was, and how she had come all the way by means thereof
from the Isle of Increase Unsought; and they all hearkened her
heedfully, and wondered both at the sorcery, and the valiant heart of
her who had driven it as she would in despite of the evil. But in
the end she spake and said: Lords, ye have now heard some deal of my
story, even that which concerns you thereof; and which must needs be
told at once: wherefore doubtless ye shall fare unto your speech-
friends by this ferry in the very wise that I shall show you; unless
perchance ye deem that I have been lying and making light tales to
you, as, sooth to say, I deem ye think it not.

Spake the Golden Knight: Damsel, in all wise we trow in thee and thy
tale. And God forbid that we should tarry! Go we hence this very
day.

Yea, but hearken, said the Black Squire: Is it not a part of this
damsel's errand that she should deliver to us the raiment of our
friends, which now she beareth on her own body, that we may bear it
back unto them?

Sooth is that, said Birdalone, and ye may well wot that this may be
nought but needful, whereas the said ladies be all beset by
sorceries.

See ye then, fellows, said the Black Squire, it may not be to-day nor
yet to-morrow that we may take the road. For ye wot that there is no
woman's gear in all the castle, and we must needs send otherwhere to
seek it.

Look thou, maiden, said the Golden Knight, laughing, how duly this
young knight thinketh of thee; whereas I, who am his elder, and
should be wiser than he, am but heedless of thee. I pray thy pardon.

Moreover, said the Black Squire, there may well be wisdom in abiding;
for it is to be thought that our dear loves considered this, and knew
what the time of tarrying should be, and have so dight their matter
as to fit in therewith; and I may not deem it of them that they would
have us array this our dear sister and theirs in unseemly wise. Nay,
for that would be an ill beginning of this deal of the Quest.

Now all yeasaid this gladly; and the Green Knight said: It were not
so ill done that we should see more of our sister here ere we depart,
and hear more of her tale; for meseemeth she began it erewhile but
half-way. And he turned to Birdalone, and took her hand and caressed
it.

Birdalone smiled on them somewhat shyly, and thanked them; but bade
them spend as little time as might be on her arrayal. For, said she,
though those ladies may well have reckoned on the time of the arrayal
of my body, yet surely also they shall have reckoned with the eager
fire of love in the hearts of you, and the haste it shall breed
therein.

Well pleased were they with that word of hers, but none the less sent
two sergeants and a squire with led horses unto the cheaping-town, a
goodly and great town hight Greenford, which was some twenty miles
thence, with the errand to bring back with them a good shaper and
embroideress, and sewing-women, and cloth and silk and linen, and all
things needful.

As for jewels, each one of them was fain to give her something which
he prized, and fair and rich were the gifts, though they had not been
made for women. As a fair SS collar of gold, which the Golden Knight
gave her, and a girdle of broad golden plates, wrought beauteously,
which was the gift of the Black Squire. Albeit he did not offer to
clasp it round her loins, as she deemed he would; for when the Green
Knight brought his gift, a great gold ring, very ancient of fashion,
he would have her turn back the sleeve from her fore-arm, that he
might set his dwarf-wrought gold upon the bare flesh; neither did he
refrain him from kissing it withal.

But the messengers came back with their work-women and stuffs early
on the morrow; and now was changed all the manner of the womanless
castle, and men were full merry therein.



CHAPTER VII. OF BIRDALONE, HOW SHE TOLD THE CHAMPIONS ALL HER TALE



It was a matter of eight days, the making of all Birdalone's raiment,
and meanwhile she was ever with the three Champions, either all three
together, or one or other of them. And as to their manners with her,
ever was the Golden Knight of somewhat sober demeanour, as if he were
an older man than he verily was. The Green Knight was for ever
praising Birdalone's beauty to her face, and seemed to find it no
easy matter to keep his eyes off her, and somewhat he wearied her
with kisses and caresses; but a gay and sportive lad he was; and when
she rebuked him for his overmuch fondness, as now and again she did,
he would laugh at himself along with her; and in sooth she deemed him
heart-whole, and of all truth to Viridis, and oft he would talk of
her to Birdalone, and praise her darling beauty to her, and tell of
his longing for his love aloof. Only, quoth he, here art thou, my
sister, dwelling amongst us, and shedding thy fragrance on us, and
showing to us, wilt thou, wilt thou not, as do the flowers, all the
grace and loveliness of thee; and thou so tender of heart withal,
that thou must not blame me overmuch if whiles I forget that thou art
my sister, and that my love is, woe's me! far away. So thou wilt
pardon me, wilt thou not? Yea, verily, said she, with a whole heart.
Yet thou needest not reach out for my hand; thou hast had enough of
it this morning. And she hid it, laughing, in the folds of her gown;
and he laughed also, and said: Of a truth thou art good in all wise,
and a young fool am I; but Viridis shall make me wiser, when we come
together again. Sawest thou ever so fair a damsel? Never, she said,
and surely there is none fairer in all the world. So hold thee aloof
now for a while, and think of her.

As for the Black Squire, hight Arthur, Birdalone was troubled for
him, and he made her somewhat sad. True it is that he came not
before her again so moody and downcast as when he was giving her the
token; yet she deemed that he enforced himself to seem of good cheer.
Furthermore, though he sought her company ever, and that lonely with
him, and would talk with her almost as one man with another, though
with a certain tenderness in his voice, and looking earnestly on her
the while, yet never would he take her hand, or touch her in any
wise. And true it is that she longed for the touch of his hand.

On the third day of her sojourn in the Castle of the Quest, Birdalone
took heart at the much egging of her friends, as they sat all
together in the meadow without the castle, to tell them all the story
of her; she hid none, save concerning the wood-mother, for she deemed
that her sweet friend would love her the better if she babbled not of
her.

So the Champions hearkened her telling the tale in her clear lovely
voice, and great was their love and pity for the poor lonely maiden.
And in especial clear it was to see that they were sore moved when
she told how she first came on the Sending Boat, and how the witch-
wife tormented her innocent body for that guilt. Then Baudoin laid
his hand upon her head, and spake: Poor child, much indeed hast thou
suffered! and now I will say it, that it was for us and our loves
that thou hast borne all this anguish of captivity and toil and
stripes.

But Hugh leaned over to her, as she sat with her head hanging down,
and kissed her cheek, and said: Yea! and I was not there to smite
the head off that accursed one; and I knew nought of thee and thine
anguish, as I took my light pleasure about these free meadows. And
he turned very red, and went nigh to weep.

Arthur sat still with his eyes bent down on the ground, and he said
nothing; and Birdalone glanced on him wistfully ere she went on with
her tale. And she went on and told closely all that had happened
unto her in the crossing of the water and on the Isle of Increase
Unsought, and the other Wonder Isles; and she deemed it not too much
that she should tell it twice over, nor they that twice over they
should hearken it.

That same evening as Birdalone walked by herself in the castle
pleasance, she saw Arthur peering about as if he were seeking
someone; so she stood forth, and asked him was he seeking aught; and
he said: Thee was I seeking. But she durst not ask him what he
would, but stood silent and trembling before him, till he took her
hand, and spake not loud but eagerly.

After what thou hast told us to-day, I seem to know thee what thou
art; and I tell thee that it is a pain and grief to me to leave thee,
yea to leave thee were it but for a minute. O I pray thee pity me
for the sundering. And therewith he turned about and hastened into
the castle. But Birdalone stood there with her heart beating fast
and her flesh quivering, and a strange sweetness of joy took hold of
her. But she said to herself that it was no wonder though she felt
so happy, seeing that she had found out that, despite her fears, this
one of her friends loved her no less well than the others. And then
she spake it in a soft voice that she would indeed pity him for the
sundering, yea, and herself also.

Nevertheless, when they met thereafter, his demeanour to her was none
otherwise than it had been; but she no longer heeded this since now
she trowed in him.



CHAPTER VIII. IN THE MEANWHILE OF THE DEPARTING OF THE CHAMPIONS,
THEY WOULD PLEASURE BIRDALONE WITH FEATS OF ARMS AND GAMES OF PROWESS



Passed the days now speedily, and the three Champions did what they
might for the solace of Birdalone. For they and their household
showed her of arms, and they tilted together courteously; and the
sergeants stood forth, and shot in the bow before her, till she
herself by their bidding took the bow in hand, and shot straighter
and well-nigh as hard as the best man there, whereat they marvelled,
and praised her much.

Then the young men ran afoot before her for the prize of a belt and
knife, and forsooth she wotted well that were she to run against them
with trussed-up skirts she would bear off the prize; but she had no
heart thereto, for amidst them all, and her new friendships, she had
grown shamefast, and might play the wood-maiden no longer. Yet twice
the Champions fared further afield with her to show her some
woodcraft; yet were not very free to go far, because of the ill
neighbours whereof the chaplain had told her that first night of her
coming.

And in all these pastimes, whatso they were, Birdalone bore herself
well and merrily, and put from her the sorrow of the sundering, and
the peril of her dear friends which grew now so near at hand.

The chaplain aforesaid, who hight Leonard, she fell in with not
seldom; and he was ever meek and humble before her; and ever withal
was sorrow easy to be seen in his countenance, and trouble withal;
and she knew not how to help him, save by being courteous and kind
with him whenso they met; but none the more might he pluck up
cheerful countenance in answer to her kindness.

With Sir Aymeris, the grizzle-haired castellan, she foregathered also
oft enough, and could not forbear some merry gibes with him
concerning their first meeting, and how that she had been a burden
and a terror to him; and these mocks she made him because she saw it
liked him not ill to be mocked in friendly fashion; though forsooth
betwixt the laughter he looked on her somewhat ruefully. And ever,
ere he parted from her, he made occasion to kiss her hands; and she
suffered it smiling, and was debonair to him; whereas she saw that he
was of good will to her. In such wise then wore the hours and the
days.



CHAPTER IX. BIRDALONE COMETH BEFORE THE CHAMPIONS IN HER NEW ARRAY



Now the time was come when Birdalone had all her gear ready, and the
women were to abide in the castle as her serving-damsels while the
Champions were away.

So now in the summer eve, an hour before sunset, Birdalone did on the
richest of her new raiment, and came into the hall where sat the
Three together, and Sir Aymeris with them. She was so clad, that she
had on a green gown with broidered sleeves, and thereover a white
cote-hardie welted with gold, and gold-embroidered; on her feet were
gold shoon of window-work, pearled and gemmed; and on her head a rose
garland; on her neck she bore the Golden Knight's collar; her loins
were girt with the Black Squire's girdle; and on her wrist was the
Green Knight's ancient gold ring; and she carried in her arms Aurea's
gown and Viridis' shift and Atra's shoon.

Rather sunrise than sunset it seemed, as verily Birdalone she came
into the hall with bright eager eyes, and flushed cheeks, and
countenance smiling with love. The men stood up all, and would come
down from the dais to meet her; but she bade them go back, and sit
each in his place till she stood before them.

Up the hall then she walked, and every step of hers seemed lovelier
than the last, till she came to them and gave unto each his keepsake,
and said: Champions, now is mine errand all done, save that to-
morrow I must show you the manner of the Sending Boat. Now there is
nought save the darkness of the coming night to hinder you from this
last deal of your Quest; and it is I that have brought you to this,
and have done this good unto you, if no more good I do in the world.
Wherefore I pray you to love me ever, and bear me ever in your minds.

They gazed on her, and were overcome by her loveliness and grace, and
by the kindness and valiancy of her heart. Next arose the Golden
Knight, Baudoin to wit, and took a cross from his breast, and held it
up, and spake: Maiden, thou sayest well, and never shall we forget
thee, or cease to love thee; and here I swear by God upon the Tree,
that it shall be a light thing for me to die for thee, if in any need
I find thee. Brethren, will ye not swear the same? And this is but
thy due, maiden, for I declare unto thee, that when thou didst enter
the hall e'en now, it was as if the very sun of heaven was coming in
unto us.

Thereon the other two took the Rood and swore upon it: and Hugh was
hushed and meek and sad-faced after he had sworn; but Arthur the
Black Squire bowed down his head and wept, and his fellows marvelled
nought thereat, neither did Birdalone; and all her body yearned
toward him to solace him.

Now turned Sir Baudoin to the castellan and said: Sir Aymeris, I
will now swear thee to guard this lady as the apple of thine eye
whiles we three be away, and therein to spare neither thyself nor
others. For thou seest well what grief it would be to us if she came
to any harm.

And to me also, said the castellan. And therewith he swore upon the
Rood, and then came round the table, and knelt before Birdalone, and
kissed her hands.

Thereafter were they all silent a space; and then came Birdalone to
the inner side of the table and sat betwixt Baudoin and Hugh. But
the Black Squire took up the word and spake: Birdalone, sweet child,
one thing is to be said, to wit, that it were well that thou keep
within walls while we be away; or at least that thou go but a little
beyond the castle, and never but within a half bowshot, save thou be
well accompanied. For there be men of violence dwelling no great way
off, reivers and rovers, who would be well pleased to take from us
anything which we deem dear; besides others who would think the
lifting of such a jewel good hap indeed. Sir Aymeris, have a care of
the Red Knight; and if thou mightest come by a few more stout lads,
to wage them, it were well.

Birdalone heeded not what the castellan answered, such a shaft of joy
went to her heart when she heard that friend speak her own name in
such wise as he had never done erst, and that before them all. She
but murmured some yeasay to that which Arthur had spoken unto her,
and then she held her peace for the sweetness of that moment.

So there they sat and talked a while in dear and pleasant converse;
and Hugh fell to asking her of her life in the House under the Wood,
and she answered all frankly and simply, and the more she told the
dearer she seemed to them.

Thus drew night in, till folk came flockmeal into the hall; for needs
must be feast and banquet for triumph of the furtherance of the
Quest; and the most of men were merry; but somewhat sober were all
the three Champions, so that whoso ran might read it in their faces.
As for Birdalone, she showed cheerful to all that folk which loved
her and praised her; but inwardly sorrow had come home to her heart.



CHAPTER X. THE CHAMPIONS GO THEIR WAYS IN THE SENDING BOAT



When the sun was arisen on the morrow the three Champions went down
to the landing-place, and there was none with them; for they had
given command that no man should pry into their doings. Thither to
them cometh Birdalone, clad no more in her gay attire, but in a
strait black coat and with unshod feet; and she looked no sorrier
than she was.

By Birdalone's rede the Champions bore down in their own hands the
victual and weapons and armour that they needed for the voyage; for
she knew not but that the Sending Boat might take it amiss that any
should touch her save the senders. And when they had done lading
her, then all four stood together by the water's edge, and Birdalone
spake to her friends, and again bade them beware of the wiles of the
Isle of Nothing; and again she told them of the woful images of the
Isle of Kings and the Isle of Queens, and the strange folk of the
Isle of the Young and the Old. Then she said: Now when ye come to
the Isle of Increase Unsought, what think ye to do? Said the Green
Knight: If I might rule, we should go straight up to the witch
sitting in her hall, as thou toldest us, my dear, and then and there
smite the head from off her. His eyes flashed and his brow knitted,
and so fierce he looked that Birdalone shrank back from him; but the
Black Squire smiled and said: It may come to the smiting off of
heads in the end; yet must we so fashion our carving, that it avail
us for the freeing of our friends; else may the witch die, and the
secret of the prison-house die with her. How sayest thou, dear
Birdalone?

She reddened at the caress of his voice, and answered: By my rede ye
shall seek and find your speech-friends ere ye make open war upon the
witch; else may her malice destroy them ere ye undo her. Her face
flushed yet more as she spake again: But concerning all things, I
deem that Atra may give you the best rede, when ye have met the
loves; for that she knoweth more of the isle and its guiles than the
others.

Quoth Baudoin: Herein is wisdom, sweet maiden, for as guileless as
thou mayst be; and so far as we may we shall follow thy rede; but all
lieth in the fathom of the coming time. And now this moment is the
moment of sundering and farewell.

Came he then to Birdalone and took his two hands about her head, and
lifted her face unto him, and kissed it kindly, as a father might
kiss a daughter, and said: Farewell, dear child, and take heed to
the word that Arthur spake yesterday, and go not from the castle even
a little way save with good and sure company.

Then came Hugh to her, and took her hand somewhat timidly; but she
put up her face to him in simple wise, and he kissed either cheek of
her, and said no more than: Farewell, Birdalone!

Lastly came Arthur, and stood before her a little; and then he knelt
down on the stones before her and kissed her feet many times, and she
shuddered and caught her breath as they felt his kisses; but neither
he nor she spake a word, and he stood up and turned away at once
toward the Sending Boat, and boarded her first of the three; and the
others followed straightway.

Thereafter the Champions bared each an arm, and let blood flow thence
into a bowl, and reddened stem and stern of their barge, and then all
three spake the spell together thus, as Birdalone had taught them:


The red raven-wine now
Hast thou drunk, stern and bow:
Wake then, and awake,
And the northern way take!
The way of the Wenders forth over the flood,
For the will of the Senders is blent with the blood.


Went all as before thereafter, that the Sending Boat stirred under
them, and then turned about and pointed her bows to the northward,
and sped swiftly over the waters. It was a fair sunny day, with no
cloud, nought save the summer haze lying on the lake far away.
Birdalone stood watching the speeding of the boat, till she could see
it no longer, not even as a fleck on the face of the waters. Then
she turned away and went toward her chamber, saying to herself that
the sundering was easier to bear than she had deemed it would be, and
that she had a many things to do that day. But when she came into
her chamber, and shut the door, she looked about her on the things
which had grown so familiar to her in these few latter days, and she
stood watching the bright sunshine that streamed across the floor and
lay warm upon her feet; then she took three steps toward the window,
and saw the lake lying all a-glitter under the sun, and her heart
failed her withal, and she had no might so much as to think about her
sorrow and caress it, but fell down where she was swooning on to the
floor, and lay there, while all the house began to stir about her.


Here ends the Third Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is
called Of the Castle of the Quest, and begins the fourth Part of the
said tale, which is called Of the Days of Abiding.




THE FOURTH PART: OF THE DAYS OF ABIDING




CHAPTER I. OF BIRDALONE'S GRIEF; AND OF LEONARD THE CHAPLAIN



Now came Birdalone to herself, and that was but little joy unto her,
and she yet lay still on the floor for a while, for she loathed the
hour that was to come. Then the life stirred in her, and whereas she
would not that her women should find her there, she stood up, and
clad herself somewhat more seemly; yet she did on her black raiment;
and determined in her mind that nought would she wear save black
unadorned while her friends were away.

She betook her now to the chamber where her women were gathered
together, and watched them working a while, but spake nought. Then
she went her ways into the pleasance, and paced the plashed alley up
and down, letting the tears run down from her as they would. Then
she turned back into the castle, and went out-a-gates and walked over
the meadow a little, and might well have gone further than wisdom
would. But the castellan espied her from a window, and came hurrying
out after her, and with many prayers for pardon, brought her back
again, babbling to her by the way; but not a word might he get from
her; and when he came into the hall with her, and, after his wont,
knelt down to kiss her hands, she caught them away from him
peevishly, and was sorry for it thereafter.

Long she sat in the hall, scarce moving, till she heard one entering
from the screen, and lo it was Leonard the chaplain. He came her
way, and showed her rueful countenance; and pity of him smote her,
and she remembered therewith how they first went out of gates
together; and at the thought thereof her tears brake forth again, but
she made him a sign with her hand to sit down beside her, and he did
so; and when she might for her weeping, she looked kindly on him, and
he fell to talk, making as if he noted not her tears and sorrow; but
she answered him little, for she had shame to begin the talk
concerning the Champions and their Quest, and their departure; yet
might she not bring her tongue to make any speech else. But
presently he took up the word, and asked her how long a while she
deemed they would be away, and she answered, smiling on him for
thanks, and having reckoned the days on her fingers: If all go
better than well, they may be back in ten days' time. Said the
chaplain: There be longer whiles of waiting in most men's lives.
Yea, she said, but this is the delay at the best; it may be far
longer; for how may we tell what haps may be?

Yea, said Leonard, shall we then call it twenty days, or thirty?
Forsooth, that may be long for thee; though there be some who must
needs endure hope deferred a deal longer. But it may run out longer
than even thirty days, thy waiting-tide.

She answered not, and he said: Whenso the time hangs heavy on hand
with thee, if thou hast will to fare abroad out of the castle, I
shall be ever at hand to guide thee. Indeed, I wot that the
castellan will be loth to let thee go; but he is old and straitlaced:
and yet withal he wotteth, as do we all, that there is now little
peril or none were we to fare a five miles or more, whereas we are as
good as at peace for the last five days with all save the Red Knight,
and of him we wot that he is gone into another land with as many of
his folk as be not needed for the warding of his hold.

I thank thee, said Birdalone, but it is like to be my will not to
fare out-a-gates till the Champions come back home. I was glad e'en
now when the castellan fetched me in again: to say sooth, fear of
peril had just entered my heart when he came up with me.

The priest seemed somewhat chapfallen at her answer. He spake little
more, and presently he stood up, made his obeisance, and departed.



CHAPTER II. BIRDALONE LEARNETH LORE OF THE PRIEST. TEN DAYS OF
WAITING WEAR



Wore that day and the next, and Birdalone fell to talking with her
women, whereof were five now left; and four of them were young, the
eldest scarce of thirty summers, and the fifth was a woman of sixty,
both wise and kind. All these told her somewhat of their own lives
when she asked them; and some withal told of folk whom they had known
or heard tell of. And well pleased was Birdalone to hear thereof,
and learn more of the ways of the world, and quick-witted she was at
the lesson, so that she needed not to ask many questions.

Furthermore, she took to her broidering again, and fell to doing a
goodly pair of shoon for Atra, since she had worn those borrowed ones
somewhat hardly. And the women wondered at her needlework, so
marvellous fine as it was, and how that in little space of time were
come flowers and trees, and birds and beasts, all lovely; and they
said that the faery must have learned her that craft. But she
laughed and reddened, and thought of the wood-mother; and, sitting
there within the four walls, she longed for the oak-glades, and the
wood-lawns, and for the sight of the beasts that dwelt therein.

Again she fell in with Leonard the priest, and he asked her could she
read in a book, and when she said nay, he offered to teach her that
lore, and she yeasaid that joyously; and thenceforth would she have
him with her every day a good while; and an apt scholar she was, and
he no ill master, and she learned her A B C speedily.

Now it was the ninth day since the Champions were gone, and all that
time she had not been out-a-gates; and after the first two days, had
enforced herself to fill up her time with her work as aforesaid: but
this last day she might do but little, for she could not but take it
for sure that the morrow would be the day of return; nay, even she
deemed that they might come in the night-tide; so that when she went
to bed, though she was weary, she would wake if she might, so that it
was nigh dawn ere she fell asleep.

Some three hours after she woke up, and heard a sound of folk
stirring in the house, and the clashing of weapons; and the heart
leapt in her, and she said: They are come, they are come!
Nevertheless she durst not get out of bed, lest her hope had beguiled
her; and she lay awake another hour, and no tidings came to her; and
then she wept herself to sleep; and when she awoke once more, she
found that she must have wept sleeping, for the pillow beside her
face was all wet with the tears.

The sun was high now, and his beams were cast back from the ripple of
the lake, and shone wavering on the wall of the chamber, the window
whereof gave on to the water. Then came a hand on the latch of the
door, and she started, and her heart grieved her; but it was one of
the women who opened, and came in, and Birdalone rose up sitting in
her bed, and said faintly, for she could scarce speak: Is any tiding
toward, Catherine? The maid said: Yes, my lady; for early after
sunrise came weaponed men to the gate, and would sell us beeves; and
my lord, Sir Aymeris, must needs go forth and chaffer with them,
though belike they had been lifting what was neither ours, nor
theirs, nor the neighbours'. Maybe Sir Aymeris looked to buy tidings
from them as well as beef. Anyhow they departed when they had gotten
their money and drunk a cup. And now it is said that the Red Knight
hath been hurt in some fray, and keepeth his bed; wherefore the land
shall have peace of him awhile. Said Birdalone: I thank thee, good
Catherine; I shall lie a little longer; depart now.

The woman went her ways; and when she was gone, Birdalone wept and
sobbed, and writhed upon her bed, and found no solace to her grief.
But she arose and paced the chamber, and sithence looked out of the
window over the empty water, and wept again. Then she said: Yet
they may come ere noon, or it may be ere evening, or perchance to-
morrow morning. And she stayed her weeping, and was calmer. But
still she walked the floor, and whiles looked out of window, and
whiles she looked on her limbs, and felt the sleekness of her sides,
and she said: O my body! how thou longest!

But at last she clad herself in haste, and went stealthily from the
chamber, as if she feared to meet anyone; and she stole up to the
tower-top that was nighest, and looked through the door on to the
leads, and saw no one there; so she went out, and stood by the
battlement, and gazed long over the water, but saw neither boat nor
burning mountain coming towards her.



CHAPTER III. NOW WOULD BIRDALONE RIDE ABROAD



After a while she came down again, and went to the women, and sat
working with them a while, and so wore away two hours. Then she sent
for the priest and had her lesson of him; and when she had been at it
another two hours, she bade him begin and learn her writing; and
nought loth he was thereto; forsooth he had been longing to pray her
to suffer him learn her, but durst not. For in such teaching needs
must he sit full nigh to her, and watch her hands, and her fingers
striving to shape the letters; nay, whiles must he touch her hand
with his, and hold it. Wherefore now he promised himself a taste of
Paradise. Withal he was full meet to learn her, whereas he was one
of the best of scribes, and a fair-writer full handy.

So they fell to the lesson, and she became eager thereover, and
learned fast, and clave to the work, while his soul was tormented
with longing for her. And thus wore a three hours, and then suddenly
she looked up wearily from her work, and her trouble was awake, and
the longing for her speech-friend, and she gave the priest leave for
that day, but suffered him to kiss her hand for wages.

Then she hurried up to the tower-top, when the afternoon was wearing
into evening; and abode there a long while looking over the waters,
till it began to dusk, and then came down miserably and went to her
women.

The next day was like unto this; nought betid, and she wore the hours
whiles going up to the tower-top and looking over the lake, whiles
broidering amidst her maids, whiles learning her clerk's work with
Sir Leonard, but ever eating her heart out with her longing.

On the third of these days she called the castellan to her for a
talk, and asked him what he thought of it, this delay of his lords'
return. Quoth the greyhead: My lady, we may not wonder if they be
tarried for a few days; for this is an adventure on which they have
gone, and many haps betide in such tales. Now I beseech thee torment
not thyself; for the time is not yet come for thee even to doubt that
they have miscarried.

His words solaced her much for that time, whereas she saw that he
spake but the sooth; so she thanked him, and smiled upon him kindly;
and he was ravished thereat, and was for kneeling before her at once
and kissing her hands after his wont; but she smiled again and
refrained him, and said: Nay, not yet, fair friend; that is for the
departure, and I have yet a word to say unto thee: to wit, that I
long to go out-a-gates, and it will solace me and give me patience to
abide the coming of my friends. For thou must know, Sir Aymeris,
that I was reared amidst the woods and the meadows, with the burning
of the sun, and the buffets of the wind; and now for lack of some
deal of that am I waxing white and faint. And thou wouldst not have
me falling sick on thine hands now, wouldst thou?

Nay, surely, lady, said Sir Aymeris; this very day I will ride out
with thee; and two score or more of weaponed men shall ride with us
for fear of mishaps. Said Birdalone, knitting her brows: Nay,
knight, I need not thy men-at-arms; I would fain go free and alone.
For hast thou not heard how that the Red Knight is hurt and keepeth
his bed? So what peril is there? Said Sir Aymeris: Yea, lady; but
the Red Knight is not the only foe, though he be the worst: but it
may well be that the story is but feigned, for the said enemy hath
many wiles. And look you, kind lady, it is most like that by now he
hath heard how in my poor castle is kept a jewel, a pearl of great
price, that hath not its like in the world, and will encompass the
stealing of it if he may.

Laughed Birdalone, and said: But how if the said jewel hath a will,
and legs and feet thereto, and is ready to take the peril on her, and
will wend out-a-gates if she will? What wilt thou do then, lord?
Then, said the castellan, I shall fetch thee back, and, though it be
a grief to me, shall have thee borne back perforce if nought else may
do. For so the oath sworn to my lords compelleth me.

Again laughed Birdalone, and said: Hearken, whereto cometh all this
kneeling and hand-kissing! But bear in mind, fair lord, how once on
a time thou wouldst have me out-a-gates, would I, would I not, and
now, will I, will I not, thou wouldst keep me within; so have times
changed, and mayhappen they may change yet again. But tell me, am I
mistress over my women to bid them what I will? Certes, said he, and
over all of us. Said she: If then I bade them, some two or three,
come with me into the meadows and woods a half day's journey for our
disport, how then? For that once, said Sir Aymeris, I should bid
them disobey their lady. Said Birdalone: And how if they disobeyed
thee, and obeyed me? Quoth Sir Aymeris: If they bring thee back
safe, they may chance to sing to the twiggen fiddle-bow, that they
may be warned from such folly; but if they come back without thee, by
All-hallows the wind of wrath shall sweep their heads off them!

Birdalone flushed red at his word, and was silent a while; then she
said, making cheerful countenance again: Thou art a hard master,
lord castellan; but I must needs obey thee. Therefore I will take
thy bidding, and ride abroad in such wise that I shall scare the land
with an army, since no otherwise may I look on the summer land. But
to-day I will not go, nor to-morrow belike; but some day soon. And
in good sooth I thank thee for thy heedful care of me, and wish I
were better worth it. Nay, nay, thou shalt not kneel to me, but I to
thee: for thou art verily the master.

Therewith she rose from beside him, and knelt down before him and
took his hand and kissed it, and went her ways, leaving him ravished
with love of her. But now she had no scorn of him, but deemed, as
was true, that he was both valiant and trusty and kind, and she
thanked him in her heart as well as in words.



CHAPTER IV. OF BIRDALONE'S FARING ABROAD



Indeed Birdalone longed on any terms to be out-a-gates and to have
some joy of the summer; for now she began to see that she might have
to abide some while ere her friends should come to her in the Castle
of the Quest; and she was angry with herself that her longing was
thus wasting her, and she rebuked herself and said: Where is now
that Birdalone who let but few days go by without some joyance of the
earth and its creatures? she who bore lightly the toil of a thrall,
and gibes and mocking and stripes? Surely this is grievous folly,
that I should be worsened since I have come to be the friend of
gentle ladies, and noble champions, and mighty warriors. Had it not
been better to have abided under the witch-wife's hand? For not
every day nor most days did she torment me. But now for many days
there has been pain and grief and heart-sickness hour by hour; and
every hour have I dreaded the coming of the next hour, till I know
not how to bear it.

So she strove with herself, and became of better heart, and set
herself strongly to the learning of the clerkly lore; she gathered
her wits together, and no longer looked for every day and every hour
to bring about the return of the Champions, nor blamed the day and
the hour because they failed therein, and in all wise she strove to
get through the day unworn by vain longing.

Wherefore, on a day when three whole weeks were gone since the day of
departure, she was glad when the castellan came to her and said:
Lady, these two days I have had men out to spy the land, and their
word goes that nought is stirring which a score of us well-armed
might have cause to fear; wherefore to-morrow, if it be thy will, we
shall bring thee out-a-gates, and so please thee, shall be in no
haste to come back, but may lie out in the wildwood one night, and
come back at our leisure on the morrow of to-morrow. How sayest thou
of thy pleasure herein?

She thanked him, and yeasaid it eagerly, and next morning they set
forth; and Birdalone had with her three of the women, and they had
sumpter-beasts with them, and tents for Birdalone and her maids.

So they rode by pleasant ways and fair meadows, and the weather was
good, for it was now the first days of July, and all was as lovely as
might be; and for that while Birdalone cast off all her cares, and
was merry, and of many words and sweet; and all the folk rejoiced
thereat, for all loved her in the Castle of the Quest, besides those
one or two that loved her overmuch.

Rode they thus a twelve miles or more, and then they came, as their
purpose was, to the beginning of a woodland plenteous of venison, and
they hunted here, and Birdalone took her part therein, and all
praised her woodcraft; albeit because of her went a head or two free
that had fallen else, whereas of the carle hunters were some who
deemed the body of her better worth looking on than the quarry.

Howsoever, they slew of hind and roe and other wood-cattle what they
would, some deal for their supper in the wilderness, some to bear
home to the castle. But when night was nigh at hand they made stay
in a fair wood-lawn about which ran a clear stream, whereby they
pitched the ladies' tent; and Birdalone and hers went down into the
water and washed the weariness off them; and her ladies wondered at
the deftness of Birdalone's swimming; for they bathed in a pool
somewhat great into which the stream widened, so that there was space
enough for her therein.

By then they were washen and clad goodly in raiment which they had
brought on the sumpters, the men had lighted fires and were cooking
the venison, and anon there was supper and banquet in the wildwood,
with drinking of wine and pleasant talk and the telling of tales and
singing of minstrelsy; and so at last, when night was well worn, and
out in the open meadows the eastern sky was waxing grey, then
Birdalone and her ladies went to bed in their fair tents, and the
men-at-arms lay down on the greensward under the bare heaven.



CHAPTER V. SIR AYMERIS SHOWETH BIRDALONE THE MOUNTAINS AFAR OFF



When it was morning and they arose, the day was as fair as yesterday,
and folk were even as joyous as they had been then, all but
Birdalone, and she was silent and downcast, even when she came forth
from the fresh water into the sweetness of the midsummer wood. She
had dreamed in the night that she was all alone in the Castle of the
Quest, and that her old mistress came to her from out of the Sending
Boat to fetch her away, and brought her aboard, and stripped her of
her rich garments and sat facing her, drawing ugsome grimaces at her;
and she thought she knew that her friends were all dead and gone, and
she had none to pity or defend her. Then somehow were they two, the
witch and she, amidmost of the Isle of Nothing, and the witch drew
close anigh her, and was just going to whisper into her ear something
of measureless horror, when she awoke; and the sun was bright outside
the shaded whiteness of her tent; the shadows of the leaves were
dancing on the ground of it; the morning wind was rustling the tree-
boughs, and the ripple of the stream was tinkling hard by. At first
was Birdalone joyous that what she had awakened from was but a dream;
but presently she felt the burden of her longing, and she said to
herself that when they came back to the castle they should find
tidings, and that she should know either that her friends were indeed
dead, or that they were come back again alive and well. And then she
thought within herself, suppose the three Champions and their loves
were dead and gone, how would she do with those that were left her,
as Sir Aymeris, and Leonard the priest, and her women? and her soul
turned with loathing from a life so empty as that would be; and yet
she blamed herself that she was so little friendly to these lesser
friends, whom forsooth she loved because of her love for the greater
ones. So, as abovesaid, she was troubled and silent amongst the joy
of the others.

That saw Sir Aymeris the castellan; and when they had broken fast and
were getting to horse, he came to her and said: Lady, the day is yet
young, and if we fetch a compass by a way that I wot of we shall see
places new to thee, and mayhappen somewhat wonderful, and yet come
home timely to the castle. Wilt thou?

Birdalone was still somewhat distraught, but she knew not how to
naysay him, though at heart she would liefer have gone back to the
castle by the shortest way. So folk brought her her palfrey, and
they rode their ways, the castellan ever by her side. And by fair
ways indeed they went, and so joyous was all about them, that little
by little Birdalone's gladness came back to her, and she made the
most of it to be as merry of seeming as she might be.

Now they rode fair and softly by thicket and copse and glade of the
woodland, following up the stream aforesaid for the more part, till
at last the trees failed them suddenly, and they came forth on to a
wide green plain, all unbuilded, so far as their eyes could see, and
beyond it the ridges of the hills and blue mountains rising high
beyond them.

When Birdalone's eyes beheld this new thing, of a sudden all care
left her, and she dropped her rein, and smote her palms together, and
cried out: Oh! but thou art beautiful, O earth, thou art beautiful!
Then she sat gazing on it, while the greyhead turned and smiled on
her, well pleased of her pleasure.

After a while she said: And might we go nigher? Yea, certes, said
he, yet I doubt if thou wilt like it the better, the nigher thou art.
Ah! she said, but if I were only amidst it, and a part of it, as once
I was of the woodland!

So thitherward they rode over the unharvested mead, and saw hart and
hind thereon, and wild kine, and of smaller deer great plenty, but of
tame beasts none; and the hills were before them like a wall. But as
they drew nigher, they saw where the said wall of the hills was
cloven by a valley narrow and steep-sided, that went right athwart
the lie of the hills; the said valley was but little grassed, and the
bare rocks were crow-black. When they had gone a little further,
they could see that the ground near the foot of the hills rose in
little knolls and ridges, but these were lower and fewer about the
entry into that valley. Also presently they came upon a stream which
ran out of the said valley, and Sir Aymeris said that this was the
water whereby they had lain last night; albeit here it was little
indeed.

Now when they had ridden some five miles over the plain, they came
amongst those knolls at the mouth of the valley, and Sir Aymeris led
Birdalone up to the top of one of the highest of them, and thence
they could look into that dale and see how it winded away up toward
the mountains, like to a dismal street; for not only was it but
little grassed, but withal there was neither tree nor bush therein.
Moreover, scattered all about the bottom of the dale were great
stones, which looked as if they had once been set in some kind of
order; and that the more whereas they were not black like the rocks
of the dale-side, but pale grey of hue, so that they looked even as
huge sheep of the giants feeding down the dale.

Then spake Birdalone: Verily, sir knight, thou saidst but sooth that
I should see things new and strange. But shall we go a little way
into this valley to-day? Nay, lady, said Sir Aymeris, nor to-morrow,
nor any day uncompelled; neither shall we go nigher unto it than now
we be. Wherefore not? said Birdalone, for meseemeth it is as the
gate of the mountains; and fain were I in the mountains.

Lady, said the castellan, overmuch perilous it were to ride the
valley, which, as thou sayest, is the very gate of the mountains.
For the said dale, which hight the Black Valley of the Greywethers,
hath a bad name for the haunting of unmanlike wights, against which
even our men-at-arms might make no defence. And if any might escape
them, and win through the gates and up into the mountains, I wot not
if suchlike devils and things unkent be there in the mountain-land,
but of a sooth there be fierce and wild men, like enough to devils,
who know no peace, and slay whatsoever cometh unto them, but if they
themselves be slain of them.

Well, said Birdalone, then to-day, at least, we go not into the dale;
but knowest thou any tales of these wild places? Many have I heard,
said he, but I am an ill minstrel and should spoil them in the
telling. Ask them of Sir Leonard our priest, he knoweth of them
better than others, and hath a tongue duly shapen for telling them.

Birdalone answered nought thereto; she but turned her horse's head
and rode down the knoll; and so they came unto their company, and all
went their ways toward the Castle of the Quest.

Nought befell them on their way home; but the nigher they came to the
castle the more pensive waxed Birdalone, and, though she hid it, when
they were come to the gate she scarce had her wit; for it was as if
she thought to have one rushing out and crying: Tidings, tidings!
they are come.

Nowise it so befell; they were no more come than was the Day of Doom.
And a little after they were within gates; it was night, and
Birdalone crept wearily up to her chamber, and gat to bed, and so
tired was she that she fell asleep at once and dreamed not.



CHAPTER VI. BIRDALONE HEARETH TELL TALES OF THE BLACK VALLEY OF THE
GREYWETHERS



On the morrow was Birdalone heavier of heart than ever yet, and
wearier for tidings; and she wondered how she could have been so
joyous that day in the wildwood. Yet she thought much of the Valley
of the Greywethers, and that solaced her somewhat after a while, so
sore she longed to go thither; and, as 'tis said, one nail knocks out
the other. So that morning, when she had had her lesson of priest
Leonard, she spake thereof to him, and told him what Sir Aymeris had
said concerning his knowledge thereof; and she asked him what he
knew.

I have been there, said he. She started at that word and said: Did
aught of evil befall thee?

Nay, said he, but a great fear and dread hung about me; and 'tis said
that they try their luck overmuch who go thither twice.

Birdalone said: Tell me now of the tales that be told of that
valley. Quoth Leonard: They be many; but the main of them is this:
that those Greywethers be giants of yore agone, or landwights,
carles, and queans, who have been turned into stone by I wot not what
deed; but that whiles they come alive again, and can walk and talk as
erst they did; and that if any man may be so bold as to abide the
time of their awakening, and in the first moment of their change may
frame words that crave the fulfilment of his desire, and if therewith
he be both wise and constant, then shall he have his desire fulfilled
of these wights, and bear his life back again from out the dale. And
thus must he speak and no otherwise: O Earth, thou and thy first
children, I crave of you such and such a thing, whatsoever it may be.
And if he speak more than this, then is he undone. He shall answer
no question of them; and if they threaten him he shall not pray them
mercy, nor quail before their uplifted weapons; nor, to be short,
shall he heed them more than if they still were stones unchanged.
Moreover, when he hath said his say, then shall these wights throng
about him and offer him gold and gems, and all the wealth of the
earth; and if that be not enough, they shall bring him the goodliest
of women, with nought lacking in her shape, but lacking all raiment,
so that he shall see her as she is verily shapen. But whoso shall
take any one of all these gifts is lost for ever, and shall become
one of that Stony People; and whoso naysayeth them all until the cock
crow, and abideth steady by his one craving, shall win fulfilment
thereof, and, as some say, all those gifts aforesaid; for that the
Stony People may not abide the day to take them back again.

He was silent therewith, and nought spake Birdalone, but looked down
on the ground, and longing encompassed her soul. Then the priest
spake again: This were a fair adventure, lady, for a hapless one,
but for the happy it were a fool's errand. She answered not, and
they parted for that time.

But the next week, there being yet no tidings come to hand, Birdalone
prayed the castellan to take her out-a-gates again, that she might
once more behold the mountains, and the gates thereof; and he yeasaid
her asking, and went with her, well accompanied, as before; but this
time, by Birdalone's will, they rode straight to the plain aforesaid,
and again she looked into that dale of the Greywethers from the
knoll. Somewhat belated they were, so that they might not get back
to the castle before dusk, wherefore again they lay out in the
wildwood, but there lacked somewhat of the triumph and joyance which
they had had that other day. They came back to the castle on the
morrow somewhat after noon, and found no news there; nor, to say
sooth, did Birdalone look for any; and her heart was heavy.



CHAPTER VII. BIRDALONE BEGUILETH THE PRIEST TO HELP HER TO OUTGOING



Now had the time so worn that the season was in the first days of
August, and weariness and heartsickness increased on Birdalone again,
and she began to look pined and pale. Yet when she spake of the
tarrying of the Champions both to the castellan and Sir Leonard the
priest  who was the wiser man of the two , each said the same thing,
to wit, that it was no marvel if they were not yet come, seeing
whatlike the adventure was; and neither of those two seemed in
anywise to have lost hope.

Thrice in these last days did Birdalone go out-a-gates with Sir
Aymeris and his company; and the last of the three times the journey
was to the knoll that looked into the Black Valley; but now was
Birdalone's pleasure of the sight of it afar off marred by her
longing to be amidst thereof; yet she did not show that she was irked
by the refraining of her desire to enter therein, and they turned,
and came home safely to the castle.

On the morrow she sat with Sir Leonard the priest over the writing
lesson, and she let it be long, and oft he touched her hand, so that
the sweetness of unfulfilled desire went deep to his heart.

At last Birdalone looked up and said: Friend, I would ask thee if
thou seest any peril in my entering the Black Valley of the
Greywethers by daylight if I leave it by daylight? Alone? quoth he.
Yea, she said, alone. He pondered a little, and then said: Sooth to
say I deem the peril little in the valley itself, if thou be not
overcome by terror there. Yea, for my part I am not all so sure that
thou shalt see the wonder of the Stony Folk coming alive; for 'tis
not said that they quicken save on certain nights, and chiefly on
Midsummer Night; unless it be that the trier of the adventure is some
one fated above others thereto; as forsooth thou mayst be. And as
for peril of evil men, there are few who be like to be as venturesome
as thou or I. They durst not enter that black street, save sore need
compel them. But forsooth, going thither, and coming back again,
some peril there may be therein. And yet for weeks past there has
been no word of any unpeace; and the Red Knight it is said for
certain is not riding.

Birdalone was silent a while; then she said: Fair and kind friend, I
am eating my heart out in longing for the coming back of my friends,
and it is like, that unless I take to some remedy, I shall fall sick
thereby, and then when they come back there shall be in me but sorry
cheer for them. Now the remedy I know, and it is that I betake me
alone to this adventure of the Black Valley; for meseemeth that I
shall gain health and strength by my going thither. Wherefore, to be
short, if thou wilt help me, I will go to-morrow. What sayest thou,
wilt thou help me?

He turned very red and spake: Lady, why shouldest thou go, as thy
name is, birdalone? Thou hast called me just now thy kind friend, so
kind as it was of thee; now therefore why should not thy friend go
with thee?

Kindly indeed she smiled on him, but shook her head: I call thee
trusty and dear friend again, said she; but what I would do I must do
myself. Moreover to what end shouldst thou go? If I fall in with
ghosts, a score of men would help me nought; and if I happen on
weaponed men who would do me scathe, of what avail were one man
against them? And look thou, Sir Leonard, there is this avail in
thine abiding behind; if I come not back in two days' space, or three
at the most, thou wilt wot that I have fared amiss, and then mayst
thou let it be known whither I went, and men will seek me and deliver
me maybe.

Therewith she stayed her words suddenly, and turned very pale, and
laid her hand on her bosom, and said faintly: But O my heart, my
heart! If they should come while I am away! And she seemed like to
swoon.

Leonard was afraid thereat, and knew not what to do; but presently
the colour came into her face again, and in a little while she
smiled, and said: Seest thou not, friend, how weak I am gotten to
be, and that I must now beyond doubt have the remedy? Wilt thou not
help me do it?

Yea verily, said he; but in what wise wilt thou have it? He spake as
a man distraught and redeless; but she smiled on him pleasantly, and
said: Now by this time shouldst thou have devised what was to do,
and spared me the pain thereof. Two things I need of thee: the
first and most, to be put out of the castle privily betimes in the
morning when nought is stirring; the second, to have my palfrey
awaiting me somewhat anigh the gate, so that I may not have to go
afoot: for I am become soft and feeble with all this house-life.

Leonard seemed to wake up with that word, and said: I have the key
of the priest's door of the chapel, and the postern beyond it; that
shall be thine out-gate, lady. I will come and scratch at thy
chamber-door much betimes, and I will see to it that thy palfrey is
bestowed in the bower wherein thou didst rest the first night thou
camest amongst us. She said: I trust thee, friend. And she thanked
him sweetly, and then rose up and fell to pacing the hall up and
down. Leonard hung about watching her a while, she nought forbidding
him, for her thoughts were elsewhere, and she had forgotten him; and
at last he went his ways to set about doing what she would.



CHAPTER VIII. BIRDALONE FARES ON HER ADVENTURE



Dawn was but just beginning when Birdalone awoke, and though she had
not heard Leonard at the door, she sprang out of bed and clad
herself, doing on her black gown; and she had a scrip with some bread
therein, and a sharp knife at her girdle. Then even as she had done
she heard the priest's nail on the door, and she turned thereto; but
as she went, her eye caught her bow and quiver of arrows where they
hung on the wall, so she took the bow in her hand and slung the
quiver over her shoulder ere she opened the door and found Leonard
standing there. Neither of them spake aught, but they stole
downstairs, and so to the chapel and out by the priest's door and the
postern in the wall-nook, and were presently out in the fresh morning
air; and Birdalone was joyous and lightfoot, and scarce felt the
earth beneath her soles for pleasure of her hope, whereas she deemed
she had a thing to crave of the Stony Folk, if they should come alive
before her. Fain were she, if she might withal, to give a joy to
some other; so that when they were gone but a little way from the
castle she reached out her hand to Leonard and took his, and said:
Hand in hand we walked when first I went this way, and I deemed thee
kind and friendly then, and even so hast thou been sithence.

He was dumbfoundered at first for joy of the touch of her hand and
the sweetness of her words; but presently he spake to her confused
and stammering, and praised her that she had thought to take her bow
and arrows; for, said he, that they might stand her in stead for
defence or for getting of food, or for an excuse for wending the
woods. She nodded yeasay unto him, and bade him again to bide three
days for her, and if she came not again in that time, to make a clean
breast of it to Sir Aymeris.

Yea, said the priest, and then . . . Why, what then? He can but
shove me out by the shoulders, and then I can seek to the little
house of canons that is at Gate Cross on the road to Greenford.

Ah, my friend! said Birdalone, how we women think of nothing at all
but ourselves! And wilt thou be thrust out of thine home for helping
me herein? Why did I not look to my palfrey myself? And the keys I
might have stolen from thee, always with thy good will. But now I
see that I have done thee a hurt.

Said Sir Leonard: Lady, a priest hath a home wheresoever is an house
of religion. There is no harm done, save Sir Aymeris bethink him of
hanging me over the battlements; as I doubt he will not with a
priest. Moreover, I pray thee believe, that wert thou gone from the
castle, house and home were none for me there. And he looked upon
her piteously, as if he were beseeching.

But she knew not what to say, and hung her head adown; and presently
they were come to the bower in the copse, which this time was a
stable for Birdalone's palfrey instead of a chamber for herself. So
Leonard went in and fetched out the comely beast; and Birdalone stood
with him just in the cover of the copse waiting to put her foot in
the stirrup; but she might not but abide to look upon the priest, who
stood there as if he were striving with his words.

So she said: Now is need of haste to be gone. Yet one word, my
friend: Is there aught betwixt us wherein I have done thee wrong?
If so it be, I pray thee to say out what it is; for it may be  though
I think it not  thou shalt not see me again from henceforth.

He caught his breath, as if he had much ado to refrain the sobbing;
but he mastered it, and said: Lady and dear friend, if I see thee
not again, I heed not what shall befall me. Thou hast done me no
wrong. There is this only betwixt us, that I love thee, and thou
lovest not me.

She looked on him sweetly and pitifully, and said: I may not choose
but understand thy word, to wit, that thy love for me is the desire
of a man toward a woman; and that is unhappy; for I love thee indeed,
but not as a woman loveth a man. It is best to say thus much to thee
downright. But I feel in my heart that when I have said it, it is as
much as to say that I cannot help thee, and therefore am I sorry
indeed.

He stood before her abashed, but he said at last: Now art thou so
sweet, and so kind, and so true, that I must perforce love thee yet
more; and this maketh me bold to say that thou mayst help me a
little, or so meseemeth. How so? said Birdalone. Quoth he: If thou
wouldst suffer me to kiss thy face this once. She shook her head,
and spake: How may it avail thee, when it is for once, and once
only, as forsooth it must be? Yet it is thy choice, not mine, and I
will not naysay thee.

And therewith she put up her face to him, and he kissed her cheek
without touching her otherwise, and then he kissed her mouth; and she
knew that he was both timorous and sad, and she was ashamed to look
on him, or to speak to him any more, lest she should behold him
ashamed; so she but said: Farewell, friend, till to-morrow at least.

And therewith her foot was in the stirrup, and anon she sat in the
saddle, and her palfrey was ambling briskly on the way she would.



CHAPTER IX. BIRDALONE COMES TO THE BLACK VALLEY



Little is to tell of Birdalone's journey unto the knoll above the
Black Valley of the Greywethers. It was about noon when she came
there, and had met but few folk on the way, and those few were
husbandmen, or carlines, or maidens wending afield betimes not far
from the Castle of the Quest.

Now she sat on her horse and looked down into the dale and its stony
people once more, and saw nought stirring save three ravens who, not
far off, were flapping about from stone to stone of the Greywethers,
and croaking loud to each other as if some tidings were toward. She
watched their play for a little, and then gat off her horse, and sat
down on the grass of the knoll, and drew forth her victual, and ate
and drank; for she deemed it happier to eat and drink there than in
the very jaws of the Black Valley.

Soon was her dinner done, and then she got to her saddle again, and
rode slowly down to the little stream, and along it toward the valley
and the gates of the mountains, which she had been fain to pass
through; but now, as had happed with her that morning when she was
boun for the Sending Boat, somewhat she hung back from the adventure,
and when she lacked but some five score yards from the very dale
itself, she lighted down again, and let her way-beast bite the grass,
while she sat down and watched the rippling water.

In a while she drew off shoon and hosen, and stood in the shallow
ripple, and bathed her hands and face withal, and stooped up-stream
and drank from the hollow of her hands, and so stepped ashore and was
waxen hardier; then she strung her bow and looked to the shafts in
her quiver, and did on her foot-gear, and mounted once more, and so
rode a brisk amble right on into the dale, and was soon come amongst
the Greywethers; and she saw that they were a many, and that all the
bottom of the dale was besprinkled with them on either side of the
stream, and some stood in the very stream itself, the ground whereof
was black even as the rest of the valley, although the water ran over
it as clear as glass.

As for the dale, now she was fairly within it, she could see but a
little way up it, for it winded much, and at first away from her left
hand, and the sides of it went up in somewhat steep screes on either
side, which were topped with mere upright staves and burgs of black
rock; and these were specially big and outthrusting on the right hand
of her; and but a furlong ahead of where she was, one of these burgs
thrust out past the scree and came down sheer into the dale, and
straitened it so much that there was but little way save by the
stream itself, which ran swift indeed, but not deep, even there where
it was straitened by the sheer rocks.

But up the dale would she go, whatever was before her; and now she
told herself her very purpose, as forsooth she scarce had heretofore;
to wit, that she would abide in the dale the night over and see what
should betide, and if those wights should chance to come alive, then
she looked to have valiance enough to face them and crave the
fulfilment of her desire.

So she took the water and rode the stream till she was past the said
sheer rock, and then the valley widened again, and presently was
wider than it was in the beginning; and here again were the
Greywethers grown many more and closer together, and, as she deemed,
were set in rings round about one very big one, which, forsooth, was
somewhat in the shape of a man sitting down with his hands laid on
his knees.

Birdalone reined up for a minute, and looked about her, and then went
up on to the grass, and rode straight to the said big stone, and
there lighted down from off her horse again, and stood by the stone
and pondered. Presently she deemed that she saw something dark
moving just beyond the stone, but if it were so, it was gone in a
twinkling; nevertheless she stood affrighted, and stared before her
long, and saw no more, but yet for a while durst not move hand nor
foot.

At last her courage came again, and she thought: Yet how if this
great chieftain be inwardly stirring and will come awake? Shall I
say the word now, lest hereafter it be of no avail? Therewith she
stretched out her right hand and laid it on the stone, and spake
aloud: O Earth, thou and thy first children, I crave of you that he
may come back now at once and loving me. And her voice sounded
strange and unkent to her in that solitude, and she rued it that she
had spoken.



CHAPTER X. HOW BIRDALONE FELL IN WITH A MAN IN THE BLACK VALLEY OF
THE GREYWETHERS



Came new tidings therewithal; for the moment after she had spoken, a
tall man drew out from behind the big stone, and stood before her;
and at first it was in her mind that this was the very chieftain come
alive for her, and for terror she was like to swoon this time; but he
spake nought a while, but looked on her eagerly and curiously.

She came to herself presently, so much that she could see him
clearly, and was now growing more shamefast than afraid, when she saw
beyond doubt that the man was of the sons of Adam; but what with her
shame that was now, and her fear that had been, she yet had no might
to move, but stood there pale and trembling like a leaf, and might
scarce keep her feet.

Now the new-comer bowed before her smiling, and said: I ask thy
pardon, fair damsel  or indeed I should say fairest damsel , that I
have scared thee. But sooth to say I beheld thee coming riding, and
even from a little aloof I could see that nought which might befall
could ever make it up to me for not seeing thee close at hand and
hearing thee speak. Wherefore I hid myself behind the king's stone
here; and no harm is done thereby I trow; for now I see that the
colour is coming into thy cheeks again, and thy fear is gone. And as
for me, thou hast not fled away from me, as thou wouldst have done
had I not hidden and come on thee suddenly; and then thou being
horsed and I unhorsed, thou wouldst have escaped me, whereas now thou
art within reach of my hand. Then he smiled, and said: Furthermore,
thou hast told so little of thy secret to this stony king here, that
I am little the wiser for thy word, and thou the little more
betrayed. Only this I will say, that if He loveth thee not, He is
more of a fool than I be.

He reached out his hand to hers, but she drew it aback, and grew yet
more ashamed, and could find no word for him. His voice was soft and
full, and he spake deftly, but she was not content with it for its
kindness, as she had been with all the other men whom she had met
since she left the House under the Wood, and she durst not trust her
hand to him.

As for his aspect, she saw that he was tall and well-knit, and goodly
of fashion; dark-haired, with long hazel eyes, smooth-cheeked and
bright-skinned; his nose long, and a little bent over at the end, and
coming down close to his lips, which were full and red; his face was
hairless save for a little lip-beard. He was so clad, that he had no
helm on his head, but a little hat with a broad gold piece in the
front thereof; he was girt to a long sword, and had an anlace also in
his belt, and Birdalone saw the rings of a fine hauberk at his collar
and knees; otherwise he was not armed. Over his hauberk he wore a
black surcoat, without device of any kind, and his foot and leg gear
were of the same hue; wherefore may we call him the Black Knight.
Sooth to say, for all his soft speech, she feared him and rued the
meeting of him.

Now he spake to her again: I see that thou art wroth with me, lady;
but mayhappen it is not so ill that I have happened on thee; for this
dale hath a bad name for more than one thing, and is scarce meet for
damsels to wander in. But now since thou hast a weaponed man with
thee, and thou, by All-hallows! not utterly unarmed, thou mayst well
go up the valley and see something more thereof. So come now, mount
thine horse again, and I will lead him for thee.

Now Birdalone found speech and said: Knight, for such thou seemest
to me, I deem now that I have no need to fare further in this dale,
but I will get me into the saddle and turn my horse's head outward
again, giving thee good day first and thanking thee for thy courtesy.
And therewith she turned to get to her palfrey, but sore trembling
the while; but he followed her and said, with brow somewhat knitted:
Nay, lady, I have left my horse somewhat further up, and I must go
back to fetch him, that we may wend out of the dale together. For I
will not suffer thee to flee from me and fall into the hands of evil
wights, be they ghosts or living men, and that the less since I have
heard the speech in thy mouth, as of honey and cream and roses.
Therefore if thou go out of the dale, I shall go with thee afoot,
leading thine horse. And look to it if it be courteous to unhorse a
knight, who is ready to be thy servant. Moreover, since thou hast
come to this dale of wonder, and mayst leave it safely, pity it were
that thou shouldst see nought thereof, for strange is it forsooth,
and belike thou shalt never seek thither again. Wherefore I crave of
thee, once more, to mount thine horse and let me lead thee up the
dale.

He spake these last words rather as one giving a command than making
a prayer, and Birdalone feared him now sorely. Forsooth she had her
bended bow in hand; but let alone that the knight was over-near to
her that she might get a shaft out of her quiver and nock it, ere he
should run in on her, and let alone also that he was byrnied, she
scarce deemed that it behoved her to slay or wound the man because
she would be quit of him. Wherefore angrily, and with a flushed
face, she answered him: So shall it be then, Sir Knight; or rather
so must it be, since thou compellest me.

He laughed and said: Nay, now thou art angry. I compel thee not, I
but say that it will not do for thee to compel me to leave thee. Go
which way thou wilt, up the dale, or down it and out of it; it is all
one unto me, so long as I am with thee. Forsooth, damsel, I have
said harder words to ladies who have done my pleasure and not deemed
themselves compelled.

She paled but answered nought; then she mounted her palfrey, and the
knight went to her bridle-rein without more words, and so led her on
up the valley by the easiest way amongst the Greywethers.



CHAPTER XI. BIRDALONE IS LED UP THE BLACK VALLEY



As they went, the knight fell a-talking to Birdalone, and that
without any of the covert jeering which he had used erewhile; and he
showed her places in the dale, as caverns under the burgs, and little
eyots in the stream, and certain stones amongst the Greywethers
whereof stories ran; and how this and the other one had fared in
dealings with the land-wights, and how one had perished, and another
had been made happy, and so forth. Withal he told of the mountain-
folk, and in especial how they of the plains, when he was scarce more
than a boy, had met them in battle in that same dale, and how fierce
the fight was; whereas the mountain-men were fighting for a life of
desires accomplished, which hitherto had been but a dream unto them;
and the men of the plain fought for dear life itself, and for all
that made it aught save death in life. Wherefore up and down the
dale they fought, at first in ordered ranks and then in knots, and
lastly sword to sword and man to man, till there was no foot of grass
or black sand there which had not its shower of blood; and the stream
was choked with the dead, and ran red out of the dale; till at last
well-nigh all the host of the mountain-men was fallen, and scarce
less of the folk of the plains, but these men held the field and had
the victory.

All this he told her deftly and well, and though he said not so right
out, yet let her wot that, youth as he was, he was of the battle; and
his voice was clear and good, and Birdalone's wrath ran off her, and
she hearkened his tale, and even asked him a question here and there;
and so courteous was this Black Knight now become, that Birdalone
began to think that she had fallen short of courtesy to him, because
of her fear and the weariness of the waiting which so oppressed her;
and that shamed and irked her, for she would fain be of all courtesy.
Wherefore now she deemed that perchance she had erred in deeming him
an evil man; and she looked on him from time to time, and deemed him
goodly of fashion; she thought his eyes were deep, and his face sober
and fair of aspect, but that his nose turned down at the end, and was
over thin at the bridge, and moreover his lips looked over-sweet and
licorous.

Now when the knight was silent of his tales, Birdalone fell to asking
him questions sweetly concerning this Stony People which was all
about them; and he told her all he knew, soberly enough at first, yet
indeed ended by mocking them somewhat, but mocked not at her any
more. At last he said: Fair lady, that thou hast not come here all
for nought I partly know by those words which I heard come from thy
mouth at the King's Stone; wherefore I marvelled indeed when I heard
thee say that thou wouldst go straight out of the dale; for I had
deemed thee desirous of trying the adventure of waking this Stony
People a-night-tide. Forsooth was this thy mind when thou soughtest
hither to the dale?

She reddened at his word, and yeasaid him shortly. Then said he: Is
it not thy mind still? Sir, said she, as now I have got to fear it.
Yea? and that is strange, said he, for thou wouldst have waked the
dale alone; and now thou art no longer alone, but hast me to watch
and ward thy waking, thou art more afeard.

She looked on his face steadily, to wot if there were no half-hidden
smile therein; but herseemed that he spake in all soberness; and she
had nought to say to him save this: Sir, I am now become afraid of
the waking. And he said no more thereof.

Now they went thus, and Birdalone not without pleasure, since her
fear of the knight was minished, some three hours up the dale, and
still were the Greywethers everywhere about them, so that there were
well-nigh as many hours as miles in their wending.

At last they seemed to be drawing nigh to the head of the dale, and
the burgs and the rocks were before them all round it as a wall,
though yet about a mile aloof at the further end; and this end it was
wider than elsewhere.

Came they then to a level space of greensward clear of the grey
stones, which were drawn all around it in ordered rings, so that it
was as some doom-ring of an ancient people; and within the said space
Birdalone beheld a great black horse tethered and cropping the grass.
The knight led her into the ring, and said: Now are we come home for
the present, my lady, and if it please thee to light down we shall
presently eat and drink, and sithence talk a little. And he drew
nigh to help her off her horse, but she suffered him not, and lighted
down of herself; but if she suffered not his hand, his eyes she must
needs suffer, as he gazed greedily on the trimness of her feet and
legs in her sliding from her horse.

Howsoever, he took her hand, and led her to a little mound on the
other side of the ring, and bade her sit down there, and so did she,
and from under the nighest of the stones he drew forth a pair of
saddle-bags, and took victual and wine thence, and they ate and drank
together like old companions. And now Birdalone told herself that
the knight was frank and friendly; yet forsooth she wotted that her
heart scarce trowed what it feigned, and that she yet feared him.



CHAPTER XII. HOW THOSE TWAIN GET THEM FROM OUT OF THE BLACK VALLEY
OF THE GREYWETHERS



When they had dined, and had sat a while talking, the knight said: I
will ask thee once more wherefore thou must needs depart from this
dale leaving the Greywethers unwaked? Yet this must I tell thee
first, that this ring at the dale's end is the only one due place
where the Greywethers can be rightly waked, and that there be few who
wot this. Wilt thou not tell me then what is in thy mind?

Birdalone gazed down on the ground a while; then she lifted up her
head and looked on the Black Knight, and said: Sir Knight, we have
been brought so close together to-day, and as meseemeth I am so
wholly in thy power, that I will tell thee the very truth as it is.
My mind it was to wake the dale here to-night, and take what might
befall me. And well indeed might I fear the adventure, which few,
meseemeth, would not fear. But so strong is my longing for that
which I would crave of these wights, that it overmastered my fear,
and my purpose held when I entered the dale. Then I met thee; and
here again is the truth, take it how thou wilt, that presently I
feared thee, and yet I fear thee; for I have noted thee closely all
this while, and have seen of thee, that thou art over heedful of my
poor body, and wouldst have it for thine own if thou mightest. And
there is this in thee also, as I deem, though thou thyself mayst not
know it, that thou wouldst have thy pleasure of me whether it
pleasure me or grieve me; and this thy pleasure must I needs gainsay;
for though thou mayest hereafter become my friend, yet are there
other friends of mine, who be such, that my grief would mar any
pleasure they might have. Hast thou heard and understood?

She looked on his face steadily as she spake, and saw that it
flushed, and darkened, and scowled, and that his hands were clenched,
and his teeth set hard together. And again she spake: Sir, thou
shalt know that beside these shot-weapons, I have a thing here in my
girdle that may serve either against thee or against me, if need
drive me thereto; wherefore I will pray thee to forbear. Forsooth,
thou shalt presently happen on other women, who shall be better unto
thee than I can be.

By then Birdalone had spoken the word, the knight's face had cleared,
and he laughed aloud and said: As to thy last words, therein at
least thou liest, my lady. But for the rest, I see that it must all
be as thou wiliest. Yea, if such be thy will, we shall presently to
horse and ride down the dale again, and at the end thereof I shall
leave thee to go home alone at thy will. She said: For that I can
thee thanks with all my heart. But why hast thou not asked me of
whence I am, and whither I would go home?

Again he laughed and said: Because I know already. I have had more
than two or three tales from them who have seen thee, or spoken unto
others who have seen thee, how the gay Champions of the Castle of the
Quest had fished up a wondrous pearl of price from out of the Great
Water; and when I set eyes on thy beauty, I knew that the said pearl
could be nowhere else than under mine eyes.

Let that pass, she said, and blushed not; but now tell me the truth
as I have told thee, why thou art so instant with me to wake the
Greywethers to-night? He kept silence a while, and, as she looked on
him, she thought she saw confusion in his face; but at last he said:
Thou wert wrong in saying that I heeded not thy pleasure, and solace,
and welfare. Meseemed, and yet doth, that it might be to thine avail
to wake the Greywethers to-night; and never again mayst thou have a
chance of the waking, as erst I said. I say I wish thee to have
fulfilment of thy craving. Nor hast thou aught to fear of them,
seeing that it is but dastards and fools that they undo.

He broke off his speech, and Birdalone yet looked on him, and after a
little he said: Thou drawest the truth out of me; for moreover I
would have thee with me longer than thou wouldst be if we but rode
together down the water and out of the dale, and thou to fare away
alone.

Birdalone spake in a while, and that while he gazed upon her eagerly;
she said: I shall now tell thee that I shall abide the adventure of
the waking to-night, whatever befall. And I, said he, will so do
that thou mayst fear me the less; for I will unarm me when the night
cometh, and thou thyself shalt keep mine hauberk and sword and
anlace.

She said: It is well; I will take that, lest desire overmaster thee.

They spake no more of it at that time, and it was now five hours
after noon. Birdalone arose, for she found it hard to sit still and
abide nightfall: she went without the two first rings of the
Greywethers, which were set in more open order beyond that, and she
looked all about her, to the black rocks on either side, and to the
great black wall at the dale's ending, and the blue mountains aloof
beyond it; then down toward the plain of the dale came her eyes, and
she looked through the tangle of the grey stones. Now she seemed to
be looking more intently upon some one thing; with that she called to
her the Black Knight, who was hanging about watching her, and she
said to him: Fair sir, art thou clear-seeing and far-seeing? I am
not thought to be purblind, quoth he. Then Birdalone reached out her
hand and pointed and said: Canst thou see aught which thou didst not
look to see, there, up the dale as I point? Said he: All too clear
I see the hand and the wrist of thee, and that blinds me to aught
else. I pray thee fool not, she said, but look heedfully, and thou
mayst see what I see, and then tell me what it means. Though
forsooth I am exceeding in far sight.

He looked under the sharp of his hand heedfully, then he turned unto
her and said: By All-hallows! there is in thee every excellency!
Thou art right; I see a bay horse up there feeding on the bites of
grass amongst the Greywethers. Look again! she said; what else canst
thou see? Is there aught anigh to the bay horse which is like to the
gleam and glitter of metal. Christ! said he, once more thou art
right. There be weaponed men in the dale. Tarry not, I beseech
thee, but get to horse forthright, and I will do no less.

There goeth the waking of the dale for this time, said Birdalone,
laughing. But art thou not in haste, fair sir? may not these be
friends?

The knight laid his hand upon her shoulder, and thrust her on toward
her palfrey, and spake fiercely, but not loud: Thee I pray not to
fool now! There is not a minute to spare. If thou deemest me evil,
as I think thou dost, there are worser than I, I tell thee, there are
worser. But we will talk of it when we be in the saddle, and clear
of this accursed dale.

Birdalone knew not what to do save obey him, so she lightly gat into
her saddle, and followed him, for he was mounted in a twinkling, and
riding on. He led out of the ring, and fell to threading the maze of
the Greywethers, keeping ever toward the steep side of the dale,
which was on that hand that looked toward the Castle of the Quest,
that is to say, the eastern bent. Birdalone wondered at this
leading, and when she was come up with the knight she spake to him
breathlessly, and said: But, fair sir, why wend we not down the
dale? He answered: First, lady, because we must hide us from them
straightway; and next because they be more than we, many more, and
their horses be fresh, while thine at least is somewhat spent; and if
they were to spur down the dale in chase, they would soon be upon us;
for think not that I would escape and leave thee behind.

Said Birdalone: But thou knowest them, then, what they be? since
thou wottest of their numbers and their riding. Hearken now! Upon
thy soul and thy salvation, be they more friends unto thee than unto
me?

He said, as be rode on a little slower than erst: Upon my soul and
my salvation I swear it, that the men yonder be of the worst
unfriends to thee that may be in the world. And now, lady, I promise
thee that I will unravel thee the riddle, and tell thee the whole
truth of these haps, whatsoever may come of my words, when we be in a
safer place than this; and meantime I beseech thee to trust in me
thus far, as to believe that I am leading thee out of the very worst
peril that might befall thee. Nay, thou must needs trust me; for I
tell thee, that though I now love thee better than all the world and
all that is in it, I would slay thee here in this dale rather than
suffer thee to fall into the hands of these men.

Birdalone heard him with a sick heart; but such passion went with his
words that she believed what he said; and she spake softly: Sir, I
will trust thee thus far; but I beseech thee to have pity upon a poor
maiden who hath had but little pity shown unto her until these latter
days; and then: O woe's me, to have fallen out of the kindness and
love once more!

The Black Knight spake to her in a little while, and said: What pity
I can to thee, that I will. Once more I tell thee, that if thou but
knew it thou wouldst thank me indeed for what I have done for thee in
this hour; and henceforth I will do and forbear with thee to the
uttermost that love will suffer me. But lo thou! here are we safe
for this present; but we must nowise tarry.

Birdalone looked and saw that they were come to the wall of the dale,
and that there it went down sheer to the plain thereof, and that
before them was a cleft that narrowed speedily, and over which the
rocks well-nigh met, so that it was indeed almost a cave. They rode
into it straightway, and when that they had gone but a little, and
because it had winded somewhat, they could but see the main valley as
a star of light behind them, then it narrowed no more, but was as a
dismal street of the straitest, whiles lighter and whiles darker,
according as the rocks roofed it in overhead or drew away from it.
Long they rode, and whiles came trickles of water from out the rocks
on one hand or the other; and now and again they met a stream which
covered all the ground of the pass from side to side for the depth of
a foot or more. Great rocks also were strewn over their path every
here and there, so that whiles must they needs dismount and toil
afoot over the rugged stones; and in most places the way was toilsome
and difficult. The knight spake little to Birdalone, save to tell
her of the way, and warn her where it was perilous; and she, for her
part, was silent, partly for fear of the strange man, or, it might
be, even for hatred of him, who had thus brought her into such sore
trouble, and partly for grief. For, with all torment of sorrow, she
kept turning over and over in her mind whether her friends had yet
come home to the Castle of the Quest, and whether they would go seek
her to deliver her. And such shame took hold of her when she thought
of their grief and confusion of soul when they should come home and
find her gone, that she set her mind to asking if it had not been
better had she never met them. Yet in good sooth her mind would not
shape the thought, howsoever she bade it.



CHAPTER XIII. NOW THEY REST FOR THE NIGHT IN THE STRAIT PASS



At last, when they had been going a long while, it might be some six
hours, and it had long been night in the world without, but moon-lit,
and they had rested but seldom, and then but for short whiles, the
knight drew rein and spake to Birdalone, and asked her was she not
weary. O yea, she said; I was at point to pray thee suffer me to get
off and lie down on the bare rock. To say sooth, I am now too weary
to think of any peril, or what thou art, or whither we be going. He
said: By my deeming we be now half through this mountain highway,
and belike there is little peril in our resting; for I think not that
any one of them knoweth of this pass, or would dare it if he did; and
they doubtless came into the dale by the upper pass, which is strait
enough, but light and open.

As he spoke, Birdalone bowed forward on her horse's neck, and would
have fallen but that he stayed her. Then he lifted her off her
horse, and laid her down in the seemliest place he might find; and
the pass there was much widened, and such light as there was in the
outer world came down freely into it, though it were but of the moon
and the stars; and the ground was rather sandy than rocky. So he
dight Birdalone's bed as well as he might, and did off his surcoat
and laid it over her; and then stood aloof, and gazed on her; and he
muttered: It is an evil chance; yet the pleasure of it, the pleasure
of it! Yea, said he again, she might well be wearied; I myself am
ready to drop, and I am not the least tough of the band. And
therewith he laid him down on the further side of the pass, and fell
asleep straightway.



CHAPTER XIV. THE BLACK KNIGHT TELLS THE TRUTH OF HIMSELF



When the morning was come down into the straitness of their secret
road, Birdalone opened her eyes and saw the Black Knight busy over
dighting their horses: so she arose and thrust her grief back into
her heart, and gave her fellow-farer the sele of the day, and he
brought her victual, and they ate a morsel, and gat to horse
thereafter and departed; and the way became smoother, and it was
lighter overhead everywhere now, and the rocks never again met
overhead athwart the way; and it seemed to Birdalone that now they
were wending somewhat downward.

The knight was courteous unto Birdalone, and no longer for the
present thrust his love upon her, so that now she had some solace of
his fellowship, though he was but few-spoken to her.

It was betimes when they arose, and they rode all the morning till it
was noon, which they might well wot of, because the way was much
wider, and the cliff-walls of the pass much lower, so that the sun
shone in upon them and cheered them.

Now the Black Knight drew rein and said: Shall we rest, lady, and
eat? And thereafter, if thou wilt, I shall tell thee my tale. Or
rather, if thou wilt suffer me, I shall speak first and eat
afterwards, or else the morsel might stick in my throat. Knight,
said Birdalone, smiling, I hope thou hast no lie to swallow down
before the meat. Nay, lady, said he; no lie that is of moment at
least.

So they lighted down, and Birdalone sat on the wayside under a birch-
bush that came thrusting out from the rock, and the knight stood
before her, hanging his head, as though he were one accused who would
plead his cause; and he began:

Lady, I must tell thee first of all, that to-day I have done as an
unfaithful servant and a traitor to my lord. Said Birdalone simply:
Shall I tell thee the truth, and say that from the first I seemed to
see in thee that thou wert scarce trusty? He said: Well, that mind
I saw in thee, and it went to my heart that thou shouldest think it,
and that it should be no less than true. But now I must tell thee,
that it is for thy sake that I have been untrusty to my lord. How
so? said she. Quoth he: Heardest thou ever of the Red Knight? Yea,
said Birdalone, I have heard of him ever as a tyrant and oppressor.
Then she grew pale, and said: Art thou he? Nay, said the knight, I
am but a kinsman of his, and his best-trusted man; nor have I failed
him ever till yesterday.

He kept silence a while, and then said: This is the true tale: that
we have had tidings of thee and of thy ridings abroad with that old
fool, Sir Aymeris, and how thou hadst been twice to look into the
Black Valley. This I say hath the Red One heard, and the heart of
him was touched by the mere hearsay of thee; and moreover 'tis
blessed bread to him the doing of any grief to the knights of Quest
Castle; wherefore he hath sent me to hang about the dale, to lay
hands on thee if I might for; he knew being wise, that thou wouldst
hanker after it; and moreover he let one of his wise women sit out in
spells on thee. So I espied, and happened on thee all alone; and
mine errand it was, since I came upon thee thus, to draw thee till I
had thee safe at home in the Red Hold. Forsooth I began mine errand
duly, and fell to beguiling thee, so that thou mayst well have seen
the traitor in me. But then, and then my heart failed me, because I
fell, not to desiring thee as coveting my master's chattel, but to
loving thee and longing for thee as my fellow and speech-friend. And
I said to myself: Into the Red Hold she shall not go if I may hinder
it.

Birdalone was very pale, but she refrained her from grief and fear,
and said: But those horsed and weaponed men up the dale, who were
they? He said: I will not lie now, not even a little; they came
into the dale by that upper pass whereof I told thee; they were of
our men; I brought them. I was never all alone in the dale; I was to
have fetched thee to them, so that thou mightest not see a rout of
folk and flee away; and then would we all have gone home together by
the upper pass. But we two must have gone on unto them in the dale's
head, whereas for all that I could say I might not bring them down
into that doom-ring where we ate and talked yesterday. We two have
been valianter than thou mayst have deemed, to have done the deed of
dining there; for all men fear it. But as for me, I have been there
more than twice or thrice, and thence have I wandered, and found this
pass wherein now we be; concerning which I have held my tongue,
deeming that it might one day serve my turn; as it hath done now
abundantly, since it hath been a refuge unto thee.

Yea, but whither are we going now? said Birdalone; is it perchance to
the Red Hold? Nay, never, said the knight, so help me God and All-
hallows!

Whither then? said Birdalone; tell me, that I may at least trust
thee, even though I owe thee for all the pain and grief which thou
hast wrought me. He reddened and said: Wait a while; I bring thee
to no ill place; there shall no harm befall thee. And he fretted and
fumed, and was confused of speech and look, and then he said: When
we come there I shall belike crave a boon of thee.

O, but I crave a boon of thee here and now, said Birdalone. Wipe
away thine offence to me and take me back to my friends and the
Castle of the Quest! So mayst thou yet be dear unto me, though maybe
not wholly as thou wouldst have it. And she reached out her two
hands toward him.

His breast heaved, and he seemed nigh to weeping; but he said: Nay,
lady, ask me not here and now, but there and to-morrow. But again I
swear to thee by thine hands that to the Red Hold I will not bring
thee, nor suffer thee to be brought, if I may hinder it; nay, not
though I give my life therefor.

Birdalone was silent awhile; then she said: And what shall befall me
if I come to the Red Hold? What is the Red Knight, and what would he
do with me? Said he: The Red Knight is terrible and fierce and
wise; and I fear him, I. He held his peace, and said: I must needs
say it, that to thee he would have been as Death and the Devil. He
would have bedded thee first. She broke in: Nay, never! and flushed
very red. But the knight went on: And after, I wot not; that were
according to his mood. And as to thy never, lady, thou wottest not
the like of him or of the folk he hath about him. Such as thou? she
said angrily. Nay, he said, far worse than me; men who fare little
afield, and are not sweetened by adventures and war-perils; and women
worser yet; and far worser were they dealing with a woman. She was
silent again awhile, and paled once more; then her colour came back
to her, and she held out her hand to him and said kindly: Thou being
what thou art, I thank thee for thy dealings with me; and now until
to-morrow, when I shall ask thee of that again, I am friends with
thee; so come now, and let us eat and drink together.

He took her hand and kissed it, and then came and sat down meekly
beside her, and they ate and drank in that wild place as though they
had been friends of long acquaintance.



CHAPTER XV. THE BLACK KNIGHT BRINGS BIRDALONE TO THE BOWER IN THE
DALE



When they had made an end of their meal, they gat to horse again and
rode on their ways; and every mile now was their road the easier, the
pass wider, and its walls lower and now also more broken; till at
last they began to go down hill swiftly, and after a little their
road seemed to be swallowed in a great thicket of hornbeam and holly;
but the knight rode on and entered the said thicket, and ever found
some way amidst the branches, though they were presently in the very
thick of the trees, and saw no daylight between the trunks for well-
nigh an hour, whereas the wood was thick and tangled, and they had to
thread their way betwixt its mazes.

At last the wood began to grow thinner before them, and the white
light to show between the trunks; and Birdalone deemed that she heard
the sound of falling water, and presently was sure thereof; and the
knight spake to her: Patience, my lady; now are we near home for to-
day. She nodded kindly to him, and therewith they rode on to open
ground, and were on the side of a steep bent, broken on their right
hands into a sheer cliff as Birdalone saw when the knight led her to
the edge and bade her look over. Then she saw down into a fair dale
lying far below them, through the which ran a little river, clear and
swift, but not riotous, after it had fallen over a force at the upper
end of the dale, and made the sound of water which she had heard.
The said dale was so, that whatsoever was on the other side thereof
was hidden by tall and great trees, that stood close together some
twenty yards aloof from the stream, and betwixt them and it was fair
greensward with a few bushes and thorn-trees thereon.

Quoth the knight: Down there shall we rest till to-morrow, if it
please thee, lady; and since the sun will set in an hour, we were
best on our way at once. It pleases me well, said Birdalone, and I
long to tread the turf by the river-side, for I am weary as weary may
be of the saddle and the pass.

So down the bent they rode, and it was but a little ere they had
ridden it to an end, and had met the river as it swept round the
cliff-wall of the valley; and they rode through it, and came on to
the pleasant greensward aforesaid under the trees; and in a bight of
the wood was a bower builded of turf and thatched with reed; and
there, by the bidding of the knight, they alighted; and the knight
said: This is thine house for to-night, my lady; and thou mayest lie
there in all safety after thou hast supped, and mayst have my weapons
by thy side if thou wilt, while I lie under the trees yonder. And if
thou wilt bathe thee in the cool water, to comfort thee after the
long ride and the weariness, I swear by thy hand that I will take
myself out of eye-shot and abide aloof till thou call me.

Said Birdalone, smiling somewhat: Fair sir, I will not have my watch
and ward unarmed; keep thou thy weapons; and thou wilt not forget,
perchance, that I am not wholly unarmed, whereas I have my bow and
arrows and my knife here. And as to my bathing, I will take thee at
thy word, and bid thee go aloof a while now at once; for I will go
down to the water; and if thou spy upon me, then will it be thy shame
and not mine.

The knight went his ways therewith, and Birdalone went down to the
water and unclad her; but ere she stepped into the river, she laid
her bow and three shafts on the lip thereof. Then she took the
water, and disported her merrily therein; and now, forsooth, she was
nowise downcast, for she said to herself, this man is not all evil
and he lovest me well, and I look for it that to-morrow he will bring
me on my way toward the Castle of the Quest, for mere love of me; and
then shall he be a dear friend to me, and I will comfort him what I
can for as long as we both live.

So she came out of the water and clad her, and then called aloud for
the knight, and he came speedily unto her, as if he had been not
exceeding far away, though he swore with a great oath that he had
nowise espied her. She answered him nought, and they went side by
side to the bower; and there the knight dight the victual, and they
sat together and ate their meat like old friends; and Birdalone asked
the knight concerning this valley and the bower, if he had known it
for long, and he answered: Yea, lady, I was but a stripling when I
first happened on the dale; and I deem that few know thereof save me;
at least none of our flock knoweth thereof, and I am fain thereof,
and keep them unknowing, for if my lord were to hear of my having a
haunt privy unto me he would like it but ill.

Birdalone turned pale when she heard him speak of his lord; for fear
of the Red Knight had entered into her soul, so that now the flesh
crept upon her bones. But she enforced her to smile, and said: Yea,
and what would he do to thee were he ill-content with thy ways?
Forsooth, lady, said he, if he could spare me he would make an end of
me in some miserable way; nay, if he were exceeding ill-content, he
would do as much for me whether he could spare me or not; otherwise
he would watch his occasion, and so grieve me that what he did would
go to my very heart. Woe's me! said Birdalone, thou servest an evil
master. The knight answered not, and Birdalone went on speaking
earnestly: It is a shame to thee to follow this fiend; why dost thou
not sunder thee from him, and become wholly an honest man? Said he
gruffly: It is of no use talking of this, I may not; to boot, I fear
him. Then did Birdalone hold her peace, and the knight said: Thou
dost not know; when I part from thee I must needs go straight to him,
and then must that befall which will befall. Speak we no more of
these matters.

Birdalone flushed with hope and joy as he spake thus, for she took
him to mean that he would lead her, on the morrow, on her way to the
Castle of the Quest. But the knight spake in a voice grown cheerful
again: As to this bower, lady, the tale thereof is soon told; for
with mine own hands I builded it some fifteen years ago; and I have
come to this place time and again when my heart was overmuch
oppressed with black burdens of evil and turmoil, and have whiles
prevailed against the evil, and whiles not. Mayst thou prevail this
time, then! said she. He answered her not, but presently fell to
talking with her of other matters, and the two were frank and
friendly together, till the August night grew dark about them; and
then spake Birdalone: Now would I rest, for I can no longer keep
mine eyes open. Abide aloof from me to-morrow morning till I call to
thee, as thou didst this evening; and then, before we eat together
again, thou shalt tell me what thou wilt do with me. He stood up to
depart, and she reached out her hand to him in the glimmer, and he
saw it, but said: Nay, if I take thine hand, I shall take thine
whole body. And therewith he departed, and she laid her down in her
smock alone, and slept anon, and was dreamless and forgetting
everything till the sun was up in the morning.



CHAPTER XVI. YET A DAY AND A NIGHT THEY TARRY IN THE DALE



Birdalone awoke when the sun came into the bower to her, and stood up
at once, and went down to the river and washed the night off her; and
then, when she was clad, called on the knight to come to her; and he
came, looking downcast and troubled; so that Birdalone thought within
herself: It is well, he will do my will.

She stood before him, and gave him the sele of the day, and he looked
on her sorrowfully. Then she said: Now is come the time when I am
to ask thee to take me back to the Castle of the Quest and my own
people. He was not hasty to answer her, and she spake again: This
must thou do, or else take me to the Red Hold and deliver me to the
tyrant there; and I have heard it from thine own mouth that will be
nought else than casting me into shame and torment and death. And I
deem thou canst not do it. Nay, she said, staying the words that
were coming from his mouth, I wot that thou canst do it if thine
heart can suffer it; for thou art stronger than I, and thou mayst
break my bow, and wrest this knife out of mine hand; and thou canst
bind me and make me fast to the saddle, and so lead my helpless body
into thraldom and death. But thou hast said that thou lovest me, and
I believe thee herein. Therefore I know that thou canst not will to
do this.

He answered in his surly voice: Thou art right, lady, I cannot.
Nay, hearken thou this time. I have been turning over night-long
what thou didst say about leaving my lord, that is, betraying him,
for it comes to that; and now I have made up my mind to do it, and I
will betray him for thy sake. Wherefore there is a third way to take
which thou hast not seen; we will ride out of this dale in an hour's
time, and I will bring thee to them who are only less the mortal foes
of the Red Knight than are thy fellows of the Quest, to wit, to the
captain and burgesses of the good town of Greenford by the Water; and
I will do them to wit that I have rescued thee from the hands of the
Red Knight, and am become his foe; and will show them all his
incomings and outgoings, and every whit of rede, and entrap him, so
that he fall into their hands. Now, though were I to be taken in
battle by them, I should be speedily brought to the halter, or may be
to the bale-fire  for we be wizards all in the Red Hold ; yet with
this word in my mouth, if they trow in it, I shall be made their
captain, and presently their master. Trow in my tale they will, if
thou bear me out therein, and they will honour thee, and suffer thee
to give thyself to me in marriage; and then I know thee, and myself
also, and that ere long we shall be both mighty and wealthy and
beloved, and fair will be the days before us.

His voice had grown softer as he spake, and toward the end of his
words he faltered, and at last brake out a-weeping, and cast himself
wordless on the grass before her.

She was pale, and her brow was knitted, and her face quivered; but
she spake coldly to him and said: This way I cannot take; and I
wonder at thee that thou hast shown it unto me, for thyself thou
knowest that I cannot go with thee. I will go nowhere hence save to
the Castle of the Quest. If thou wilt not lead me thereto, or put me
on the road, I ask thee straight, Wilt thou stay me if I go seek the
way thither myself?

He rose up from the ground with a pale face full of anger as well as
grief, and caught her by the wrists and said, scowling the while:
Tell me now which of them it is; is it the stupid oaf Baudoin, or the
light fool Hugh, or the dull pedant Arthur? But it matters not; for
I know, and all the country-side knows, that they be vowed, each man
of them, to his own woman; and if they find not the women themselves,
such dolts they are, that they will ever be worshipping the mere
shadows of them, and turn away from flesh and blood, were it the
fairest in the world, as thou art, as thou art.

She shrank away from him what she might, but he still held her
wrists; then she spake in a quivering voice, her very lips pale with
fear and wrath: It is well seen that thou art a man of the Red
Knight; and belike thou wouldst do with me as he would. But one
thing I crave of thee, if there is any grain of mercy in thee, that
thou wilt draw thy sword and thrust me through; thou mayst leave
thine hold of me to get at the blade, I will not stir from where I
stand. O! to think that I deemed thee well-nigh a true man.

He dropped her hands now and stood aloof from her, staring at her,
and presently cast himself on the ground, rolling about and tearing
at the grass. She looked on him a moment or two, and then stepped
forward and stooped to him, and touched his shoulder and said: Rise
up, I bid thee, and be a man and not a wild beast.

So in a while he arose, and stood before her hang-dog-like; then she
looked on him pitifully, and said: Fair sir and valiant knight, thou
hast gone out of thy mind for a while, and thus hast thou shamed both
me and thyself; and now thou wert best forget it, and therewithal my
last words to thee.

Therewith she held out her hand to him, and he went on his knees and
took it, sobbing, and kissed it. But she said, and smiled on him:
Now I see that thou wilt do what I prayed of thee, and lead me hence
and put me on the road to the Castle of the Quest. He said: I will
lead thee to the Castle of the Quest.

Said Birdalone: Then shall it be as I promised, that I will be thy
dear friend while both we live. And now, if thou canst, be a little
merrier, and come and sit with me, and let us eat our meat, for I
hunger.

He smiled, but woefully, and presently they sat down to their meat;
and he strove to be somewhat merry of mood, and to eat as one at a
feast; but whiles his heart failed him, and he set his teeth and tore
at the grass, and his face was fierce and terrible to look on; but
Birdalone made as if she heeded it nought, and was blithe and
debonair with him. And when they had done their meat he sat looking
at her a while, and at last he said: Lady, dost thou deem that, when
all is said, I have done somewhat for thee since first we met the day
before yesterday at the lower end of the Black Valley? Yea, she
said, as erst I spake, all things considered I deem that thou hast
done much. And now, said he, I am to do more yet; for I am to lead
thee to where henceforth I shall have no more part or lot in thee
than if thou wert in heaven and I in hell. I pray thee say not so,
said Birdalone; have I not said that I will be thy friend? Lady,
said the knight, I wot well that according to the sweetness of thine
heart wilt thou do what thou canst do. And therewith he was silent a
while and she also.

Then he said: I would ask thee a grace if I durst. Ask it, said
she, and I will grant it if I may; I have gainsaid thee enough
meseemeth.

Lady, he said, I will ask this as a reward of the way-leader, to wit,
that thou abide with me here in this dale, in all honour holden, till
to-morrow morning; and let this place, which has helped me aforetime,
be hallowed by thy dwelling here; and I, I shall have had one happy
day at least, if never another. Canst thou grant me this? If thou
canst not, we will depart in an hour.

Her countenance fell at his word, and she was silent a while; for
sore she longed to be speedily whereas her friends should find her if
they came back to the castle. But she thought within herself how
wild and fierce the man was, and doubted if he might not go stark mad
on her hands and destroy her if she thwarted overmuch; and, moreover,
frankly she pitied him, and would do what she might to ease his pain
and solace his grief of heart. Wherefore she cleared her face of its
trouble and let it be vexed no longer, but smiled upon the knight and
said: Fair sir, this meseemeth but a little thing for me to do, and
I grant it thee with a good will, and this shall now be the first day
of the friendship if so thou wilt take it; and may it solace thee.

Who then was gleeful but the knight, and strange it was to see all
his sorrow run off him; and he became glad and gamesome as a youth,
and yet withal exceeding courteous and kind with her, as though he
were serving a mighty queen.

So then they wore the day together in all good fellowship; and first
they went up the dale together and right to the foot of that great
force, where the stream came thundering down from the sheer rocks;
and long Birdalone stood to look thereon, and much she marvelled at
it, for no such thing had she seen before.

Thereafter they went afoot into the wood behind the green bower, and
when they had gone some way therein for their pleasure, they fell to
seeking venison for their dinner; and the knight took Birdalone's bow
and shafts to strike the quarry withal, but he would have her gird
his sword to her, that she might not be weaponless. So they gat them
a roe and came back therewith to the bower, and the knight dight it
and cooked it, and again they ate in fellowship and kindness; and
Birdalone had been to the river and fetched thence store of blue-
flowered mouse-ear, and of meadow-sweet, whereof was still some left
from the early days of summer, and had made her garlands for her head
and her loins; and the knight sat and worshipped her, yet he would
not so much as touch her hand, sorely as he hungered for the beauty
of her body.

Next, when dinner was done, and they lay in the shadow of the trees,
and hearkened the moor-hen crying from the water, and the moaning of
the wood-doves in the high trees, she turned to him and bade him tell
her somewhat of the tale of his life and deeds; but he said: Nay,
lady, I pray thee pardon me, for little have I to tell thee that is
good, and I would not have thee know of me aught worse than thou
knowest of me already. Rather be thou kind to me, and tell me of thy
days that have been, wherein I know full surely shall be nought but
good.

She smiled and blushed, but without more ado fell to telling him of
her life in the House under the Wood, and spared not even to tell him
somewhat of the wood-mother. And he said no word to her thereover,
save thanks and praises for the kindness of her story.

At last the day wore to its ending, and then the knight's grief
strode over him again, and he was moody and few-spoken; and Birdalone
was blithe with him still, and would have solaced his grief; but he
said: Let it be; as for thee, thou shalt be happy to-morrow, but
this happy day of mine is well-nigh worn, and it is as the wearing of
my life. And the dark night came, and he bade her good-night
sorrowfully, and departed to his lair in the wood. Birdalone lay in
the bower, and might not sleep a long while for her joy of the
morrow, which should bring her back to the Castle of the Quest.

But when morning was, and the sun was but just risen, Birdalone
awoke, and stood up and did on her raiment, and called her servant
the knight, and he came at once leading the two horses, and said:
Now go we to the Castle of the Quest. And he was sober and
sorrowful, but nought fierce or wild.

So Birdalone thanked him kindly and praised him, and he changed
countenance no whit therefor.

Then they mounted and set forth, and the knight led straight into the
wood, and by roads that he wotted of, so that they went nowise slowly
for wenders through the thick woodland. Thus went they on their way
together, he sorry and she glad.

But now leaves the tale to tell of Birdalone and the knight on whom
she happened in the Black Valley of the Greywethers, and turns to the
Castle of the Quest and the folk thereof, and what they did in this
while and thereafter.


Here ends the Fourth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which
is called Of the Days of Abiding, and the Fifth Part now begins,
which is called The Tale of the Quest's Ending.




THE FIFTH PART: THE TALE OF THE QUEST'S ENDING



CHAPTER I. OF SIR LEONARD'S TROUBLE AND THE COMING OF THE QUEST



Tells the tale that when the chaplain had departed from Birdalone at
the bower in the copse, he went home to the castle sadly enough,
because of his love and longing for her, which well he wotted might
never be satisfied. Moreover when he was come into the castle again,
there fell fear upon him for what might betide her, and he rued it
that he had done her will in getting her forth of the castle; and in
vain now he set before himself all the reasons for deeming that her
peril herein was little or nothing, even as he had laid them before
her, and which he then believed in utterly, whereas now himseemed
there was an answer to every one of them. So he sighed heavily and
went into the chapel, wherein was an altar of St. Leonard; and he
knelt thereat, and prayed the saint, as he had erst delivered folk
from captivity, now to deliver both him and Birdalone from peril and
bonds; but though he was long a-praying and made many words, it
lightened his heart little or nothing; so that when he rose up again,
that if anything evil happened to this pearl of women, he wished
heartily that some one might take his life and he be done with it.

Now was the house astir, and the chaplain came from out the chapel,
and thinking all things over, he thought he would go straight to Sir
Aymeris and make a clean breast of it, so that weaponed men might be
sent at once to seek Birdalone. And he said to himself: What matter
if he slay me or cast me into prison, if Birdalone be lost?

So he went his ways to the highest tower, which looked landward and
hight the Open Eye, deeming to find Sir Aymeris; but when he got to
the topmost, he found neither captain nor carle there: wherefore he
stayed a little and looked forth betwixt the battlements, if
perchance there were some wild chance of seeing Birdalone's coming
home again; but his keen eyes beheld nothing more than he looked to
see, as sheep and neat, and the field-folk of thereabouts. So he
turned away and went by the swale toward the next tallest tower,
which looked lakewards, and was called Hearts' Hope; and as he went
he fell to framing in his mind the words which he should say to the
castellan.

Thus came he, haggard and hapless, on the leads of the tower, which
were nought small; and there gathered together in a knot, and all
gazing eagerly out over the lake, he found a dozen of men-at-arms and
the castellan amongst them. They took no heed of him as he came up,
though he stumbled as he crossed the threshold and came clattering
over the lead floor, and he saw at once that there was something
unwonted toward; but he had but one thought in his mind, to wit, the
rescuing of Birdalone.

He went up now behind where the castellan was leaning over the
battlement, and pulled his skirt, and when Sir Aymeris turned round,
he said: Lord, I have a word for thine ear. But the old knight did
but half turn round, and then spake peevishly: Tush, man! another
time! seest thou not I have got no eyes for aught save what we see on
the lake? Yea, but what then? said the priest. There cometh a boat,
said Sir Aymeris, not looking back at him, and our thought is that
therein be our lords.

When the priest heard that word, it was to him as if hell had opened
underneath his feet; and he had no might to speak for a minute; then
he cried out: Sir Aymeris, hearken, I pray thee. But the old knight
but thrust him back with his hand, and even therewith one of the men-
at-arms cried out: I hear the voice of their horn! Then shouted Sir
Aymeris: Where art thou, Noise? Blow, man, blow, if ever thou
blewest in all thy life! And therewithal came the blare of the
brass, and Sir Aymeris nodded to the trumpeter, who blew blast after
blast with all his might, so that the priest might as well have been
dumb for any hearing he might get; and all the while to Leonard the
minutes seemed hours, and he was well-nigh distraught.

And then when the knight held up his hand for the Noise to stay his
blowing, and Leonard strove to speak, the castellan turned on him and
said: Peace, Sir Leonard; dost thou not know that now we would
listen with our ears to heed if they answer us? Not a word any one
man of you, learned or lewd, or ye shall rue it!

Even therewith came clearly the sound of the horn from the water, and
again and yet again; and no man spake but the chaplain, who cried
out: Hearken, knight, it is of Birdalone. But Sir Aymeris laid his
hand on his shoulder and said in an angry whisper: Thou shalt be put
downstairs, priest, if thou hold not thy peace.

Leonard drew aback scowling, and went out of the door, and so slowly
down the stair, and withdrew him into the cover of the door of the
first chamber down from the tower-top, with the mind to waylay Sir
Aymeris as he came down; and meanwhile he cursed him for a fool and a
dull-wit, and himself yet more, as was but right, for a fool and a
licorous traitor.

But he had not tarried there more than a score of minutes, ere he
heard a great shout from those up above: They are come! they are
come! And next thereafter came all the men clattering down the stair
past him, scarce refraining them from shoving each his neighbour on
to the next one; Leonard followed on them, and presently arose great
shouting and tumult through all the house, and all folk, men and
women, hurried flock-meal toward the water-gate, and with them went
Leonard perforce; and sick of heart he was, calling to mind the first
coming thither of Birdalone.

But now when they came to the water-gate, there verily was the
Sending Boat just coming to hand; and in the stern stood the three
knights together, all clad in their armour, and before them sat three
lovely ladies, clad one in gold, one in green, and one in black: and
lo, there was the Quest come home.



CHAPTER II. NOW ASK THEY OF BIRDALONE, AND SIR LEONARD SPEAKS



Now the prow touched the stones of the stair, and folk were busy to
lay hold of it that the wayfarers might land, but Sir Baudoin cried
out in a great voice: Let none be so hardy as to touch this ferry,
either now or hereafter; for there is peril therein. And therewith
he took Aurea by the hand, and led her out of the boat and up the
stair, and she all joyous and wondering; and thereafter came Hugh and
his darling, and last of all Arthur and Atra, and she alone of the
three women looked downcast, and her eyes wandered about the throng
that was before them there, as though she sought something, yet
feared to see it.

But when they were all standing together on the landing-plain, and
the folk were all about them in a ring, Sir Baudoin spake to the
castellan and said: Sir Aymeris, thee and other folk I see here, the
sight of whom doth me great joy; but where, I pray thee, is the lady,
our friend Birdalone, by whom it is that all we are come happily
hither? And he looked around with an anxious face; but Arthur was as
pale as ashes, yet he spake nought, and Atra let her hand fall away
from his.

Then spake the castellan, and said: No harm hath befallen the Lady
Birdalone; but whiles she hath been somewhat ailing of late, and it
is like that she wotteth not what is toward, and keepeth her chamber
now, for it is yet betimes in the morning.

As he spake, came thrusting a man through the throng, eager and pale-
faced; who but the chaplain; and he said: He would not let me speak,
this fool; I cannot choose my time. Lords, I bear evil tidings and
an ugly welcome home. The Lady Birdalone is in peril, and she is not
in the castle; I wot not where she is. Ye must send armed men to
seek her out.

Thereat fell the silence of woe upon the throng; but Arthur ran
forward on the priest with drawn sword, and cried out: I misdoubt me
that thou art a traitor; speak! or I will slay thee here and now. If
I be a traitor, quoth Leonard, I shall tell thee in little while what
ye must do to undo my treason, if there be yet time thereto; so slay
me not till ye have heard, and then do what ye will with me.

But Baudoin put Arthur aside, and said: Refrain thee a little, fair
brother, else shall words tumble over each other and we shall know
nothing clear. Sir Aymeris, bring our dear ladies to the fairest
chambers, and do all honour and courtesy to them. And ye,
sweetlings, ye will not begrudge us that we go to seek your friend.
Thou priest, come with us a little apart, and tell thy tale as
shortly as thou mayst, and fear nought; we be not God's dastards, as
the Red Knight and his men.

Viridis wept and kissed her love before all folk, and bade him go and
do his best to find her friend, or never come back to her else. Much
moved, even to tears, was Aurea withal, and reached her hand to
Baudoin, and said: If any man on earth can help us it is thou. Go
thou. But Atra wept not, and but said to Arthur: Go thou, it is
meet.

Therewith were the ladies brought to fair chambers; but the three
knights went with the priest and Sir Aymeris into the solar, and set
a guard at the door that their talk should be privy.



CHAPTER III. HOW THEY FOLLOW THE SLOT OF BIRDALONE AND THE BLACK
KNIGHT



It was but five minutes ere the priest had told them all that need
was; so they let him abide alone there, though sooth to say there was
none of them but had good will to break his neck; and the same rede
had all three, that there was nought for it but to go their ways with
all speed to the Black Valley of the Greywethers, and follow up the
slot of Birdalone if it might yet be found; wherefore they bade
saddle their horses straightway; and while that was a-doing they ate
a morsel, and bade farewell to their lovelings. And they dight them
to go, they three together, with but one squire and a sergeant, who
were both of them keen trackers and fell woodsmen. But ere they
went, by the rede of Arthur they bade Sir Aymeris to arm a two score
of men and ride toward the Red Hold, and beset the ways 'twixt that
and the Castle of the Quest; for one and all they deemed that if any
harm befell Birdalone, the Red Knight would be at the bottom of it.

So rode those fellows, and came unto the dale but some four hours
after Birdalone had happened on the stranger knight; and they took up
the slot of her, but not easily, whereas the ground was hard and
stony; howbeit, they found tokens of the knight also, finding here
and there what they deemed the footprints of a tall man. And this
was grievous to those fellows, since now they could not but deem that
somewhat untoward had befallen Birdalone. But they went on making
out the slot, and they followed it with much toil until they came to
the doom-ring in the head of the dale, whereas Birdalone and the
stranger had sat down to meat; but by that time, so toilsome had been
their going, it was somewhat more than dusk, and there was nought for
it but to abide there night-long. So a while they sat talking, all
of them, and the squire and the sergeant aforesaid were not a little
timorous of the adventure of making that stead unkenned their
sleeping chamber; and to while away the time, their lords made them
tell tales such as they knew concerning that place; and both they
said that they had never erst come into the dale but a very little
way, and said that they had done so then but trusting in their lords'
bidding and the luck of the Quest. Thereafter turned the talk as to
what had befallen Birdalone, and the chances of coming on her; and,
as folk will in such a plight, they talked the matter over and over
again till they were weary and could say no more.

Then they went to sleep, and nought befell them till they awoke in
the broad daylight; but they had little inkling of what hour it was,
for all the dale was full of thick white mist that came rolling down
from the mountains, so that they could scarce see their hands before
them, and there they had to tarry still, would they, would they not;
and the sergeant fell to telling tales of folk who had been lost in
that stony maze; and all of them deemed, more or less, that this was
the work either of evil wights, or it might be of the wizardry of the
Red Knight; and, to be short, they all deemed that he it was who had
wielded it, save the sergeant, who said that the mountain wights were
the masters and not the servants of him of the Red Hold.

Thus, then, it betided; but when the said mist had been hanging upon
them for some six hours, it rolled up like a curtain, and lo the blue
sky and the sun, and the mountains as clear blue as in a picture; and
they saw by the sun that it was but a little after high noon.

But as they rejoiced herein, and betook them once more to tracking
out the slot of Birdalone and the other, the sky became suddenly
overcast, and down from the jaws of the mountain came a storm of wind
and rain, and thunder and lightning, so great that they might scarce
see each other's faces, and when it cleared off, in about an hour and
a half, and went down the wind to the south-east, the stream was
waxen great, and ran brown and furious down the dale, so that it was
fordable only here and there; and as for tracking the slot of those
twain, there was no need to talk thereof, for the fury of the driving
rain had washed all away.

Thus fared they the whole day betwixt fog and clear weather, and they
laid them down to rest at night sore disheartened. When the day
broke they talked together as to what was best to do; and the
sergeant aforesaid spake: Lords, said he, meseemeth I am more at
home in the Black Valley than ye be; heed ye not wherefore. Now so
it is that if we tarry here till night come we wot not what of evil
may betide us, or at the least we do nought. Or if we turn back and
go southward out of the dale we shall be safe indeed; but safe should
we have been at your house, lords, and should have done no less. But
now I shall tell you that, if ye will, lords, I shall guide you to a
pass that goeth out of the head of the dale to our right hands, and
so turneth the flank of the mountains, and cometh out into the
country which lieth about the Red Hold; and meseemeth it is
thitherward that we must seek if we would hear any tidings of the
lady; for there may we lay in ambush and beset the ways that lead up
to the Hold, by which she must have been brought if she hath not been
carried through the air. How say ye, lords? Soothly there is peril
therein; yet meseemeth peril no more than in our abiding another
night in the Black Valley.

Said Arthur: We heed not the peril if there be aught to be done;
wherefore let us be stirring straightway. And so said they all.
Wherefore they gat to horse, and rode up to the very head of the
valley, and the weather was now calm and bright.

But the sergeant brought them to the pass whereof the stranger knight
had spoken to Birdalone, which led into the Red Knight's country, and
without more ado they entered it when it was now about three hours
after noon. But the way was both steep and rough, so that they had
much toil, and went not very far ere night fell upon them, and the
moon was not yet up. So when they had stumbled on another two hours,
and their horses were much spent and they themselves not a little
weary, they laid them down to sleep, after they had eaten such meat
as they had with them, in a place where was a little grass for the
horses to bite; for all the road hitherto had been mere grim stones
and big rocks, walled on either side by stony screes, above which
rose steep and beetling crags.

In the dawn they arose again, and made no ado till they were in the
saddle, and rode till they came to the crest of the pass, and came
out thence after a while on to the swelling flank of a huge mountain
 as it might be the side of the mountain of Plinlimmon in Wales ,
which was grassed and nought craggy, but utterly treeless.

Now the sergeant led them somewhat athwart the said mountain till
they began to go down, and saw below them a country of little hills
much covered with wood, and in a while, and ere it was noon, they
were among the said woods, which were grown mostly with big trees, as
oak here and beech there, and the going was good for them.



CHAPTER IV. OF THE SLAYING OF FRIEND AND FOE



So came they, three hours after noon, to where was a clearing in the
woodland, and a long narrow plain some furlong over lay before them,
with a river running along it, and the wood rose on the other side
high and thick, so that the said plain looked even as a wide green
highway leading from somewhence to somewhither.

At the edge hereof their way-leader, the sergeant, bade draw rein,
and said: Lords, we are now in the lands of the Red Hold, and
therein is mickle peril and dread to any save stout hearts as ye be;
but meseems we are so steaded, that whatever may come out of the
Black Valley of the Greywethers to the Red Hold, ye now may scarce
miss. Yonder along this plain to the north lies the way to the said
Hold, and any man coming from the head of the valley is sure to come
by the way we have come, and will pass us not many yards at the worst
from where we now be. On the other hand, if any come to the Hold
from the mouth of the Black Valley, then along this green road must
they needs pass under your very eyes. Lastly, if we do what we are
come to do, to wit, to deliver the lady from the Red Knight, then,
the deed done, we have to take the green road southward, and ride it
for a league and then turn east, and we shall have our heads turned
toward the Castle of the Quest, and shall speedily fall in with Sir
Aymeris and our men who be guarding the out-gates of the Red Knight's
country toward our house. So now, by my rede, ye shall lay in covert
here and abide a while what may befall; if nought come hereby ere two
hours be lacking of sunset, then may we seek further.

They all yeasaid this, and gat off their horses, and lay quiet on the
grass, not even speaking save softly. And when they had abided thus
scarce an hour's space, the squire, who was a man of very fine ear,
held up his hand as though to bid utter silence, and all hearkened
eagerly. Presently he said: Hear ye not? Said Arthur: Meseemeth I
hear a faint tinkle as of a sheep-bell. Said the squire: 'Tis the
clashing of swords down the plain to the south, and meseemeth 'tis
but of two: ride we thither?

Quoth Baudoin: Nay, not by my rede; for if we can hear them they can
hear us; let us quietly edge along afoot somewhat nigher their way,
ever keeping the cover of the wood betwixt us and the open plain.
Now then to it; and let each man keep his weapons ready.

Even so did they, and spread out in a line as they went, in such wise
that there was some six paces betwixt each man of them, and they went
softly forward; Baudoin went first, Hugh second, then Arthur; then
the squire and the sergeant last of all.

Now when they had gone but a quarter of an hour, the squire caught up
with Arthur, and spake to him softly, and said: The voice of the
swords has been silent now a while, and I heard a voice crying out
e'en now, a woman's voice. And now again I could well-nigh deem that
I hear horse-hoofs.

Arthur nodded to him, and they went but a little further ere he said:
Lo, lo! 'tis the time of the eyes now! Here come folk. And
therewithal they stayed them. For the wood turned somewhat here, so
as to hide all but a little of the plain, and round the wood neb the
new-comers hove in sight, and were close on them at once, so that
they might see them clearly, to wit, a knight weaponed, clad all in
red, a very big man, riding on a great bay horse, and behind him a
woman going afoot in very piteous plight; for she was tethered to the
horse's crupper by a thong that bound her wrists together, so that
she had but just room left 'twixt her and the horse that she might
walk, and round about her neck was hung a man's head newly hewn off.

This sight they all saw at once, and were out of the wood in a trice
with weapons aloft, for they knew both the man and the woman, that
they were the Red Knight and Birdalone.

So swift and sudden had they been, that he had no time either to spur
or even to draw his sword; but he had a heavy steel axe in his hand
as the first man came up to him, which was the tall Baudoin; and
therewith he smote down on Baudoin so fierce and huge a stroke, that
came on him betwixt neck and shoulder, that all gave way before it,
and the Golden Knight fell to earth all carven and stark dead: but
even therewith fell Hugh, the squire, and the sergeant on the Red
Knight; for Arthur had run to Birdalone and sheared her loose from
her tether. The sergeant smote him on the right arm with a maul, so
that the axe fell to the ground; the squire's sword came on the side
of his head, and, as it was cast back beneath the stroke, Hugh thrust
his sword through the throat of him, and down he fell unto the earth
and was dead in less than a minute.

Then gathered the others round about Baudoin, and saw at once that he
was dead; and Birdalone came thrusting through the press of them, and
knelt down beside him, and when she saw her friend so piteously
dight, she wept and wailed over him as one who might not be
comforted; and Hugh stood over her and let his tears fall down upon
the dead man; and withal the squire and the sergeant did not refrain
their lamentations, for sore beloved was Sir Baudoin the Golden
Knight.

But Arthur spake dry-eyed, though there was grief in his countenance,
and he said: Fellows, and thou, lady, let us lament afterwards, but
now is time for us to get us gone hence as speedily as may be. Yet I
will ask, doth any know whose is this head that the slain tyrant here
had hung about the lady's neck? May the fiends curse him therefor!

Said the sergeant: Yea, lords, that wot I; this is the head of the
Red Knight's captain and head man, Sir Thomas of Estcliffe; one of
the hardiest of knights he was while he was alive, as ye surely wot,
lords; neither, as I have heard say, was he as cruel a tyrant as his
lord that lieth there ready for the ravens.

Now had Birdalone arisen and was standing facing Arthur; her face was
pale and full of anguish, and she was dabbled with blood from the
dead man's neck; but there was nought of shame in her face as she
stood there and spoke: O my living friends, who have but now saved
me, ye and my dead friends, from what shame and death I know not, the
tale of this woeful hap is over long to tell if there be peril at
hand, and I scarce alive from dread and sorrow; but shortly thus it
is: This man, whose head here lieth, entrapped me as I foolishly
wandered in the Black Valley, and afterwards delivered me, and was
leading me to your castle, my friends, when this other one, his
master, the tyrant of the Red Hold, came upon him, and fell upon him
and slew him as a traitor, and dighted me as ye saw. And woe's me!
I am the fool whose folly has slain your friend and mine. Wherefore
I am not worthy of your fellowship, and ye shall cast me forth of it;
or to slay me were better.

So she spake, gazing earnestly on Arthur; and so troubled and
grieved, that she might well have died but for her woodland breeding,
and the toil of the days she had won through in the House under the
Wood.

But Hugh spake gently to her and said: Keep up thine heart yet,
maiden; for the hand of Fate it is that led thee, and none doeth
grievously amiss but if he mean wrong-doing in his heart; and we know
thee for true; and thou hast been our helper, and brought our
lovelings unto us to make us happy.

But she brake out weeping afresh, and said: O no, no! it is but woe
and weariness I have brought unto my friends; and to myself woe and
weariness yet more.

And she looked piteously into Arthur's face, and hard and stern it
seemed unto her; and she writhed and wrung her hands for anguish.
But he spake and said: This will we look into when we be safe behind
our walls, and see what she hath done amiss and what not amiss. But
now is there but one thing to do, and that is to get us speedily on
our way to the Castle of the Quest, and bind our fellow's body on his
horse that he also may ride with us, and the lady shall ride the
horse of the accursed thief. Then they turned to go toward their
horses; but therewith Birdalone smote her foot against the slain
knight's head, and shrank aback from it, and pointed down toward it
and spake no word; and Hugh said: Friends, the lady is right, this
at least we will cover with earth. Do ye go fetch hither our horses,
since we be on the road, and I will do here what need is meanwhile.

So they went on that errand, and then Hugh and Birdalone between them
dug a hole with the swords and laid the head of the captain of the
Red Knight therein. And forsooth, somewhat would Birdalone have wept
for him had she had a tear to spare.

Then they fell to and bound the dead Baudoin on the Red Knight's
mighty bay steed, so that no time might be wasted; and when that was
done, and the others had not come back with their horses, Hugh took
Birdalone's hand and led her down to the stream and washed the gore
off her bosom, and she washed her face and her hands and let him lead
her back again in such wise that now she could hearken to the words
of comfort he spake to her, and piteous kind he seemed unto her; so
that at last she plucked up heart, and asked him how Viridis did.
Quoth he: They be all safe at home in the castle, and Viridis is
well and loveth thee well. And Aurea was well, woe worth the while
for her now! As for Atra, she has not been so glad as the other
twain, I wot not wherefore.

Even as he spake were the others come up with the horses, and Arthur
nodded yeasay when he saw what had been done with Baudoin dead; and
so they gat to horse, and Birdalone it was that rode Baudoin's steed.
Then they went their ways, crossing the river into the wood; and the
sergeant was ever way-leader, but the squire led the horse which bore
the sorrowful burden of the dead Knight of the Quest.



CHAPTER V. THEY COME HOME TO THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST



Now they had gone but some three hours, riding dreary and nigh
speechless all of them, ere they began to know the land they were in,
and that they were coming to the place where they might look
presently to fall in with Sir Aymeris and his company; and even so
the meeting betid, that they saw men standing and going about their
horses beside a little wood, and knew them presently for their folk,
who mounted at once and spurred forward to meet them, spears aloft.
Speedily then was the joy of those abiders turned into sorrow, nor
may the grief of Sir Aymeris be told, so great it was; and Birdalone
looked on and saw the mourning and lamentation of the warriors, and
eked was her anguish of mind; and she beheld Arthur the Black Squire,
how he sat still upon his horse with a hard and dreary countenance,
and looked on those mourners almost as if he contemned them. But Sir
Aymeris came up to Birdalone, and knelt before her and kissed her
hand, and said: If my heart might rejoice in aught, as some day it
will, it would rejoice in seeing thee safe and sound, lady; here at
least is gain to set beside the loss.

She thanked him, but looked askance toward Arthur, who said: If that
be gain, yet is there more, for the Red Knight lieth in the green
plain for a supper to the wolf and the crow. Vengeance there hath
been, and belike more yet may come. But now, if ye have lamented as
much as ye deem befitteth warriors, let us tarry here no longer; for
even yet meseemeth shall we be safer behind walls, now that our chief
and captain is slain, I scarce know in what quarrel.

None naysaid it, so they all rode forth together, and the sergeant
and the squire and Sir Hugh told of their tale what they might to Sir
Aymeris and the others; but Arthur held his peace, and rode aloof
from Birdalone, whereas Sir Aymeris and Hugh rode on either side of
her, and did not spare to comfort her what they might.

They rode straight on, and made no stay for nightfall, and thus came
home to the Castle of the Quest before the day was full; and woeful
was their entry as they went in the dawn underneath the gate of the
said castle, and soon was the whole house astir and lamenting.

As for Birdalone, when she got down from her horse in the gateway,
and was stiff and weary of body, and all dazed and confused of mind,
there was but little life in her; nor could she so much as think of
the new day and Aurea's awakening, but crept up unto her own chamber,
so long as it seemed since she had left it, though it was but a
little while; and she cast herself upon the bed and fell asleep
whether she would or not, and so forgat her much sorrow and her
little hope.



CHAPTER VI. OF THE TALK BETWIXT BIRDALONE AND VIRIDIS



When she woke again, she had slept the night away, and it was broad
day, and for a moment she lay wondering what was the burden upon her;
but presently she called it all to mind, and deemed it were well
might she forget it all again. Anon she became aware of someone
moving about the chamber, and she looked about unhappily; and lo! a
woman, fair and dainty, clad all in green, and it was Viridis that
had come there. But when she saw Birdalone stirring, she came up to
her and kissed her sweetly and kindly, and wept over her, so that
Birdalone might nowise refrain her tears. But when she might cease
weeping, she said to Viridis: Tell me, art thou weeping for thy
friend who is lost, and who shall be thy friend no more; or thy
friend whom thou hast found? Said Viridis: Forsooth I have wept for
Baudoin plenteously, and he is worthy of it, for he was valiant and
true and kind. Said Birdalone: True is that; but I meant not my
question so; but rather I would ask thee if thou weepest because
thine heart must needs cast me away, or because thou hast found me
again? Quoth Viridis: Whoso may be dead, or whoso alive, but if it
were Hugh, my loveling, I were rejoiced beyond measure to find thee,
my friend. And again she kissed her as one who was glad and kind.
But for new rest of soul and for joy, Birdalone fell a-weeping
afresh.

Again she spake: And what mind have the others about me? For thou
art but one, though the dearest, save . . . And would they punish me
for my fault and folly that has slain the best man in the world? If
the punishment be short of putting me forth of their fellowship, I
were fain thereof.

Viridis laughed: Forsooth, she said, they have much to punish thee
for! whereas it was by thy doing and thy valiance that we all came
together again and the Quest was accomplished. Nay, but tell me,
said Birdalone, what do they say of me, each one of them?

Viridis reddened; she said: Hugh, my mate, saith all good of thee;
though no one of carl-folk may be sorrier of the loss of his fellow.
Aurea layeth not the death of her man upon thee; and she saith: When
the fountain of tears is dried up in me, I will see her and comfort
her, as she me. Atra saith: she saith but little, yet she saith:
So is it fated. I had done belike no better, but worse than she.

Now turned Birdalone red and then pale again, and she said, but in a
quavering voice: And the Black Squire, Arthur, what sayeth he? Said
Viridis: He sayeth nought of thee, but that he would hear all the
tale of what befell thee in the Black Valley. Sweet friend, said
Birdalone, I pray thee of thy kindness and sweetness that thou go
unto him presently and bring him in hither, and then I will tell him
all; and he and thou and I together.

Viridis said: There is this to be said, that when a man loveth a
woman he coveteth her, to have her all wholly to himself, and hard
and evil he groweth for the time that he misdoubteth her whom he
loveth. And I will tell thee that this man is jealous lest thou wert
never so little kind to the slain stranger knight whose head the
tyrant hung about thee. Furthermore, I fear there is no help for it
that thou wilt undo the happiness of one of us, that is Atra; yet
were it better that that befell later than sooner. And if Sir Arthur
come in here to thee, and hath thy tale with none beside save me,
meseems the poor Atra will feel a bitter smart because of it. Were
it not better that we all meet presently in the solar, and that there
thou tell thy tale to us all? and thereafter shall we tell the tale
of our deliverance and our coming hither. And thus doing, it will
seem less like to the breaking up of our fellowship.

Said Birdalone: It will be hard for me to tell my tale before Atra
and before him. Might it not be that thou hearken to it here and
now, and tell it to the others hereafter? Nay, nay, said Viridis, I
am not a proper minstrel to take the word out of thy mouth. Never
shall I be able to tell it so that they shall trow it as if they had
seen it all. Besides, when all is told, then shall we be more bound
together again. I pray thee, and I pray thee, sweet, do so much for
me as to tell thy tale to the fellowship of us. And if it be hard to
thee, look upon it as my share of the punishment which is due to thee
for falling into that mishap.

Smiled Birdalone ruefully, and said: So be it; and may the share of
the others be as light as thine, sister. Yet soothly were I liefer
that my body and my skin should pay the forfeit. But now, since I
must needs do this, the sooner is the better meseemeth.

In a little half hour, said Viridis, will I bring what is left of our
fellowship into the solar to hearken thee. So come thou there unto
us when thou art clad. And hear thou! be not too meek and humble,
and bow thyself to us in fear of our sorrow. For whereas thou didst
speak of our punishing thee, there will be one there whom thou mayst
easily punish to thy pleasure; forsooth, friend, I rue that so it is;
but since it will not better be, what may I do but wish thee happy
and him also.

Therewith she turned and went out of the chamber, and Birdalone, left
to herself, felt a secret joy in her soul that she might not master,
despite the sorrow of her friends, whatever it might be.



CHAPTER VII. BIRDALONE TELLETH THE TALE OF HER WANDERING UP THE
VALLEY OF THE GREYWETHERS



Now Viridis did as she said, and brought them all in to the solar;
there was none lacking save Baudoin, and they sat silently in a half
ring, till the door opened and Birdalone came in to them, clad all
simply in but a black coat; and she made obeisance to them, and stood
there with her head bent down as if they were her judges, for so in
sooth she deemed them. Then Hugh bade her sit down amongst them; but
she said: Nay, I will not sit amongst you till ye have heard my
story, and ye have told me that I am yet of your fellowship. None
said aught; Atra looked straight before her, and her eyes met not
Birdalone's eyes; Arthur looked down on the ground; but Hugh and
Viridis looked kindly on Birdalone, and to Viridis' eyes the tears
were come.

Then spake Birdalone and said: I am here as one that hath done
amiss; but I will tell you, so that ye may not think worse of me than
ye should, that when ye were gone, ye Champions, and the time wore
long that ye came not again, it lay heavy on my heart, and hope waned
and fear waxed, and my soul so grieved my body that I thought to fall
sick thereof, and I knew that it would be ill for you to come home
hither and find me sick; so that I longed sore to do somewhat which
should make me whole again. Then weird would that I should hear all
the tale of the Black Valley of the Greywethers, and of how therein
is whiles granted fulfilment of desire; and methought how well it
were if I might seek the adventure there and accomplish it. Thereof,
doubtless, hath the chaplain, Sir Leonard, told you; but this
furthermore would I say, that his doing herein was nought; all was
done by my doing and by my bidding, and he might not choose but do
it. Wherefore I do pray you all earnestly that ye keep no grudge
against him, but pardon him all. Tell me, then, will ye do thus
much?

Said Hugh: Let him be pardoned, if he can take pardon. But Arthur
spake not, and Birdalone looked on him anxiously, and her face was
moved, and it was with her throat as if she had swallowed something
down. Then she spake again, and fell to tell them all that had betid
to her when she went to the Black Valley, even as is hereafore writ,
hiding nought that had been done and said; and freely she told it,
without fear or shame, and with such clearness and sweetness of words
that no one of them doubted her aught; and Arthur lifted up his head,
and once and again his eyes met hers, and there was nought of
hardness in them, though they turned away at once.

So at last fell Birdalone to telling what betid after they two, the
stranger knight and she, left the valley of the force and fell to
riding the wildwood with their heads turned toward the Castle of the
Quest; and she said:

When we turned into the wood away from the said valley it lacked some
four hours of noon; and we rode till noon was, and rested by a
stream-side and ate, for we knew no cause wherefore we should hasten
overmuch; but my fellow the strange knight was downcast and heavy,
and some might have called him sullen. But I strove to make him of
better cheer, and spake to him kindly, as to one who of an enemy had
become a friend; but he answered me: Lady, it availeth not; I grieve
that I am no better company than thou seest me, and I have striven to
be merrier; but apart from all that I wot and that thou wottest which
should make me of evil cheer, there is now a weight upon my heart
which I cannot lift, such as never have I felt erst. So by thy leave
we will to horse at once, that we may the speedier come to the Castle
of the Quest and Sir Aymeris' prison.

So I arose, but smiled on him and said: Hold up thine heart, friend!
for thee shall be no prison at the Castle of the Quest, but the fair
welcome of friends. He said nought, and mended not his cheer; and in
this plight we gat to horse and rode on for some three hours more,
till we came out of the thick forest into a long clearing, which went
like a wide highway of greensward between the thicket, and it seemed
as if the hand of man had cleared that said green road. Thereto we
had come, following a little river which came out on to the clearing
with us, and then, turning, ran well-nigh amidst it toward the north.

Now when we were come thither, and were betwixt the thicket and the
water's edge, we drew rein, and it seemed to me as fair a stead as
might be in the woodland, and I looked thereon well pleased and with
a happy heart. But the knight said: Lady, art thou not exceeding
weary? Nay, said I, not in any wise. Said he: It is strange then,
for so weary am I, that I must in any case get off my horse and lay
me down on the grass here, or I shall drop from the saddle. And
therewith he lighted down and stood by me a little, as to help me off
my horse; but I said to him: Knight, I pray thee, even if ye be
weary, to struggle forward a little, lest we be in peril here. In
peril? quoth he; yea, that might be if the Red Knight knew of our
whereabouts; but how should that be? He spoke this heavily, as one
scarce awake; and then he said: I pray thee pardon me, lady, but for
nought may I hold my head up; suffer me to sleep but a little, and
then will I arise and lead thee straight to thy journey's end.
Therewithal he laid him down on the grass and was presently asleep,
and I sat down by him all dismayed. At first, indeed, I doubted some
treachery in him, for how might I trust him wholly after all that had
come and gone? but when I saw that there was no feigning in his
sleep, I set that doubt aside, and knew not what to make of it.

Thus passed an hour, and from time to time I shook him and strove to
waken him, but it was all in vain; so I knew none other rede than to
abide his awakening; for I knew not the way to take toward this
castle; and, moreover, though he were a knight, and armed, yet might
it be perilous for him if he were left there alone and unguarded; so
I abode.

But now came new tidings. Methought I heard the sound of the
tinkling of weapons and armour; the green highway so turned that a
wood neb about an hundred yards to the north hid it from my sight, so
that a man might have drawn somewhat near to us without being seen,
came he on the hither side of the river. So I stood up hastily, and
strung my bow, and took a shaft in my fingers, and no sooner was it
done than there came a rider round about the aforesaid wood neb. He
was all-armed and had a red surcoat, and rode a great shining bay
horse. I kept my eye upon him while I stirred the sleeping knight
with my foot, and cried to him to wake, but he scarce moved, and but
uttered words without sense.

Now the new-comer drew rein for a moment when he saw us, and then
moved on a little toward me, but I nocked a shaft and pointed it at
him, and cried out to him to stay. Then I heard a great rattling
laugh come from him, and he shouted: Nay, do thou stay, fair wood-
wife, and I will risk thy shafts to come at thee. But why doth not
the sluggard at thy feet rise up and stand before me, if he be thy
loveling? Or is he dead? His voice was harsh and big, and I feared
him sore; and it was as much because of fear as of hardihood, that I
drew and loosed straightway; and doubtless it was because of fear
that I saw my shaft fly an inch or so over his right shoulder. I
heard his rattling laugh again, and saw him bend forward as he
spurred; I knew that time lacked for drawing another shaft, so I
caught up my skirts and ran all I might; but swift-foot as I be, it
availed me nought, for I was cumbered with my gown, and moreover I
was confused with not knowing whither to run, since I wotted that in
the water the horse would do better than I.

So he was up with me in a twinkling, and reached out his hand and
caught hold of me by the hair, and tugged me to him as he reined back
his horse. Then he laughed again and said: Forsooth she will look
better when she is no longer reddened and roughened with fleeing;
and, by Red Peter! what limbs she hath. Then he let me loose and got
off his horse, and shoved me on before him till we came to where the
Black One lay still sleeping heavily. Then the Red Knight stood
against me, and looked hard into my face; and I saw how huge a man he
was, and how a lock of bright red hair came out from under his
sallet. His eyes were green and fierce underneath shaggy red
eyebrows; terrible he was to look on.

Now he spake fiercely and roughly, and as though he had something
against me: Tell me, thou, who thou art and who this is? I answered
nought, for fear had frozen my speech. He stamped his foot on the
ground and cried: Hah! art thou gone dumb? Speak! thou wert best!
I said, all quaking: My name is Birdalone; I belong to no one; I
have no kindred: as for this man, I know not his name. He said:
Comest thou from the Castle of the Quest? Art thou the whore of
those lily-and-rose champions there? My heart was hot with anger in
spite of my dread, but I spake: I came from the Castle of the Quest.
He said: And this man  therewith he turned about and spurned him in
the side , where didst thou happen upon him? Again I was silent, and
he roared out at me: So thou wilt not answer! Beware, or I may see
how to compel the speech of thee. Now answer me this: Was it in the
Black Valley of the Greywethers that ye two came together? Again I
knew not how to answer, lest I might do a wrong to him who had
repented him of the wrong he had done me. But the Red Knight burst
out a-laughing and said: It shall be remembered against thee, first,
that thou didst let fly a shaft at me; second, that thou didst run
from me; and thirdly, that thou hast been slack in answering my
questions. But all this scathes me nought; first, because thy shaft
missed me; second, because thy legs failed thee  though they were
fair to look on, running ; and third, because all thou canst tell me
I know without thine answering. Now thee will I tell that this is
Friday, and that ye two first met in the Black Valley on Tuesday; now
I will ask this last question, and thou mayst answer it or not as
thou wilt; for presently I shall wake this brisk and stirring knight,
and I deem that he will tell me the truth of this if of nought else.
Tell me, thou whore of the Questing Champions, where and how many
times thou hast lain in this good knight's arms since last Tuesday?
Nowhere and never, quoth I. Thou liest, I doubt thee, said the Red
Knight; howsoever, let us see what this doughty one will say. Hah!
thou deemest he shall be hard to wake up, dost thou not! Well, I
shall see to that. He who giveth sleep may take it away again.

Therewith he went up to the Black One and stooped adown over his
head, and spake some words over him, but so softly that I heard not
their import; and straightway the sleeper rose up so suddenly that he
wellnigh smote against the Red Knight. He stood awhile staggering,
and blinking at the other one, but somehow got his sword drawn forth,
and the Red Knight hindered him nought therein, but spake anon when
the other was come to himself somewhat: The sele of the day to thee,
Sir Thomas, True Thomas! Fair is thy bed, and most fair thy
bedfellow.

The Black Knight drew aback from him and was now come awake,
wherefore he stood on his guard, but said nought. Then said the Red
Knight: Sir Thomas, I have been asking this fair lady a question,
but her memory faileth her and she may not answer it; perchance thou
mayst do better. Tell me where and how many times hast thou bedded
her betwixt last Tuesday and this? Nowhere and never, cried Sir
Thomas, knitting his brows and handling his sword. Hah, said the Red
Knight, an echo of her speech is this. Lo, the tale ye have made up
betwixt you. But at least, having done mine errand, though meseemeth
somewhat leisurely, and having gotten the woman for me, thou art now
bringing her on to the Red Hold, whatever thou hast done with her on
the road? I am not, said my fellow, I am leading her away from the
Red Hold. Pity of thee, quoth the other, that thou hast fallen in
with me, and thou but half-armed. And he raised aloft his sword; but
presently sank it again, and let the point rest on the earth.

Then he spoke again, not mockingly as erst: A word before we end it,
Thomas: thou hast hitherto done well by me, as I by thee. I say
thou hast gotten this woman, and I doubt not that at first thou hadst
the mind to bring her to me unminished; but then thou wert overcome
by her beauty, as forsooth I know thee woman-mad, and thou hadst
meant to keep her for thyself, as forsooth I marvel not. But in thy
love-making thou hast not bethought thee that keep her to thyself
thou mayst not while I am above ground, save thou bewray me, and join
thee to my foemen and thine. Because I am such a man, that what I
desire that will I have. For this reason, when I misdoubted me of
thee for thy much-tarrying, I cast the sleep over thee, and have
caught thee. For what wilt thou do? Doubt it not, that if our
swords meet, I shall pay thee for trying to take my bedthrall from me
by taking from thee no more than thy life. But now will I forgive
thee all if thou wilt ride home quietly with me and this damsel-
errant to the Red Hold, and let her be mine and not thine so long as
I will; and then afterwards, if thou wilt, she shall be thine as long
as thou wilt. Now behold, both this chance and thy life is a mere
gift of me to thee, for otherwise thou shalt have neither damsel nor
life.

Yea, yea, said my friend, I know what thou wouldest: I have been no
unhandy devil to thee this long while, and thou wouldst fain keep me
still; but now I will be devil no longer, on this earth at least, but
will die and take my luck of it. And do thou, God, see to the saving
of this damsel, since thou hast taken the matter out of my hands.
Farewell, dear maiden!

Scarce was the word out of his mouth ere his sword was in the air,
and he smote so fierce and straight that he beat down the huge man's
blade, and, ere he could master it again, smote the Red Knight so
heavily on the crest that he fell to his knees; and the heart rose in
me, for I deemed that he might yet prevail; and in as 'twere a flash
I bethought me of the knife at my girdlestead, and drew it and ran to
the Red Knight, and tore aside his mail hood with one hand and thrust
the knife into his shoulder with the other; but so mighty was he that
he heeded nought the hurt, but swept his sword back-handed at the
Black Knight's unarmed leg, and smote him so sore a wound that down
he fell clattering. Then arose the Red Knight, and thrust me from
him with the left hand, and strode over my fellow-farer and thrust
his sword through his throat. Then he turned to me, and spake in a
braying voice as if a harsh horn were blown:

Abide thou; if thou takest one step I will slay thee at once. So he
went and sat down on a bank a little way from the dead man, and wiped
his sword on the grass and laid it beside him, and so sat pondering a
while. Thereafter he called me to him, and bade me stand in face of
him with my hands clasped before me. Then he spake to me: Thou art
my thrall and my having, since I had thus doomed it no few days ago;
and thou art now in my hands for me to do with as I will. Now
instead of being meek and obedient to me thou hast rebelled against
me, shot an arrow at me, run from me, denied answer to my questions,
and thrust a knife into me. To be short, thou hast made thyself my
foe. Furthermore, it is by thy doing that I have lost a right good
servant and a trusty fellow, and one that I loved; it is thou that
hast slain him. Now have I been pondering what I shall do with thee.
I said: If I have deserved the death, then make an end and slay me
presently; but bring me not to thine house, I pray thee. I pray by
the mother that bore thee!

Quoth he: Hold thy peace, it is not what thou deservest that I am
looking to, but what shall pleasure me. Now hearken; I say that thou
hast made thee my foe, and I have overcome thee; thou art my runaway
thrall, and I have caught thee. As my foe I might slay thee in any
evil way it might like me; as my thrall I might well chastise thee as
sharply and as bitterly as I would. But it is not my pleasure to
slay thee, rather I will bring thee to the Red Hold, and there see
what we may make of thee; whereas I cannot but deem that in thee is
the making of somewhat more than a thrall; and if not, then a thrall
must thou needs be. Again as to the chastising of thee, that also I
forgive thee since I have gotten the hope aforesaid. Yet forsooth
some shame must I do thee to pay thee back for the love that was
betwixt thee and the slain man. I will ponder what it shall be; but
take heed that whatsoever it shall be, it will not avail thee to pray
me to forego it, though thy speech be as fair and sweet as thy body.

Therewith he was silent a while, and I stood there not daring to
move, and my heart was so downcast that all the sweetness of life
seemed departed. Yet I withheld lamentations or prayers, thinking
within myself, who knows what occasion may be between this and the
Red Hold for my escaping; let me keep myself alive for that if it may
be.

Presently he arose and took his sword, and went up to the slain man's
body and smote the head from off it. Then he went to the two horses
of Sir Thomas and of me, and took from them such gear of girths and
thongs as he would, and therewith he dight me as ye saw, doing a
girth about my middle and making me fast to a line wherewith to hold
me in tow. And then he did that other thing which sickens my very
soul to tell of, to wit, that he took the slain man's head and tied a
lace thereto, and hung it about my neck; and as he did so, he said:
This jewel shalt thou thyself bear to mine house; and there belike
shall we lay it in earth, since the man was my trusty fellow. Lo
now, this is all the ill I shall do thee till it be tried of what
avail thou art. This is a shaming to thee and not a torment, for I
will ride a foot's-pace, and the green way is both soft and smooth;
wherefore fear not that I shall throw thee down or drag thee along.
And to-morrow thy shame shall be gone and we shall see what is to
betide.

Lo, friends, this is the last word he spake ere he was slain, and the
ending of my tale; for we had gone thus but a little way ere ye brake
out of the wood upon us; and then befell the death of one friend, and
the doubt, maybe, of the others, and all the grief and sorrow that I
shall never be quit of unless ye forgive me where I have done amiss,
and help me in the days to come. And she spread out her hands before
them, and bowed her head, and the tears fell from her eyes on to the
floor.

Viridis wept at Birdalone's weeping, and Aurea for her own sorrow,
which this other sorrow stirred. Atra wept not, but her face was
sadder than weeping.

But Arthur spake and said: Herein hath been the hand of Weird, and
hath been heavy on us; but no blame have we to lay on our sister
Birdalone, nor hath she done light-mindedly by us; though maybe she
erred in not trusting to the good-hap of the Quest to bring us back
in due time: and all that she saith do we trow as if it were written
in the Holy Gospel. They all yeasaid this, and called on her to come
amongst them; but she thought of little at first save the joy of
hearing the sweetness of those words as Arthur spake them; wherefore
she hung back a little, and thought shame of it that she might not
give more heed to the others of them. Then came Viridis and took her
by the hand and led her to Sir Hugh, and Birdalone knelt down before
him and took his hand to kiss it, but he put both hands about her
face and kissed her kindly and merrily on the lips. Then she knelt
before Aurea, and was hapless before her; but Aurea kissed her, and
bade her be of better cheer, albeit the words came coldly from her
mouth. Next she came to Arthur, and knelt before him and took his
hand and kissed it, and thanked him kindly for his kind words,
looking into his face meanwhile; and she saw that it was pale and
troubled now, and she longed to be alone with him that she might ask
him wherefore.

As for Atra, she arose as Birdalone came before her, and cast her
arms about her neck, and wept and sobbed upon her bosom, and then
went hurrying from out the solar and into the hall, and walked to and
fro there a while until the passion that tore her was lulled
somewhat, and she might show her face to them calm and friendly once
more. And as she entered Arthur was speaking, and he said:

To you, ladies, I tell what we of the castle wot better than well,
that our dear friend hath escaped so heavy a fate in escaping the Red
Hold, that it were unmeet for us to murmur at our loss in our fellow;
for a warrior's life, which is ever in peril of death, is nought over
heavy a ransom for such a friend, and so dear and lovely, from such a
long and evil death. Whereas ye must wot that the said Hold hath
this long while been a very treasure-house of woes and a coffer of
lamentations; for merciless was the tyrant thereof, and merciless all
his folk. Now another time, when ye are stronger in heart than now
ye be, I may tell you tales thereof closer and more nicely of those
who did his will; as of his innermost band of men-at-arms, called the
Millers; and of his fellow-worker in wizardry and venoms, called the
Apothecary; and the three hags, called the Furies; and the three
young women, called the Graces; and his hounds that love man's flesh;
and the like tales, as evil as nightmares turned into deeds of the
day. But now and here will I say this, that when we have done the
obsequies of our dear fellow, it were good that we follow up the
battle so valiantly begun by him. I mean that the Quest of our
ladies being now accomplished, we should turn what is left of the
fellowship into a war against the Red Hold and its evil things; and
that so soon as the relics of Baudoin are laid in earth, we gather
force and go thither in arms to live or die in the quarrel, and so
sweeten the earth, as did the men of ancient days when they slew the
dragons and the giants, and the children of hell, and the sons of
Cain.

His cheek flushed as he spoke, and he looked around till his eyes
fell on Birdalone, and he saw that her face also glowed and her eyes
gleamed; but Viridis, her heart sank so that she paled, and her lips
trembled.

But Aurea spake and said: I thank thee for thy word, Black Squire,
and I know that my man shall rejoice in Paradise when he knoweth of
it, and thereof shall I tell him to-morrow when the mass is said for
him.

And Atra said: Good is the word, and we look to it that the deed
shall be better yet. Thus hath the evil arisen that shall destroy
the evil, as oft hath been when the valiant have been grieved, and
the joy of the true-hearted hath been stolen from them; then the hand
doth the doughty deed and the heart hath ease, and solaced is sorrow.

They looked on her and wondered, for she spake with her head upraised
and her eyes glittering, as she had been one of the wise women of
yore agone. And Birdalone feared her, though she loved her.

Lastly spake Hugh, and said: Brother, this is well thought of
indeed, and I marvel that I did not prevent thee; and I am thine to
live and die with thee. And the adventure is nought unlikely; for if
we have lost a captain they have lost their head devil, and their
head little devil; moreover, the good men of Greenford shall join
them to us, and that shall make us strong, whereas they have men
enough, and those stout men-at-arms; and artificers they have to make
us engines, and do other wisdom; and therewithal money to buy or to
wage what they will. Wherefore, to my mind, we were best to make no
tarrying, but send out the messengers for the hosting straightway.

Straightway, said the Black Squire; and let us go now and find Sir
Aymeris. So they arose both and went their ways, and left the women
there alone, and were gone a good while.



CHAPTER VIII. ATRA AND BIRDALONE TALK TOGETHER WHILE THE LORDS SIT
AT THE MURDER-COUNCIL



Meanwhile of their absence, Viridis sat sad and silent and downcast,
though she wept not, for her gladness, which erst had been so great,
seemed now reft from her; and no merrier was Aurea, as might have
been looked for. But Atra came quietly unto Birdalone, and said
softly: I have a word for thee if thou wilt come forth with me into
the hall. Birdalone's heart failed her somewhat, but she suffered
Atra to take her hand, and they went into the hall together, and Atra
brought her into a shot-window, and they sat down together side by
side and were silent awhile. Spake Atra then, trembling and
reddening: Birdalone, knowest thou what thought, what hope, was in
my heart when I spake so proudly and rashly e'en now? Birdalone kept
silence, and trembled as the other did. This it was, said Atra: he
will go to this battle valiantly, he may fall there, and that were
better; for then is life to begin anew: and what is there to do with
these dregs of life? Said Birdalone, with flushed face: If he die
he shall die goodly, and if he live he shall live goodly. Yea, yea,
said Atra; forsooth thou art a happy woman! Dost thou hate me? said
Birdalone. Said Atra: Proud is thy word, but I hate thee not. Nay,
e'en now, when I spake thus boastfully, I thought: When he hath died
as a doughty knight should, then, when life begins again, Birdalone
and I shall be friends and sisters, and we two will talk together oft
and call him to mind, and the kindness of him, and how he loved us.
Woe's me! that was when he was there sitting beside me and I could
see him and his kindness; and then it was as if I could give him
away; but now he is gone and I may not see him, it is clear to me
that I have no part or lot in him, and I call back my thought and my
word, and now it is: O that he may live! O thou happy woman, that
shall be glad whether he liveth or dieth!

Said Birdalone: And now thou hatest me, dost thou not, and we are
foes? Atra answered not, nor spake for a while; then she said: Hard
and bitter is it, and I know not what to turn to. I have seen once
and again, on the wall of the Minorites' church at Greenford, a fair
picture of the Blessed, and they walking in the meads of Paradise,
clad in like raiment, men and women; their heads flower-crowned,
their feet naked in the harmless blossomed grass; hand in hand they
walk, with all wrath passed for ever, all desire changed into loving-
kindness, all the anguish of forgiveness forgotten. And underneath
the picture is it writ:


Bitter winter, burning summer, never more shall waste and wear;
Blossom of the rose undying brings undying springtide there.


O for the hope of it, that I might hope it! O for the days to be and
the assuaging of sorrow: I speak the word, and the hope springeth;
the word is spoken, and there abideth desire barren of hope! And she
bowed down her head and wept bitterly; and Birdalone called to mind
her kindness of the past and wept for her, she also.

After a while Atra lifted up her head, and thus she spake: I hate
thee not, Birdalone; nor doth one say such things to a foe. Yea,
furthermore, I will crave somewhat of thee. If ever there come a
time when thou mayst do something for me, thou wilt know it belike
without my telling thee. In that day and in that hour I bid thee
remember how we stood together erst at the stair-foot of the Wailing
Tower in the Isle of Increase Unsought, and thou naked and fearful
and quaking, and what I did to thee that tide to comfort thee and
help and save thee. And then when thou hast called it to mind, do
thou for me what thou canst do. Wilt thou promise this? Yea, yea,
said Birdalone; and with all the better will, that oft and over again
have I called it to mind. Wherefore I behight thee to let me serve
thee if I may whenso the occasion cometh, even if it be to my own
pain and grief; for this I know thou meanest.

See thou to this then, said Atra coldly; and thou shalt be the better
for it in the long run belike: for thou art a happy woman.

She arose as she spake, and said: Hist! here come the lords from the
murder-council; and lo, now that he cometh, my heart groweth evil
toward thee again, and well-nigh biddeth me wish that thou wert naked
and helpless before me again. Lo my unhap! that he should mark my
face that it shows as if I were fain to do thee a mischief. And
nought of that would I do; for how should it avail me, and thou my
fellow and the faithful messenger of the Quest?

Now little of her last words did Birdalone meet, as into the hall
came Hugh and Arthur; and though she strove to sober her mind and
think of her she-friend and her unhappiness, yet she could not choose
but to be full of joy in her inmost heart now she knew without doubt
that she was so well-beloved of her beloved: and she deemed that
Atra was in the right indeed to call her a happy woman.

So now they all went into the solar together, and sat them down with
the two others; and Hugh did them to wit, how they had ordered all
the matter of the messengers who were to summon the knights and
chiefs of thereabouts, and the aldermen of Greenford, to meet at the
Castle of the Quest, that they might set afoot the hosting to go
against the Red Hold.



CHAPTER IX. HUGH TELLS THE STORY OF THE QUEST'S ENDING.



When this was said, and there had been silence a while, Birdalone
took up the word, and spake meekly and sweetly, saying: Dear
friends, how it fared with you on the isle from the time of my
leaving you, and how with you, true knights, from the time of your
departure, I both were fain to know for the tale's sake, and also I
would take the telling thereof as a sign of your forgiveness of my
transgression; so I would crave the same of you but if it weary you
overmuch.

All they yeasaid her kindly, and Hugh spake and said: By your leave,
fellows, I will tell in few words what betid us on our way to the
Isle of Increase Unsought, and then shall Viridis take up the tale
from the time that Birdalone left the said isle in the witch's ferry.
None said aught against it, and Hugh went on: Short is my tale of
the journey: We came to the Isle of Nothing on the morrow's morn of
our departure, and being warned of thee, Birdalone, we abode there
but a little while to rest us from the boat, and went nowhither from
the strand, and so went on our way in a three hours' space.

Thence again we took the water, and came to the Isle of Kings, and
that was in the middle of the night: we beheld the dead long and
heedfully when the morning came, and departed again before noon, and
came to the Isle of Queens a little after nightfall. The next
morning we deemed we needs must go see the images of those ladies,
lest aught might have befell since thou wert there which might be of
import to the Quest, but all was unchanged, and we came away while
the day was yet young.

We made the Isle of the Young and the Old about sunset that day, and
the boy and the girl came down to the strand to behold us and wonder
at us, and we sported with them merrily a while; and then they
brought us to the house of the old man, who received us courteously
and gave us to eat and drink. Forsooth, when the night was somewhat
spent, he brought out strong drink to us, and took it somewhat amiss
that we drank not overmuch thereof, as forsooth he did, and so fell
asleep. Before he was drunk we asked him many questions about the
isle and its customs, but he knew nought to tell us of them. Of thee
also we asked, sister, but he had no memory of thee.

On the morrow he fared down with us to our ferry, and made many
prayers to us to take him along with us; for here, said he, is
neither lordship nor fair lady; and if here I abide, soon shall I
come to mine ending day, and sore I yearn for joyance and a long term
to my years. Now we durst not take him aboard lest we should fare
amiss with the wight of the Sending Boat; so we naysaid him
courteously, thanked him for his guesting, and gave him gifts, to
wit, a finger gold ring and an ouch of gold, so he turned away from
us somewhat downcast as we deemed; but ere we had given the word to
the Sending Boat we heard him singing merrily in a high cracked voice
as he went on his way.

Now on this last day betid somewhat of new tidings; for scarce was
this isle out of sight behind, ere we saw a boat come sailing toward
us from the north-east, and it came on swiftly with a blue ripple of
the lake behind it. Thereat we marvelled, and yet more when we saw
that its sail was striped of gold and green and black; next then were
we betwixt fear and joy when, as it drew nigher, we saw three women
in the said boat, clad in gold, green, and black; and it came so nigh
unto us at last, that we could see their faces that they were verily
those of our lovelings; and each reached out her arms to us and
called on us for help, each by our name: and there we were, oarless,
sailless, at the mercy of our unkenned ferry. Then would Baudoin and
I have leapt overboard to swim to our loves at all adventure; but Sir
Arthur here stayed us, and bade us think of it, that we were now
nearing the Witch-land, and if we might not look to be beset with
guiles and gins to keep us from winning to our journey's end;
wherefore we forbore, though in all wretchedness, and the gay boat
ran down the wind away from us, and the breeze and the ripple passed
away with it, and the lake lay under the hot sun as smooth as glass;
and on we went, weary-hearted.

Came again another sail out of the north-east, when the sun was
getting low, and speedily it drew nigh, but this time it was no small
boat or barge, but a tall ship with great sails, and goodly-towered
she was and shield-hung, and the basnets gleamed and the spears
glittered from her castle-tops and bulwarks, and the sound of her
horns came down the wind as she neared us. We two handled our
weapons and did on our basnets, but Arthur there, he sat still, and
said: Not over-wise is the witch, that she lets loose on us two
sendings in one day so like unto each other. Hah, said Baudoin, be
we wary though; they are going to shoot. And sure enough we saw a
line of bowmen in all the castles and even along, and a horn blew,
and then forth flew the shafts, but whither we knew not, for none
came anywhere anigh us; and Arthur laughed and said: A fair shot
into the clouds; but, by our Lady! if none shot better in our
country, I would bear no armour for their shafts. But we two were
confused and knew not what to think.

The great ship flew past us on the wind as the barge had done, but
when she was about half a mile aloof we saw her canvass fall to
shivering and her yards swaying round, and Arthur cried out: St.
Nicholas! the play beginneth again! she is coming about!

Even so it was, and presently she was bearing on us, and was ere long
so close aboard that we could see her every spar and rope, and her
folk all gathered to the windward, knights, sergeants, archers, and
mariners, to gaze at us and mock us; and huge and devilish laughter
arose from amongst them as she ploughed the water so close beside us,
that one might well-nigh have cast a morsel of bread aboard her; for
clear it was presently that she had no mind to run us down.

Spake Arthur then: There will be a fresh play presently, my mates,
but ye sit fast, for meseemeth this show is no more perilous than the
other, though it be bigger.

Scarce were the words out of his mouth, ere there was a stir amongst
the men gathered in the waist, and lo, amidst a knot of big and
fierce mariners, three women standing, pale, with flying hair, and
their hands bound behind them, and one was clad in gold and another
in green and the third in black; and their faces were as the faces of
Aurea and Viridis and Atra.

Then there came forth from that ship a huge cruel roar blent with
mocking laughter that shamed our very hearts, and those evil things
in the form of mariners took hold of each one of the ladies and cast
them overboard into the gulf of the waters, first Aurea, next
Viridis, and then Atra; and we two stood up with our useless swords
brandished and would have leapt over into the deep, but that Arthur
arose also and took hold of an arm of each of us and stayed us, and
said: Nay, then, if ye go, take me with you, and let all the Quest
sink down into the deep, and let our lovelings pine in captivity, and
Birdalone lose all her friends in one swoop, and we be known
hereafter as the fools of lovers, the unstable.

So we sat us down, but huge shrieking laughter rose up unblended from
the keel of the evil thing, and then they let her go down the wind,
and she went her way with flashing of arms, and streaming of banners
and pennons, and blowing of horns, and the sun was setting over the
wide water.

But Arthur spake: Cheer up, brethren! see ye not how this proud
witch is also but an eyeless fool to send us such a show, and the
second time in one day to show us the images of our dearlings, who
hours ago flitted past us in the stripe-sailed boat? Where, then,
did they of the ship meet with them? Nay, lords, let not the anguish
of love steal all your wits.

We saw we had been fools to be so overcast by guile, and yet were we
exceeding ill at ease, and over-long the time seemed unto us until we
should be come to the Isle of Increase Unsought, and find our
lovelings there.

Now was the night come, and we fell asleep, but belike were not often
all asleep at once; and at last it was, when we felt the dawn drawing
near, though, the moon being down, it was the darkest of the summer
night, that we were all three awake, when all of a sudden we heard
just astern the rushing of the water, as though some keel were
cleaving it, and dimly in the dark we saw a sail as of a boat
overhauling us. Close at hand there rang out a lamentable cry: O,
are ye there, fellows of the Quest? O, help me, friends! save me and
deliver me, who am snatched away to be cast into the hands of my
mistress that was. Help me, Baudoin, Hugh, Arthur! Help! help!

Then all we knew the voice of Birdalone, and Arthur leapt up, and
would have been overboard in a trice had not we two held him, and he
fought and cursed us well-favouredly, there is no nay thereto; and
meanwhile the wailing voice of thee, my sister, died out in the
distance, and the east grew grey, and dawn was come.

Then spake Baudoin: Arthur, my brother, dost thou not mark that this
also was of the same sort of show as those two others, and thou who
wert so wise before? It is but beguilings to bring the Quest to
nought; wherefore call to mind thy manhood and thy much wisdom!

And we admonished him and rebuked him till he became quiet and wise
again, but was sad and downcast and silent. But the Sending Boat
sped on through the dawning, and when it was light we saw that we had
the Isle of Increase close aboard, and we ran ashore there just as
the sun was rising. Fain were we then to get out of the boat and
feel earth under our feet. We took all our hards out of the boat,
and hid away under the roots of an old thorn a little mail wherein
was your raiment, my ladies, which ye had lent to Birdalone; then we
did on our armour, and advised us of whereabout on the isle we were,
and we saw the orchards and gardens before us, and the great fair
house above all, even as ye told us of them, Birdalone.

Next, then, without more ado, we went our ways up through the orchard
and the gardens, and when we were well-nigh at the end of them, and
in face of those many steps ye spake of, we saw at the foot of them a
tall woman clad in red scarlet, standing as if she abode our coming.
When we drew nigh we saw that she was strong-looking, well-knit,
white-skinned, yellow-haired, and blue-eyed, and might have been
called a fair woman, as to her shaping, save that her face was heavy,
yet hard-looking, with thin lips and somewhat flagging cheeks, a face
stupid, but proud and cruel.

She hailed us as we came up, and said: Men-at-arms, ye be welcome to
our house, and I bid you to eat and drink and abide here.

Then we louted before her, and bade her Hail; and Baudoin said:
Lady, thy bidding will we take; yet have we an errand to declare ere
we break bread with thee, lest when it is told we be not so welcome
as ye tell us now. What is it? said she. Said Baudoin: This man
here is called the Green Knight, and this the Black Squire, and I am
the Golden Knight; and now will we ask thee if this isle be called
the Isle of Increase Unsought? Even so have I called it, quoth she,
wherefore I deem none other will dare call it otherwise. It is well,
quoth Baudoin; but we have heard say that hereto had strayed three
dear friends of ours, three maidens, who hight Viridis, the friend of
the Green Knight, and Atra, who is the Black Squire's, and Aurea, who
is mine own friend, so we have come to take them home with us, since
they have been so long away from their land and their loves. Now if
they be thy friends thou wilt perchance let them go for love's sake
and the eking of friendship; but if they be thy captives, then are we
well willing to pay thee ransom, not according to their worth, for no
treasure heaped up might come nigh it, but according to thy desire,
lady.

Laughed the proud lady scornfully and said: Big are thy words, Sir
Knight: if I had these maidens in my keeping I would give them unto
you for nothing, and deem that I had the best of the bargain. But
here are they not. True it is that I had here three thralls who were
hight as thou hast said; but a while ago, not many days, they
transgressed against me till I chastised them; and then was I weary
of them and would be quit of them; for I need no servants here,
whereas I myself am enough for myself. Wherefore I sent them away
across the water to my sister, who dwells in a fair place hight the
House under the Wood; for she needeth servants, because the earth
there yieldeth nought save to the tiller and the herdsman and the
hunter, while here all cometh unsought. With her may ye deal, for
what I know, and buy the maidens whom ye prize so high; though belike
ye may have to give her other servants in their place. For, indeed,
a while ago her thrall fled from her and left her half undone, and it
is said that she came hither in her shamelessness: but I know not;
if she did, she slipped through my fingers, or else I would have made
her rue her impudence. Now meseemeth, Sir Knights, here is enough of
so small and foolish a matter; and again I pray you to enter my poor
house, and take meat and drink along with me, for ye be none the less
welcome because of your errand, though it be a foolish one.

Now would Sir Baudoin have answered wrathfully, but Arthur plucked at
his skirt, and he yeasaid the lady's bidding, though somewhat
ungraciously; but that she heeded nought; she took Sir Baudoin by the
hand and led him up the stately perron, and thence came we into a
pillared hall, as fair as might be. And there on the dais was a
table dight with dainty meats and drinks, and the lady bade us
thereto, and we sat to it.

Thereat was the lady buxom and merry: Baudoin scowled across the
board; I was wary and silent; but Arthur was as blithe with the lady
as she with him; nor did I altogether marvel thereat, since I knew
him wise of wit.

But when we were done with the meal, the lady stood up and said:
Now, Sir Knights, I will give you leave; but this house is as your
own to roam through all its chambers and pleasure you with its
wonders and goodliness; and when ye are weary of the house, then is
the orchard and the garden free to you, and all the isle wheresoever
ye will go. And here in this hall is meat and drink for you whenso
ye will; but if ye would see me again to-day, then shall ye meet me
where ye first happened on me e'en now, at the foot of the great
perron.

Then she laid her hand on Arthur's shoulder, and said: Thy big
friend may search out every nook in this house, and every bush in the
whole island, and if he find there the maidens he spake of, one or
all of them, then are they a gift from me unto him.

Therewith she turned, and went out of the hall by a door in the side
thereof; and now already meseemed that though the woman was hateful
and thick-hearted and cruel, yet she was become fairer, or seemed so,
than when we first came on her; and for my part I pondered on what it
might grow to, and fear of her came into my soul.

Now spake Baudoin: Fellows, let us get out into the garden at least;
for this place is evil, and meseems it smells and tastes of tears and
blood, and that evil wights that hate the life of men are lurking in
the nooks thereof. And lo, our very she-friend that was so kind and
simple and dainty with us, there is, as it were, the image of the
dear maiden standing trembling and naked before the stupid malice of
this lump of flesh. So spake he, Birdalone.

But I said to Arthur in a soft voice: And when shall we slay her?
Said he: Not until we have gotten from her all that may be gotten;
and that is the living bodies of our friends. But come we forth.

So did we, and came down to the orchard and did off our helms, and
lay down under a big apple-tree which was clear of cover all round
about, and so fell to our redes; and I asked Arthur what he deemed of
the story of our loves having been carried to the House under the
Wood, and if it might not be tried seeking thither; but he laughed
and said: Never would she have told us thereof had it been sooth:
doubtless our friends are here on this isle, but, as I deem, not in
the house, else had not the witch left all the house free for us to
search into. Yea, said I, but how if they be in her prison? Said
he: It is not hard to find out which is the prison of so dainty a
house as is yonder; and when we had found it, soon should we have hit
upon a way to break it, since we be three, and stout fellows enough.
Nay, I deem that the lovelings be stowed away in some corner of the
isle without the house, and that mayhappen we shall find them there;
and yet I trow not before we have made guile meet guile, and overcome
the sorceress. But come now, let us be doing, and begin to quarter
this little land as the kestrel doth the water-meadow; and leave we
our armour, lest we weary us, for we shall have no need for hard
strokes.

We hung up there on the tree helm and shield and hauberk, and all our
defences, and went our ways quartering the isle; and the work was
toilsome, but we rested not till the time was come to keep tryst with
the lady; and all that while we found no sign of the darling ones:
and the isle was everywhere a meadow as fair as a garden, with little
copses of sweet-growing trees here and there, and goodly brooks of
water, but no tillage anywhere: wild things, as hart and buck and
roe, we came upon, and smaller deer withal, but all unhurtful to man;
but of herding was no token.

Came we then back to that lordly perron, and there, at the foot
thereof, stood the witch-wife, and received us joyously; clad was she
all gloriously in red scarlet broidered and begemmed; her arms bare
and her feet sandalled, and her yellow hair hanging down from under
its garland; and certainly it was so that she had grown fairer, and
was sleek and white and well-shapen, and well-haired; yet by all
that, the visage of her was little bettered, and unto me she was
loathsome.

Now the feast went much as the earlier meal had done; and Baudoin was
surly and Arthur blithe and buxom; and nought befell to tell of, save
that dishes and meats, and flasks and cups, and all things came upon
the board as if they were borne thereon by folk unseen; and thereat
we wondered not much, considering in what wonder-house we were. But
the lady-witch looked on us and smiled, and said: Knights, ye marvel
at the manner of our service, but call to mind that we told you this
morning that we were enough for Ourselves, and we have so dight our
days here that whoso is our friend on this Isle of Increase shall
lack nothing. Fear not, therefore, to see aught ugly in our servants
as now unseen, if their shapes were made manifest unto you.

All things were we heedful to note at this banquet; but when it was
over, then came music into the hall from folk unseen, but not as if
the musicians were a many, only belike some three or four. And
thereat the lady spake, saying: Knights, ye may deem our minstrels
but few, but such is our mind that we love not our music overloud,
and for the most part only three sing or play unto us at one time.

Thereafter the lady brought us to fair chambers, and we slept there
in all ease, and we arose on the morrow and found the lady still
blithe with us; yet I noted this, that she seemed to deal with Arthur
as if she saw him now for the first time, and much he seemed to be to
her liking.

Again we fared forth, and were no less diligent in searching the isle
than erst, and found nought; and all went that day as before.

On the morrow  that is, the third day  the witch seemed to have
somewhat more memory of Arthur than erst, and even yet more liking of
him, so that she reached out her hand for him to kiss, which needs
must he do, despite his loathing of her.

When we had lain under the apple-tree a little while, Baudoin spake
and said: Yesterday and the day before we searched the open land and
found nought; now to-day let us search the house, and if we find
nought, then at least it shall lie behind us. We yeasaid it, and
presently went back, and from chamber to chamber, and all was fair
and goodly as might be, and we marvelled what would betide to it when
the witch was undone and her sorcery come to an end.

To the Wailing Tower we came, and up the stairs, and found the door
open of the prison-chamber, and all there as thou hast told us,
Birdalone; only we opened the great coffer, whence thou didst refrain
thee, and found it full of hideous gear truly, as fetters and chains,
and whips and rods, and evil tools of the tormentors, and cursed it
all and came away; and Arthur said: Lo you, this stupid one! How
eager is she to bid us what to do, and to tell us that our ladies are
not in this evil house, since she leaveth all open to us. Yet we
went about the house without, and counted the windows heedfully to
see that we had missed no chamber, and found nought amiss; and then
we went in again and sought as low down as we might, to see if
perchance some dungeon there were underground, but found nought save
a very goodly undercroft below the great hall, which was little less
fair than that which was above it. So came the evening and the
banquet, and the end of that day; but the witch-wife led Arthur by
the hand to the board, and afterwards to the chamber ere we slept.

On the fourth day and the fifth it was no otherwise than erst; and
when I fared to bed I felt confused in my head and sick of heart.

The night of the next day  the sixth , as we went to our chambers,
and the witch-wife and Arthur hand-in-hand, she stayed him a while,
and spake eagerly to him in a soft voice; and as he came up to me
afterwards he said: To-night I have escaped it, but there will not
be escape for long. From what? said I. He said: From bedding her;
for now it has come to this, that presently we must slay her at once
and have no knowledge of our sweetlings, or I must do her will.

In such wise passed four more days, and it was the twelfth morning of
our sojourn there, and we went forth on our search of every mead and
every covert of the isle, and all day we found nought to our purpose;
but as it grew toward sunset, and there grew great clouds in the
eastern ort, piled up and copper-coloured, we came over a bent on to
a little green dale watered by a clear brook, and as we looked down
into it we saw something shine amongst its trees; so we hastened
toward that gleam, and lo, amidst the dale, with the brook running
through it, a strange garth we saw. For there was a pavilion done of
timber and board, and gaily painted and gilded, and out from that
house was, as it were, a great cage of thin gilded bars, both walls
and roof, just so wide apart as no one full-grown, carl or quean,
could thrust through.

Thitherward then ran we, shouting, for we saw at once that in the
said cage were three women whose aspect was that of our sweetlings,
and presently we were standing by the said herse, reaching our hands
out to them to come to us and tell us their tale, and that we would
deliver them. But they stood together in the midst of the said cage,
and though they gazed piteously on us thence, and reached out their
hands to us, they neither spake nor came to the herse to us; so we
deemed that they were bewitched, and our joy was dashed.

Then we went all about the cage and the pavilion to find ingate, and
found it not; and then the three of us together strove with the bars
of the herse, and shook and swayed them, but it was all to no
purpose.

Moreover, while we were at this work the sun seemed to go out, and
there came a heavy black mist rolling into the dale, and wrapped us
about so that we saw not each other's faces, and the bars of the
herse were gone from our hands as we stood there. Then came rain and
thunder and lightning on to the black night, and by the glare of the
lightning we could see the leaves and grass of the dale, but neither
herse nor house nor woman. So we abode there in the dark night, and
the storm all bewildered us, till the rain and clouds drew off and it
was calm fair starlight again, but clean gone was the golden cage and
they that stood therein; and we turned sadly, and went our ways
toward the witch-house.

On the way said Arthur: Brethren, this meseemeth is but a-going on
with the shows which were played us on the water as we came hither;
but whether she doth this but for to mock and torment us, or that she
would beguile us into deeming that our friends are verily here, I wot
not; but to-morrow, meseemeth, I shall can to tell you.

Now came we to the perron of the house, and there stood the witch-
wife under the stars to meet us. And when she saw us, she took hold
of Arthur by the hand and the arm to caress him, and found that he
and we were drenched with the rain and the storm, as might well be
deemed; then she bade us up to our chambers to do on raiment which
she had dight for us, and we went thither, and found our garments
rich and dainty indeed; but when we came down into the hall where the
witch abode us, we saw that Arthur's raiment was far the richest and
daintiest. But the witch ran to him and cast her arms about him, and
clipped and kissed him before the others, and he suffered it. So
sped the feast again.

But when they went to bed, the said witch took Arthur's hand and
spake a word unto him, and led him away, and he went with her as one
nought loth; but we twain were afraid lest she should destroy him
when she had had her will of him. Wherefore we waked through the
more part of the night with our swords ready to hand.

But when we were clad in the morn he came unto us, he also clad, and
was downcast and shamefaced indeed, but safe and sound; and he said:
Speak no word about our matter till we be out in the open air, for I
fear all things about us.

So when we had gone forth and were under the apple-tree once more,
spake Arthur: Now, lords, am I shamed for ever, for I have become
the leman of this evil creature; but I pray ye not to mock me; and
that the more as the same lot may happen on you both, or either; for
I can see for sure that the wretch will weary of me and desire one of
you two. Let it pass. Somewhat have I found out from her, but not
much; first, that she has forgotten her first lie, to wit, how she
sent our ladies to the sister-witch; for I told her of the golden
cage, and how we had missed it in the storm; and she said: Though I
deem it a folly that ye should seek these thralls, yet would I help
you if I might, since ye are now become my dear friends. Though,
forsooth, when ye meet them I deem that ye will find them sore
changed to you. For, as I told you, they fled away from me, after I
had chastised them for a treason, into the hidden places of the isle,
whereas they had no keel to sail away hence. And I cared not to
follow them, as I myself am queen and lady of all things here, and am
enough for myself, save when love constraineth me, dear lord. Now,
my rede is that ye seek the golden cage again and yet again, because
I deem that these thralls have somehow learned some wisdom, and they
have enchanted the said cage for a defence against me, from whom they
might not hide as they did from you; for of me have they stolen their
wizardry, and I am their mistress therein.

This, therefore, is the new lie of her, and my rede is that we heed
it nought. For my mind is that she it is that hath made the
appearance of the cage and the women therein, and that she hath our
poor friends somewhere underneath her hand.

Now this we deemed most like; yet whereas we had nought to do with
the time, which, now that we had searched the isle throughly, hung
heavy on hand, we deemed it good to go to the dale of the golden cage
again, though we looked not to find the cage there any more. But
this betid, that we found the little dale easily enough, and there
stood the cage as we had seen it yesterday, but nought was there
within its bright bars save the grass and the flowers, and the water
of the brook a-running.

We loitered about that place a while, and went back to the house in
due time; and to shorten the tale, I shall tell that for many days it
betid that we went every day to seek the golden cage, but after the
first three days we saw it no more.

Now began sadness and weariness to overcome us as the days and weeks
wore, and belike the witch-wife noted it that we were worse company
than heretofore.

And now on a day Arthur bade us note that the said witch was growing
weary of him, and he bade me look to it; for, said he, she is turning
her face toward thee, brother. My heart burned with rage at that
word; I said nought, but made up my mind that I would try to bring
the matter to an end.

That same night befell what Arthur had threatened; for the feast
being done in the evening, the witch drew me aside while the music
was a-playing, and caressed my hand and my shoulder, and said: I am
yet wondering at you Champions, that ye must needs follow after those
three wretched thralls, whom never will ye find, for they. need ye
not, but will flee from you if ye have sight of them, as they did
that other day; and therein they are scarce in the wrong, whereas
they may well think that if ye find them they should fall into my
hands; for easily may I take them any day that I will, and then I
have a case against them, and may lawfully chastise them according to
the law that has been given unto me; and then shall they be in
grievous plight. Wherefore the rede We give unto you three now is
the rede of friendliness that ye make yourselves happy in Our Island,
and then will We do everything We may for your pleasure and delight;
and if ye will that We make Ourselves even fairer than now We be,
that may be done, and shall be a reward unto you for your yielding
and obedience. And if ye will women thralls for your pleasure, that
also may be gotten for you; for We be not wholly without power in
these waters, though We have no keel or ferry upon them. And now,
thou fair lad, We give thee this last word: Ye Champions have been
dwelling in Our house a long while, and that while have ever striven
to thwart Us. We now counsel you to make an end of it, and it shall
be better for you.

She seemed to my eyes prouder and stupider than ever erst, despite
her golden hair and white skin and lovely limbs; and I said to myself
that now must we destroy the evil of that house even if we died for
it, or else we were all undone; withal I saw somewhat of truth
thrusting up through her much lying, and I deemed, even as Arthur
did, that she had our friends under her band somewhere.

Nought else betid that night; but on the morrow we went forth and
strayed on till we were come into the southernmost quarter of the
isle, and not very far from the water we came upon a wood or big
thicket which was new to us. So we entered it, and as we went and
noted the wild things of the wood going hither and thither, we espied
afar off the shape of a man going amidst the thicket; wherefore we
went warily towards him, lest he should see us and flee from us; and
when we drew a little nigher we saw it was a woman, though she was
clad as a hunter, with legs naked to above the knee. She had a
quiver at her back and a bow in her hand, and her coat was black of
hue. Belike now she heard our going amongst the dry leaves, for she
turned her face to us, and lo! it was the face of Atra.

When she saw us, she gave a shrill cry, and fell to running at her
swiftest away from us, and we followed all we might, but we could not
over-run her, though we kept her in sight ever, till we had run all
through the wood, and before us was the sheer side of a rocky hill
and the mouth of a cave therein, and by the said mouth who should
there be but Aurea and Viridis, as we thought, clad in gold and in
green, but the fashion of their raiment not otherwise than Atra's.
Their bows were bended and they had shafts in their hands, and as we
came out of the thicket into the open lawn before the cave, Viridis
nocked a shaft and aimed at us and drew, and the shaft flew over my
head; therewith mocking laughter came from them, and they ran into
the cave. Speedily we ran up to it, but when we came home thither,
there was the sheer hillside, but never a cave nor an opening.

Dismayed were we thereat; but more dismayed had we been but that we
deemed that all this was but a cheat and a painted show put upon us
by the witch to back up her lying. Nevertheless we fared the next
day to seek the wood and the cave in the sheer rock, but nowise might
we find either wood or cave.

Now it was the night of the day hereafter, as we went to our
chambers, that the witch-wife took me by the hand and led me apart,
and said me many soft things of her accursed lust, whereof I will not
say one again. But the upshot of it all was that she would bring me
to her chamber and her bed. And whereas I was determined what to do,
and had my war-sword by my side, I naysaid her not, but made her good
countenance. And when we came to her chamber, which was full
gloriously dight, and fragrant as with the scent of the roses and
lilies of mid-June, she bade me to lie in her bed of gold and ivory
and she would be with me anon. So I unclad myself and laid me down,
but I drew forth my sword, and laid the ancient naked blade betwixt
my side and her place.

Anon she cometh back again unclad, and would step into the bed; but
she saw the sword and said: What is this, Champion? Said I: These
edges are the token of sundering between us, for there is a spell on
me, that with no woman may I deal, save with mine only love, but I
shall do her mortal scathe; so beware by the token of the grey edges
of battle. She drew aback, and was as a spiteful and angry cat, and
there was no loveliness in her; and she said: Thou liest, and thou
hatest me; see thou to it, both for thyself and thy loveling. And
she turned about and strode out of the chamber; but I arose and clad
myself in haste, and took my naked sword in my hand. But before I
went, I looked around, and espied an ambry fashioned in the wall of
the bed-lane, and the door was half open; and the said ambry was
wrought of the daintiest, all of gold and pearl and gems; and I said
to myself: Herein is some treasure, and this is a tide of war. So I
opened the ambry, and within it was even more gloriously wrought than
without; and there was nought therein, save a little flask of crystal
done about with bands of gold set with great and goodly gems. So I
took the said flask and went my ways hastily to my own chamber, and
there I looked at the said flask and took out the stopple; and there
was a liquor therein, white like to water, but of a spicy smell,
sweet, fresh, and enheartening. So I yet thought this was some great
treasure, and that much hung upon it, could I find out unto what use
it might be put. And I said: To-morrow we will put it to the proof.
Then I put the said flask under my pillow, and laid my sword by my
side and slept, and was not ill-content so far.

But on the morrow, when I met my fellows, they asked me how I had
sped, and I told them, Well, and that we would talk the matter over
under our tree of counsel. So we went down into the hall, where we
met the witch-lady; and I looked for it that she would be angry and
fierce with me; but it went far otherwise; for she was blithe and
buxom, and abounding in endearments more than I could away with. But
this I noted, that her eyes wandered, and her speech faltered at
whiles, and ever she seemed to be seeking somewhat; and withal that
her caressing hands were seeking if they could aught stowed away in
the bosom of my coat. But all was nought, for as we came to the door
of the hall I gave Baudoin the flask to guard until we should come to
our apple-tree of rede. Wherefore the she-wolf went red and white by
turns, and fumed, and fretted her bedizenments with unrestful hands,
and when she should let us go our ways, she lingered and looked back
oft, and was loth to depart ere she had gotten what she lacked, and
that, forsooth, was the said flasket.

But when we were without the house, I bade our fellows go with me to
another place than the wonted apple-tree of rede, and they understood
my word, and I led them to a little grassy plain without the orchard,
where was no covert for a wide space about it, nought but the one
linden-tree under which now we sat. There I told them all the tale
of the last night and of the flasket, and put before them all that
was in my mind to do that evening at the banquet, and they both of
them yeasaid it. But what it was, that shall ye hear anon when we
carried the matter through; but I bade Baudoin still carry the
flasket till the evening.

Thereafter we spake of other matters; but soon we had good cause to
rejoice that we had not talked our talk under the apple-tree  whereas
I doubted not that the witch would spy upon us there , for not long
had we been at our talk ere, looking that way, we saw the evil
creature by the hedge of the orchard and gazing over at us.

We arose then, and came to her as if nought had happened; and she
bade us walk the garden with her, and we yeasaid it, and went with
her, and paced about amidst the flowers and lay on the blossomed
grass. Forsooth, both to her and to us the time hung heavy on hand.
And meseemed that the sleekness and fairness of her body was worsened
since yesterday, and she was pale and haggard, and her eyes were
wandering and afraid.

Now she bade us come a little further into the garden and eat a
morsel at noon; and we arose, and she brought us to where were vines
trellised all about and overhead, so that it was like a fair green
cloister; and there was a board laid and spread with many dainties of
meat and drink. And she bade us sit. Verily we had but little
stomach to that dinner; and I said to myself, Poison! poison! and
even so my fellows deemed, as afterwards they told me. And I saw
Baudoin loosen his sword in the sheath, and I knew that his mind was
to smite at once if he saw aught amiss. And I, who sat next to the
witch, laid my hand on a little dagger which I wore at my girdle.
She also saw this, and turned as pale as death, and sat trembling
before us; and whatso we ate or drank at that board under the
rustling vine-leaves, she gave unto us with her own hand; and then we
wotted full surely that she had meant our deaths there and then, but
was cowed by the fierce eyes of Baudoin and the threat of my hand.

Withal it seemed that she might not bear it to sit there long amongst
us. She rose up and smiled on us as ghastly as a corpse, and gave us
leave, and went hurrying into the house. And right glad we were to
be at rest from her. Yet as we ourselves durst not go far away from
the house, lest some new thing might happen, neither could she leave
us quite alone, but thrice again that afternoon at some turn of the
garden, or orchard, or meadow, we came upon her wan face and eyes
full of all hate and staring pride, and she enforced her to smile
upon us, and turned away with some idle word.

At last the sun began to sink, and we went to the perron of the
house, and found her standing to meet us in her wonted way. But when
we came up she gave no hand to any one of us but went up the stairs
before us, and we followed with no word spoken.

There was the hall with the lordly service on the board, and the wax-
candles lighted all about, and the great vault of stone fair and
stately over it. We went to the dais and the board and sat down, the
witch-wife in her gold and ivory chair at the board's end, and I at
her right hand and looking down the hall, my two fellows facing me,
with their backs to the clear of the hall.

There we sat, and the meats and drinks were before us as dainty as
ever erst; but we put forth no hand to them, but sat staring at each
other for some two minutes it might be, and the witch looked from one
to the other of us, and quaked that her hands shook like palsy.

Then I rose up and put my hand to my bosom  for Baudoin had given me
the flasket ere we came to the perron : I spake in a loud voice, and
it sounded wild and hard in the goodly hall: My lady, I said, thou
art looking but pale now, and sick and downcast. Drink now to me out
of this precious flasket, and thou shalt be whole and well.

And therewith I held the flasket aloft; but her face changed
horribly; she sprang up in her chair and reached out her arm to
clutch at the flasket, screaming like an eagle therewith. But I
thrust her back into the chair with my left hand; and therewith arose
Baudoin and Arthur, and caught her by the shoulders, and bound her
fast to the chair with cords that they had gotten thereto. But when
she got her breath she yelled out: Ah, now shall all tumble
together, my proudful house and I under it! Loose me, traitors!
loose me, fools! and give me one draught of the water of might, and
then shall I tell you all, and ye shall go free with your thralls if
ye will. Ah! ye will not loose me? ye will not? Well then, at least
ye, the fools, shall be under it, and they also, the she-traitors,
the scourged and tormented fools that might not save themselves from
me. O loose me! loose me! thou in whose arms I have lain so many a
night, and give me to drink of the proud water of might!

So she yelled; and now had all the fairness gone from her body:
flaggy and yellow were her limbs, and she looked all over as her
face, a lump of stupid and cruel pride, and her words lost meaning
and changed into mere bestial howling. But for me, since she so
desired that water, I knew that it was good for us to drink, and I
took out the stopple and drank, and it was as if fire ran through all
my veins, and I felt my strength three-folded straightway, and most
wondrous clear was my sight grown therewith; and I raised my eyes now
and looked down the hall, and lo, there was Aurea, chained by the
ankle to the third pillar from the dais; and over against her,
Viridis; and next, to the fourth pillar, Atra. Then I cried in a
loud voice that rang through the witch's hall: Lo what I see! And I
ran round the head of the board, and thrust and dragged Baudoin and
Arthur along with me, crying out: Come, come! they are found! they
are here! And I came to my sweetling, and found her clad but in her
white smock, which was flecked with blood all about, and her face was
wan and pined, and the tears began to run when she saw me, but no
word came from her lips though the kissing of them was sweet.

Then I turned about to my two fellows, and they stood bewildered, not
knowing what was toward; and I came to them and made them drink of
the flasket, and their eyes were opened and the strength of giants
came to them, and they ran each to his sweetling; but Baudoin, before
ever he kissed Aurea, caught hold of the chain that bound her to the
pillar, and by main force dragged it out. Wise was that, meseemed,
for words were again come into the witch's howls, and I heard her:
Ah, long may ye be playing with the chains, long! for now the house
rumbleth toward its fall. Ah, the bitches are loose! Woe's me! to
die alone! And once more she howled wordless, as both I and Arthur
had our loves in our arms, and fell to following Baudoin out on to
the perron and down into the fresh fragrant garden wherein now was
the moon beginning to cast shadows.

Stood we then aloof from the house, and the rumbling whereof the evil
hag had howled waxed into a thunder, and under our very eyes the
great white walls and gold-adorned roofs fell together, and a great
cloud of dust rose under the clear moonlit sky.

We looked and wondered, and our loves also, but no word they spake;
but ere the other two had time to grieve thereat, I gave Viridis to
drink of the water of might, and she fell to sweet speech
straightway, of such sort and such wise as I will not tell you. Then
I did the same by Aurea and Atra, and forthwith the speech flowed
from them to their friends.

Full happy were we then in the early night-season, for the water of
might gave them strength also, as to us, and healed all the stripes
and wounds their bodies had suffered of the foul witch, and made
their eyes bright, and their cheeks full and firm, and their lips
most sweet, and their hands strong and delicious.

Now when we had stood gazing toward the melting of the beauteous
palace for a little, we took our darlings in our arms again, whereas
the chains would have hindered their walking, and went down to the
lip of the water whereas lay the Sending Boat, so that we might be
anigh our ferry in case of need; for we knew not what might betide
the isle now its mistress had perished. Then we fell to and sawed
off the chains from the dear ankles with our swords, and took
Birdalone's lendings from the mail. And Aurea had her gown again,
and Viridis her smock, and my green surcoat over it, and Atra wore
the battle-coat of the Black Squire. As for their bare feet  for
Atra would not have hers dight prouder than her sisters' , we so clad
them with kisses that they were not ill-covered belike.

So gat we aboard our ferry, and did blood-offering to the wight
thereof, and so sped merrily and lovingly over the wide lake back on
our homeward road. And we said: This hath the dear Birdalone done
for us.

And now, my Viridis, I will that thou fill up the tale by telling to
Birdalone, as ye told us, how it fared with you three and the evil
one from the time that ye sped Birdalone on her way till the moment
when mine eyes first beheld you made fast to the pillars of the
palace which has crumbled into dust.



CHAPTER X. HOW IT FARED WITH THE THREE LADIES AFTER THE ESCAPE OF
BIRDALONE



Viridis took up the word without more ado, and said: I will do my
best herein, and ye, sisters, must set me right if I err. When we
had seen the last of you, dear Birdalone, that early morning, we
turned back again to the house as speedily and as covertly as we
might, lest the witch might espy our disarray and question us
thereover. Then we went to the wonder-coffer, and gat thereout
raiment for that which we had given away, which was easy for us to
do, whereas the witch-mistress was so slothful that she had given to
us the words of might wherewith to compel the coffer to yield, so
that we might do all the service thereof, and she not to move hand or
foot in the matter. So when we were clad, and the time was come, we
went into the hall, by no means well assured of our mistress.

When we came before her, she looked on us in surly wise, as her wont
was, and said nought for a while; she stared on us and knit her
brows, as if she strove to call to mind something that ran to and fro
in her memory; and I noted that, and for my part I trembled before
her. But she spake at last: Meseemeth as if there is a woman in the
isle besides you three; some misdoer that I was minded to punish.
Tell me, you! was there not a naked one who came into this hall a
while ago, one whom I threatened with pining? Atra, who was the
boldest of us, bowed the knee before her, and said: Nay, our lady,
since when do stranger women come naked into thine hall, and dare
thee there?

Said the witch: Yet have I an image of a naked woman standing down
there before me; and if I have it in mine eye, so should ye. Tell me
therefore, and beware, for We are not bidden to hold Our hand from
you if We take you in misdeeds.

If I quaked before, now much more I quaked, till my legs well-nigh
failed me for fear; but Atra said: Great lady, this image will
belike be of that one whom a while ago ye had stripped and tied to a
pillar here, and tormented while ye feasted.

The lady looked on her hard, and again seemed striving to gather up
the thrums of some memory, and then her face became smooth again, and
she spake lightly: All that may well be; so do ye go about your due
service, and trouble Our rest here no longer; for We love not to look
on folk who be not wholly Our own to pine or to spare, to slay or let
live, as We will; and We would that the winds and the waves would
send Us some such now; for it is like to living all alone to have but
such as you with Us, and none to cower before Us and entreat Us of
mercy. So begone, I bid you.

Thus for that time were we saved from the witch's cruelty; but our
time came before long. The days wore heavily, nor kept we count of
them lest we should lose heart for the weariness of waiting. But on
a day as we stood on the steps of the perron and served my lady with
dainties, of a hot afternoon, came two great white doves a-flying,
who pitched down right before our mistress's feet; and each had a
gold ring about his neck, and a scroll tied thereto, and the witch
bade us take the doves and take off the scrolls and give them unto
her; and she looked on the gold rings which the doves bore, and for a
moment on the scrolls, and then she said: Take ye the doves and
cherish them, lest We have need of them; take also the two scrolls
and keep them till to-morrow morning, and then give them into Our
hands. And look ye to this, that if ye give them not unto Us it will
be treason against Us, and We shall have a case against you, and your
bodies will be Ours.

Then she rose up slowly, and bade me to her that she might lean upon
my shoulder and be helped upstairs, so slothful a beast as she was;
and as we went up I heard her say softly to herself: Weary on it,
now must I drink a sup of the Water of Might, that I may remember and
do and desire. But dear is my sister, and without doubt she hath
matters of import to tell me by these doves.

So when we were together alone I told the others hereof, and we
talked it over; and they deemed the tidings ill, even as I did; for
we might not doubt but that the doves were a sending from the witch-
sister who dwelt at the House under the Wood; and sore we misdoubted
that they were sped to our mistress to tell her of thee, Birdalone,
and mayhappen of the Quest, so wise as we knew she was. As to the
two scrolls, forsooth, they were open, and not sealed; but when we
looked on them we could make nought of it; for though they were writ
fairly in Latin script, so that we read them, yet of the words no
whit might we understand, so we feared the worst. But what might we
do? we had but two choices, either to cast ourselves into the water,
or abide what should befall; and this last one we chose because of
the hope of deliverance.

Next morning, therefore, we came before our mistress in the hall, and
we found her pacing up and down before the dais; though her wont was
at that hour to be sitting in her throne of gold and ivory, lying
back on the cushions half asleep.

So Atra went up to her, and knelt before her and gave her the
scrolls, and she looked on her grimly, and smiled evilly, and said:
Kneel there yet; and ye others kneel also, till I see what befitteth
you. So did we, and indeed I was fain to kneel, for I might scarce
stand up for terror; and all of us, our hearts died within us.

But the witch read those scrolls to herself, sitting in her throne,
and spake not a long while; then she said: Come hither, and grovel
before Us, and hearken! Even so we did; and she said again: Our
sister, who hath been so kind unto you, and saved you from so many
pains, here telleth Us, by the message of the two doves, that ye have
betrayed Us and her, and have stolen her thrall and her Sending Boat,
and sent her an errand for Our destruction; and therewith she
delivereth you into Our hands, and ye are Ours henceforward; nor is
it to be thought that ye may escape Us. Now, for your treason, some
would slay you outright here and now, but We will be merciful, and
let you live, and do no more than chastise you sharply now; and
thereafter shall ye be Our very thralls to do as We will with:
thereafter, that is to say, when they whom ye have sent Our sister's
thrall to fetch have come hither  as belike I may scarce stay them ,
and I have foiled them and used them, and sent them away empty. Now
I tell you, that meanwhile of their coming shall ye suffer such
things as We will; and when they be here We will not forbid you to be
anigh them; but We shall see that there will be little joy to you in
that nighness. Yea, ye shall know now to what market ye have brought
your wares, and what the price of treason is therein.

Verily then we suffered at her hand what she would, whereof it would
shame me to tell more as at this present; and thereafter did she
chain us to those three pillars of the hall whereas ye found us
chained; and we were fed as dogs be, and served as dogs, but we
endured all for the sake of hope; and when we durst, and deemed the
witch would not hear us, we spake together and enheartened each
other.

But on the fourth day of our torment came the witch to us, and gave
us to drink a certain red water from out of a leaden flasket; and
when I drank I deemed it was poison, and was glad, if gladness might
be in me at such a tide; and when I had drunk I felt an icy chill go
through all my body, and all things swam before my eyes, and deadly
sickness came over me. But that passed away from me presently, and I
felt helpless and yet not feeble; all sounds heard I clearer than
ever yet in my life; also I saw the hall, every arch and pillar and
fret, and the gleam on the pavement from the bright sun that might
not enter; and the witch I saw walking up and down the hall by the
dais; but my sisters I saw not when I looked across to their pillars.
Moreover, I might not see myself when I reached out my hand or my
foot, though I saw the chain which made my ankle fast to the pillar;
and withal, when I set my hand on my face, or any other part of my
body, or what else I might touch, I felt there what I looked to feel,
were it flesh or linen, or the cold iron of my fetter, or the
polished face of the marble pillar.

Now I knew scarce if I were alive or dead, or if I were but beginning
to be dead; but there came upon me the desire of life, and I strove
to cry out to the sisters, but though I formed the words in my mouth,
and did with my throat as when one cries out aloud, yet no sound of a
voice came from me, and more helpless did I feel than erst.

But even therewith I saw the witch come toward me, and therewith all
my body felt such fear of her that I knew I was not dead. Then she
came before me and said: O shadow of a thrall, whom none can see but
them unto whom wisdom hath given eyes to see wonders withal, now have
I tidings for thee and thy sisters, to wit, that your lovers and
seekers are at hand; and presently I shall bring them into this hall,
and they shall be so nigh unto you that ye might touch them if I did
not forbid it; but they shall not see you, but shall wonder where I
have hidden you, and shall go seeking you to-day and many days, and
shall find you not at all. So make ye the most of the sight of them,
for in them henceforward ye have no other part or lot.

Therewith she spat out at me, and went over to my sisters, and said
words of like import to those which she had said unto me. And
presently she went out of the hall; and not long afterwards I heard
voices speaking on the perron, and knew one for the voice of the
witch, and the other for the voice of my lord Baudoin; and then again
wore a little while, and I saw the witch come through the great door
of the hall leading Sir Arthur by the hand, as if she were his dear
friend, and Baudoin and Hugh, my man, following them. And the said
witch was clad full fair, and had laid by her sloth and stupid pride,
as meseemed; and her limbs were grown rounder and sleeker, and her
skin fairer, so that to them that knew her not she might well seem to
be a goodly woman.

Now they sat to meat as my man hath told you, and then departed from
the hall, and the witch also. But after a while she came back again
and loosed us, and grimly bade us go with her, and needs must we,
though we could not so much as see our own feet upon the floor. And
she set us to tasks about the house, and stood by while we toiled for
her, and mocked us not without stripes, and in all ways was as rough
and cruel and hard with us as she had been smooth and debonair to our
lords; but after noon she brought us back and chained us to our
pillars again. And when the evening came and the banquet was, it was
we who were the unseen players of the string-play; and we might play
no other melody than what the witch bade us; else belike, could we
have held converse, we might have played such tunes as would have
smitten the hearts of our loves, and told them that we were anigh.
To make a short story of it, thus did she day by day, and no comfort
or converse might we sisters have of each other, or of aught else
save the sight of our beloved ones, and a glimmer of hope therewith.
And, forsooth, for as grievously as my heart was wrung by the
yearning of me for my love, yet was it a joy unto me to think that he
went there desiring me, and that whom he desired was not the poor
wretched creature chained there in her nakedness, with her body
spoiled by torment and misery, but the glad maiden whom he had so
often called fair and lovesome.

So passed the days, and at last hope had grown so pale and wan, that
she was no more to be seen by us than we were by our lords; and now
it seemed to me that death was coming, so feeble and wretched as I
grew. But the witch would not let us die, but sustained us from time
to time with some little draughts of a witch-drink that revived us.

So wore the time till that evening, when came hope together with the
fulfilment of hope, so that one minute we durst hope for deliverance,
and the next we were delivered.

Nor is there more to tell, Birdalone, my dear, save that we came
safely to the Isle of the Young and the Old in the full morning-tide;
and as our ferry drew nigh the green shore, there were the two
younglings whereof thou didst tell us awaiting our landing, and when
we stepped ashore they came to us bearing cakes and fruit in a fair
basket, and they made much of us and we of them. And so we came to
the old man, who was exceeding fain of us, and grand and courteous,
till he became a little drunk, and then he was somewhat over-kind to
us women. Nevertheless, there in that pleasant isle we rested us for
three days, that we might somewhat calm and refresh our spirits with
what was small and of little account. And when we departed, the old
man followed us down to the strand, and lamented our departure, as he
had done with our lords erewhile; only this time yet greater was his
lamentation, and needs must we kiss him, each one of us, or never had
he been done. So he turned up landward, bewailing the miss of us,
but presently, before we had seen the last of him, was cheerful again
and singing.

So we went on our way; and we also, we maidens, in our turn, saw
those woeful images of the Isle of Queens and the Isle of Kings; and
we came to the Isle of Nothing, and abode warily by our ferry, and so
came away safe, and thus, as thou wottest, home to the castle to hear
evil tidings of thee. Now is this all my tale.

Birdalone sat shyly and hushed when all was done; and then all they
did somewhat to comfort her, each after their own fashion; and now
sorrow for the slain man was made softer and sweeter for them,
whereas they had to lose not two fellows, but one only. Yet, despite
of all, trouble and care was on Birdalone's soul betwixt the joy of
loving and being beloved, and the pain and fear of robbing a friend
of her love. For Atra's face, which she might not hate, and scarce
might love, was a threat to her day by day.



CHAPTER XI. BIRDALONE AND THE BLACK SQUIRE TALK TOGETHER IN THE HALL
OF THE CASTLE.



Now within a few days was the body of Baudoin laid in earth in the
chapel of the castle; and in the solemnest of fashions was the burial
done. When it was over, the two knights and Sir Aymeris turned them
heartily to dighting the war against the Red Hold, and less than a
month thereafter was the hosting at the Castle of the Quest, and if
the host were not very many  for it went not above sixteen hundreds
of men all told , yet the men were of the choicest, both of knights
and sergeants and archers. There then they held a mote without the
castle, whereas Arthur the Black Squire was chosen for captain, and
in three days they were to depart for the Red Hold.

Now this while Birdalone had seen but little of Arthur, who was ever
busy about many matters, and never had she had any privy talk with
him, though sore she longed for it; yet indeed it was more by her
will than his that so it was. But when it was come to the very last
day before the departure, she said that she must needs see him before
he went, and he perchance never to come back again. So when men were
quiet after dinner she went into the hall and found him there, pacing
up and down the floor. For indeed she had sent a word to him by
Leonard the priest that he should be there.

So she went up to him, and all simply she took him by the hand and
led him into a shot-window and set him down by her; and he, all
trembling for love and fear of her, might not forbear, but kissed her
face and her mouth many times; and she grew as hot as fire, and
somewhat she wept.

Then she spake after a while: Dear friend, I had it in my mind to
say to thee many things that meseems were sage, but now neither will
the thought of them come into my mind, nor the words into my mouth.
And this is a short hour. And therewith she fell to kissing him,
till he was well-nigh beside himself betwixt desire and joy and the
grief of departure, and the hardness of the case.

But at last she forbore and said: Will it not be when thou art gone
to-morrow as it was when ye were away upon the Quest, and I knew not
how to bear myself, so heavy lay all the world and its doings and its
fashion upon me? It will be hard to me, he said; evil and grim will
be the days. She said: And yet, even now in these last days, when I
see thee oft, every day my soul is worn with grief, and I know not
what to do with myself. I shall come back, he said, and bear my love
with me, and then belike we shall seek some remedy. She was silent a
while, and then she said: Meanwhile of thy coming, and I see thee
not at all for many days, how will it be with my grief then? Quoth
he: More than enough of grief no soul may bear; for either death
comes, or else some dullness of the pain, and then by little and
little the pain weareth. Then she said: And how would it be if thou
come not back and I see thee never again, or if when thou come back
thou find me not, for that I be either dead or gone away out of thy
reach? He said: I know not how it would be. When thou sayest thou
shalt die, dost thou wholly believe it in thy sense or thy body
otherwise than Holy Church would? I will tell thee, she said, that
now I am sitting by thee and seeing thy face and hearing thy voice,
it is that only which I believe in; for I may think of nought else of
either grief or joy. Yea, when I wept e'en now, it was not for
sorrow that I wept, but for I cannot rightly tell what. And she took
his hand and looked fondly upon him.

But presently she looked on his hand, and said: And now meseemeth
that we twain are grown to be such close friends that I may ask thee
what I will, and thou be neither angry, nor wonder thereat. I see on
thy finger here the ring that I brought with me from the Isle of
Increase, and which thereafter thou hadst of me when I gave thee back
also the shoon which were lent unto me. Tell me how thou hadst it
back from Atra, as I suppose thou gavest it unto her. But how now
art thou angry? for I see the blood come up in thy face. Nay,
beloved, said he, I am not angry, but whenso I hear of Atra, or think
of her closely, shame comes on me and confusion, and maybe fear. But
now will I answer thee. For even in those hours which we wore on the
Isle of the Young and the Old, when all we should have been so happy
together, she divined somewhat of my case, or indeed, why do I not
say it out, all thereof. And she spake to me such words  for she is
both tender and wise and strong of heart  that I cowered before her
and her grief and pain; and she gave me back the said ring, which
forsooth I gave to her in the Sending Boat in the first hour that the
Isle of Increase lay astern of us. And I wear it now as a token of
my grief for her grief. See now, love, since I have answered thee
this question without anger or amaze, thou needest not fear to ask me
any other; for this of all things lies closest to my heart.

Birdalone drooped her head, and she spake in a low voice: Lo now!
the shadow of parting and the shadow of death could not come between
our present joy; but this shadow of the third one cometh between us
and is present between us. Woe's me! how little did I think of this
when thou wert away and I was sick of longing for the sight of thee,
and deemed that that would heal it all.

He spake not, but took her hand and held it; and presently she looked
up again and said: Thou art good, and wilt not be angry if I ask
thee something else; this it is: Why wert thou so grim with me that
other day when ye found me in that evil plight in tow of the Red
Tyrant, so that I deemed that thou of all others hadst cast me off?
That was worse to me than the witch's stripes, and I kept thinking to
myself: How simple was my trouble once, and now how tangled and
weary!

Then he might not refrain him, but threw himself upon her, and
clipped her and kissed her all he might, and she felt all the
sweetness of love, and lacked nought of kindness and love to him.
And thereafter they sat still awhile, and he said, as if her question
had but that moment left her lips: This, forsooth, was the cause
that I looked grim on thee: first, that from the time I first saw
thee and heard thy tale, and of thy deeds, I had deemed thee wise
above the wisdom of women. But this going forth of thee to the Black
Valley, whereof came the slaying of Baudoin, seemed unto me a mere
folly, till again I had heard thy tale of that also; and then the
tale and thy speech overcame me. But again, though I was grieved and
disappointed hereat, belike that had passed from me speedily, but
then there was this also which would not let my soul rest, to wit,
that I feared concerning that slain knight whose head the Red One had
hung about thy neck; for how else, methought, might he have been so
wroth with him and thee; and meseemed, moreover, that thou wert kind
in thine heart to the dead man, even when we were come to thee; and
then, seest thou, my desire for thee and the trouble of Baudoin's
slaying, and the black trouble aforesaid. Lo now, I have told thee
this. When wilt thou cease to be angry with me?

She said: I ceased to be grieved with thine anger when thine anger
died; yet strange, meseemeth, that thou shouldst trust me so little
when thou lovest me so much!

And she leaned against him and caressed him gently, and again was he
at point to take her in his arms, when lo! the sound of men coming
unto the screen of the hall; so then those two stood up and went to
meet them, and there was the speech of their sundering done. Yet
belike for a little while both those twain were happy.



CHAPTER XII. THE KNIGHTS AND THEIR FELLOWS BETAKE THEM TO THE
ASSAULTING OF THE RED HOLD



On the morrow, when the day was yet young, the knights were ready for
departure, and in the very gate they bade farewell to the ladies, who
kissed them kindly one and all, and Viridis wept sore; and Atra
constrained herself to do even as the others did; but pale she was
and quaking when she kissed Arthur and watched him get a-horseback.

But the knights bade their ladies be of good cheer, for that they
would send them tidings of how they sped every seven days at least,
whereas it was no long way thence to the Red Hold, save there were
battle on the road, and they deemed their host which should beset the
Hold would be enough to clear all the ways behind it. For that same
cause withal they had Sir Aymeris with them, nor left a many men
behind them, and they under the rule of three squires, whereof two
were but young, and the third, who was made the captain of the
castle, was an old and wise man of war, who had to name Geoffrey of
Lea. There, withal, was the priest Sir Leonard, who went about now
much hushed and abashed, and seemed to fear to give a word to
Birdalone; albeit she deemed of him that his thoughts of her were the
same as erst they had been.

So now when the knights were departed, and all the host was gone out
of sight, it was heavy time indeed in the Castle of the Quest till
they should hear tidings of them again. Both Aurea and Atra kept
much to themselves, and did I know not what to wear away the time;
for now it was not to be looked for that they should venture out-a-
gates. But as for Viridis, she waxed of better cheer after a while,
but whatever betid she would not sunder herself from Birdalone; nay,
not for an hour; and Birdalone took all her kindness kindly, though
forsooth it was somewhat of a pain unto her; it shall be told
wherefore ere long.

Withal, as if to wear the time, Birdalone betook her diligently to
her needlework, and fell to the cunningest of broidery; so that
Viridis and the others wondered at her, for when they were done it
seemed indeed that the flowers and creatures and knots had grown of
themselves upon the cloth, such wondrous work it was.

Moreover, to his great joy, the very first day of the departure of
the host she called Sir Leonard unto her, and prayed to go on again
with the learning her fair scribe-craft; and therein also was she
diligent hours of every day; and Viridis would sit beside her
wondering at the deftness of her fingers, and crying out for joy as
the page grew fair and well-learned under them.

Thus wore a week, and at the end thereof came a messenger from the
host and told how they had come before the Red Hold and had summoned
them thereof to yield, which they had utterly denied to do, but
defied the host; wherefore the host had now beset the Hold, and more
folk were daily flocking unto them; but that the said Hold would be
hard to win by plain assault, whereas it was both strong and well-
manned; but few of the host had been slain or hurt as yet, and of the
chieftains not one.

Right glad were they of the castle because of these tidings; though,
forsooth, the men-at-arms knew well enough that the time would soon
come when some fierce assault would be made, and then, forsooth,
would be sore peril of life and limb unto the chieftains.



CHAPTER XIII. BIRDALONE BETHINKS HER TO FULFIL THE PROMISE MADE UNTO
ATRA



Again wore a week, and once more came the messenger, and did them of
the castle to wit that there had been nought more done at the Red
Hold, save skirmishing at the barriers, wherein few were hurt on
either side; and also that the engines for battering the walls were
now well-nigh all dight, and they would begin to play upon the Hold,
and in especial one which hight Wall-wolf, which had been set up by
the crafts of Greenford.

This tidings also was deemed good by all, save it might be by Atra,
who, as Birdalone deemed, pined and fretted herself at the delay, and
would fain that, one way or other, all were over. Atra spake but
little to Birdalone, but watched her closely now; oft would she gaze
on her wistfully, as if she would that Birdalone would speak unto
her; and Birdalone noted that, but she might not pluck up heart
thereto.

Wore a third week, and again came the messenger, and told how three
days ago, whenas Wall-wolf had sorely battered one of the great
towers which hight the Poison-jar, and overthrown a pan of the wall
there beside, they had tried an assault on the breach, and hard had
been the battle there, and in the end, after fierce give and take,
they of the Hold had done so valiantly that they had thrust back the
assailants, and that in the hottest brunt the Black Squire had been
hurt in the shoulder by a spear-thrust, but not very grievously; but
withal that he sent, in so many words, forbidding the ladies to make
any account of so small a matter. And, quoth the sergeant, most like
my lord will wear his armour in four days' time; also now we have
reared another great slinger, which we call Stone-fretter, and soon,
without doubt, we shall be standing victorious within that den of
thieves.

Now though these tidings were not so altogether ill, yet were those
ladies sore troubled thereby, and especially Atra, who swooned
outright when she had heard the last word thereof.

As for Birdalone, she made as little semblance of her trouble as she
might, but when all was quiet again she went to find Viridis, and
brought her to her chamber and spake to her, saying: Viridis, my
sister, thou hast been piteous kind unto me from the first minute
that thou sawest me naked and helpless, and fleeing from evil unto
worse evil; nowise mightest thou have done better by me hadst thou
been verily my sister of blood; and I know it that thou wouldst be
loth to part from me.

Viridis wept and said: Why dost thou speak of parting from me, when
thou knowest it would break my heart?

Said Birdalone: To say it as short as may be, because the parting
must now come to pass. Viridis waxed pale and then red, and she
stamped her foot and said: It is unkind of thee to grieve me thus,
and thou doest wrong herein.

Hearken, dear sister, said Birdalone: thou knowest, for thou thyself
wast the first to tell me thereof, that I am the supplanter in our
fellowship, and that I have undone Atra's hope. This I did not of
mine own will, but it came unto me; yet of mine own will I can do the
best I may to amend it; and this is the best, that I depart hence
before the Red Hold is taken and my lords come back; for if they come
back and I see my lord Arthur, so fair and beauteous as he is, before
me, never shall I be able to go away from him. And lo thou, I have
promised Atra by all the kindness she did me when we were come to the
Wailing Tower, and I naked and quaking and half-dead with terror,
that if occasion served I would do my utmost to help her, even if it
were to my own grief. Now behold this that now is, is the occasion,
and there will not be another; for when my love comes home hither and
beholdeth me, think thou how all the desire which has been gathering
in his heart this while will blossom and break forth toward me; and
mayhappen he will make but little semblance of it before other folk,
for proud and high of heart is he; but he will seek occasion to find
me alone, and then shall I be with him as the lark in the talons of
the sparrow-hawk, and he will do his pleasure of me, and that with
all the good-will of my heart. And then shall I be forsworn to Atra,
and she will hate me, as now she doth not, and then is all the
fellowship riven, and that by my deed.

Yet was Viridis wrath, and she said: Meseemeth this is fool's talk.
Will not the fellowship be all the more riven if thou depart and we
see thee no more?

O nay, said Birdalone; for when I am gone thy love shall be no less
for me, though as now thou art angry; and Atra will love me for that
I shall have held to my promise to mine own scathe; and thy man and
Aurea will lay it to me that I have done valiantly and knightly. And
Arthur, how can he choose but love me; and maybe we shall yet meet
again.

And therewithal she did at last bow down her head and fall to
weeping, and Viridis was moved by her tears and fell to kissing and
caressing her.

After a little Birdalone lifted up her head and spake again:
Moreover, how can I dare to abide him? didst thou not see how grim he
was to me when they delivered me and brought me back? and he with his
own lips told me so much, that it was because he doubted that I had
done amiss; and now if I do amiss again, even if it be at his
bidding, will it not be so that he will speedily weary of me, and
curse me and cast me off? What sayest thou, Viridis mine?

What is to say, said Viridis, save that thou hast broken my heart?
But thou mayst heal it if thou wilt take thy words back, and tell me
that thou wilt not sunder thee from us.

But Birdalone brake out weeping and lamenting aloud, and she cried
out: Nay, nay, it may not be; I must depart, and Atra hath smitten
me amidst of my friends. And Viridis knew not what to say or to do.

At last came Birdalone to herself again, and she looked sweetly on
Viridis and smiled on her from out her tears, and said: Thou seest,
sister, how little a loss thou wilt have of me, a mere wild woman.
And now nought availeth either me or thee but I must begone, and that
speedily. Let it be to-morrow then. And when the messenger comes at
the end of this week, send word by him of what I have done; and look
thou to it but both our lords will praise me for the deed.

Said Viridis: But whither wilt thou, or what wilt thou do? To
Greenford first, said Birdalone, and after whither the Good Lord
shall lead me; and as for what I will do, I am now deft in two
crafts, script and broidery to wit; and, wheresoever I be, folk shall
pay me to work herein for them, whereby I shall earn my bread.
Hearken also, my sister, canst thou give me any deal of money? for
though I wot little of such matters, yet I wot that I shall need the
same. And I ask this whereas, as e'en now I said, I deem our lords
shall praise my deed, and that, therefore, they would not that I
should depart hence as an outcast, wherefore they shall not begrudge
it to me. Moreover, for the same cause I would thee speak to the old
squire Geoffrey of Lea, and tell him that I have an errand to
Greenford, and crave of him that he lend me one of the two
younglings, Arnold or Anselm, and two or three men-at-arms to bring
me safely thither; since now, forsooth, I need no more adventures on
the road.

She smiled as she spake; and now all the passion of anguish seemed to
have left her for that while; but Viridis cast her arms about her
neck and wept upon her bosom, and said: Woe's me! for I see that
thou wilt go whatsoever I may say or do; I strove to be angry with
thee, but I might not, and now I see that thou constrainest me as
thou dost all else. I will go now straightway and do thine errand.

Thus then they parted for that time; but it was not till the day
after the morrow that Birdalone was alboun. Viridis told of her
departure both to Aurea and Atra; and Aurea lamented it, but would
not do aught to stay her; for she was waxen weary and listless since
the death of her man. As for Atra, she spake but little concerning
it, but to Viridis praised Birdalone's valiance and kindness. Yet
unto herself she said: Verily she understood my word that I spake to
her about the occasion of her helping. Yet woe's me! for she shall
carry his love with her whithersoever she wendeth; and a happy woman
is she.

But when Geoffrey the squire knew that the ladies, all three, were at
one with Birdalone as to her departure, he doubted nothing, but bade
Arnold, his mate, take four good men with him, and bring the Lady
Birdalone unto Greenford and do her bidding there. Albeit, he deemed
no less but they would bring her back again.



CHAPTER XIV. BIRDALONE LEAVES THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST



On the morrow morn, then, Birdalone spake farewell both to Aurea and
Atra; but as for Viridis, she sent her word that she had no heart
thereto, and yet she sent her a word of comfort, to wit, that she
deemed that they would one day meet again. Aurea, in her parting
words, part praised her, part chid her; saying that she did well and
kindly and valiantly, as her wont was. Yet, said she, when all is
said, thou mightest have abided this tangle and trouble, which at the
worst had not been so evil as death between us. Yea, sister, said
Birdalone, but might not death have come of my abiding?

As she spake, in came Atra, with her head somewhat drooped, meek and
humble, her cheeks red, her hands trembling; and she said: Wilt thou
take now my word of farewell and blessing, and the kiss of peace
betwixt us, and bear away the memory of our kindness together?

Birdalone stood up proud and straight, and was somewhat pale as she
suffered Atra to kiss her cheeks and mouth, and said: Now hast thou
forgiven me that weird dragged me in betwixt thy love and thy
goodhap; and I have forgiven thee that I am led away by weird into
the waste and the wilderness of love. Farewell. Therewith she went
her way to the gate, and the others followed her not.

Without abode her Arnold and the four men-at-arms, and her palfrey
and a sumpter-horse bearing two goodly coffers, wherein Viridis had
let load raiment and other havings for her; and Arnold came up to her
smiling, and said: My lady Viridis hath given me a pouch wherein is
money to bear for thee to Greenford and hand over to thee there when
we be safe; and she hath bidden me to be in all wise obedient unto
thee, lady, which needed not, whereas now and from hence forth am I
by mine own will thy very servant to do thy pleasure always and
everywhere.

She thanked him and smiled on him kindly, so that his heart beat fast
for joy and love of her; and therewith she gat into the saddle and
they rode their ways together, and Birdalone looked back never till
the Castle of the Quest was shut from their eyes by the nesses of the
little hills.


Here ends the Fifth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is
called The Tale of the Quest's Ending, and begins the Sixth Part of
the said tale, which is called The Days of Absence.




THE SIXTH PART: THE DAYS OF ABSENCE




CHAPTER I. BIRDALONE RIDES TO GREENFORD AND THERE TAKES LEAVE OF
ARNOLD AND HIS MEN



On the road to Greenford nought befell to tell of; they came thither
when the sun was at point to set, for they had ridden diligently all
day.

As they rode the streets of the good town, they noted of them, that
though it was evening wherein folk do much disport them abroad, there
were women and children enough in the streets or standing at their
doors, but of carles very few, and they for the more part grey-heads.

Now did Arnold bring Birdalone to the town hall, wherein yet sat the
deputy of the burgrave, who himself was in the leaguer at the Red
Hold; this man, who was old and wise and nothing feeble of body, made
much of Birdalone and her folk, and was glad of them when he knew
that they had the seal and let-pass of Geoffrey of Lea; wherefore he
gave them to eat and drink, and lodged them in his own house, and
made them the best of cheer.

But betimes on the morrow did Birdalone send back Arnold and the four
men-at-arms, with no tale but that such was her will; and bidding
farewell to the said Arnold, she suffered him to kiss her hands, and
gave him a ring from off her finger, so that he went on his way
rejoicing.

So soon as she saw him and his men well on the road, she went to the
old man, the vice-ruler of the town, who was of the aldermen thereof,
and did him to wit that she would wage two or three carles who could
deal with horses and beasts, and withal handle weapons if need were,
to be both as servants and guards for her, as she had errands in that
country-side, and belike might well have to go from town to town
thereabout. He took her asking kindly, but said it was none so easy
to find men who for any wage would fare forth of Greenford at that
stour, whereas well-nigh all their fighting-men were lying before the
Red Hold as now. Howsoever, ere noontide he brought before her a man
of over three score, but yet wayworthy, and two stout young men, his
sons, and told her that these men were trusty and would go with her
to the world's end if need were.

She took these men readily, and agreed with them for a good wage; and
whereas each one had bow and arrows and short sword, she had but to
buy for them jacks, sallets, and bucklers, and they were well armed
as for their condition. Withal she bought them three good horses and
another sumpter-horse; which last was loaded with sundry wares that
she deemed that she needed, and with victual. Then she took leave of
the alderman, thanking him much for his good-will, and so departed
from Greenford at all adventure, when the day was yet young.

The alderman had asked her whither away, and she had told him that
she was boun for Mostwyke first, and thereafter for Shifford-on-the-
Strand; whereas she had heard talk of these two towns as being on one
and the same highway, and Mostwyke about a score of miles from
Greenford; but when she was well out-a-gates she came to a little
road on the right hand which turned clean away from Mostwyke, and she
took the said road; and when she had followed it some three miles,
she asked the old carle whither it led. He looked on her and smiled
somewhat, and she on him in turn; and she said: Wonder not, my
friend, that I am not clear about my ways, for I shall tell the sooth
that I am a damsel adventurous, and am but seeking some place where I
may dwell and earn my livelihood till better days come; and this is
the whole truth, and thou shalt know it at once, to wit, that I am
indeed fleeing, and were fain to hide the footsteps of me, and I bid
you three to help me therein. But ye must know that I am fleeing,
not from my foes, but from my friends; and, if ye will, as we go by
the way, I will tell you all the story of me, and we will be friends
while we are together, yea, and thereafter if it may be.

Now she said this because she had looked carefully on these men, and
herseemed that they were good men and true, and not dull of wit.
Forsooth the old man, who hight Gerard of the Clee, was no weakling,
and was nought loathly to look on, and his two sons were goodly and
great of fashion, clear-eyed, and well-carven of visage; they hight
Robert and Giles.

Now spake old Gerard: Lady, I thank thee heartily of thy much grace
unto me; now would I get off my nag and kneel to thee in the highway
therefor, but that I see that thou wert fain to make as much way as
may be to-day; wherefore, by thy leave, I will tarry my homaging till
we rest our horses by the wayside. She laughed, and praised his
wisdom; and the young men looked on her and worshipped her in their
hearts. Forsooth, the fellowship of these good and true folk was
soft and sweet to her, and soothed the trouble of her spirit. And
she enforced herself to talk cheerfully with them, and asked them
many things, and learned much of them.

But now went on Gerard to say: Lady, if thou wilt hide thy ways from
whomsoever it may be, thou hast happened on no ill way; for though
this road be good to ride, it is but a byway through the sheep-walks
that folk may drive their wains hereby in the wet season of winter
and spring; and for a great way we shall come to but little save the
cots of the sheep-carles; scarce a hamlet or two for the space of two
days' riding; and on the third day a little town, hight Upham, where
are but few folk save at the midsummer wool-fair, which is now gone
by.

Now there is a highway cometh into this road from out of the tilled
country and Appleham, a good town, and goeth through it toward the
tillage, and the City of the Bridges and the liberties thereof; and
all the land is much builded and plentiful; but, if thou wilt, we
will not take either highway, but wend over the downland which lieth
north-east of Upham, and though it be roadless, yet is it not ill-
going, and I know it well and its watering-places, little dales and
waters therein all running north-east, wherein be certain little
thorps here and there, which shall refresh us mightily. Over that
downland we may wend a four days, and then the land will swell up
high, and from the end of that high land we shall behold below us a
fair land of tillage, well watered and wooded, and much builded; and
in the midst thereof a great city with walls and towers, and a great
white castle and a minster, and lovely houses a many. In that city
mayst thou dwell and earn thy livelihood if thou canst do aught of
crafts. And if thou mayst not, then may we find somewhat to swink at
for a wage, and so maintain thee and us. But the said city is called
the City of the Five Crafts, and the land round about it is the frank
thereof; and oftenest, frank and city and all, it is called the Five
Crafts all simply. Now what sayest thou hereof, my lady?

She said: I say that we will go thither, and that I thank thee and
thy sons of thy good-will, and so may God do to me as I reward you
well therefor. But tell me, good Gerard, how it is that thou art so
willing to leave kith and kin to follow a gangrel wife along the
ways? Said Gerard: Dame, I think that the face and body of thee
might lead any man that yet had manhood in him to follow thee, even
if he left house and all to go with thee. But as for us, we have no
longer a house or gear, whereas they of the Red Hold lifted all my
bestial, and burned my house and all that was therein a month ago.
Yea, said Birdalone, and how befalleth it, then, that ye are not
before the Red Hold to avenge thee? Dame, said he, when the muster
was I was deemed somewhat over old, wherefore the sheriff took me
not, but suffered my sons also to abide behind to earn a living for
me; may God be good to him therefor, and St. Leonard! But as to my
kindred, I must tell thee that I am not kinned hereabout, but in a
good town hight Utterhay, and that when our alderman sent for me to
bring me to thee, I was more than half-minded to get me back thither.
Now sooth it is that the best way thither, though it may be indeed
the safest rather than the shortest, lies through the Five Crafts;
for the road goes thence to Utterhay a three score miles or so,
making the longer of it, as it skirteth ever some way off a perilous
forest, a place of sore dread and devilish, which hight Evilshaw, on
the edge whereof lieth Utterhay, a merry cheaping-stead and a
plenteous, and the home of my kindred. Wherefore now is the City of
the Five Crafts handy to us; because when thou hast done with us, as
I hope it may be long first, then are we others nigh home, and may
all simply wend our way thither.

Birdalone thanked him again full heartily; but therewithal as they
rode along there seemed to stir in her some memory of the earliest of
her days in the witch's house, and she began to have a longing to
betake her to Utterhay and the skirts of Evilshaw.



CHAPTER II. OF BIRDALONE AND HER FELLOWSHIP, THEIR FARING OVER THE
DOWNLAND



Thus rode they along and loitered not, though they talked blithely
together; and Birdalone wondered to herself that she might so much as
hold up her head for bitter thoughts of the days and the longings but
late passed away, but so it was, that it was only now and again that
they stung her into despair and silence, and for the most part she
hearkened to the talk of the old man and the lads about the days of
Greenford and the alarms of lifting and unpeace, and the ways of the
chapmen and the craftsmen.

An hour after noon they rested in a little dale of the downland where
was a pool and three thorn-bushes thereby; and when they had lighted
down, the old man knelt before Birdalone and took her hand, and swore
himself her man to do her will, whatso it were; and then he stood up
and bade his sons do likewise; so they two knelt before her in turn,
somewhat shy and abashed, for all that they were such stout, bold
fellows, and found it hard to take her hand, and then when they had
it in theirs, hard to let it go again.

A score of miles and five they rode that day, and had no roof over
them at night save the naked heaven, but to Birdalone that was but
little scathe: they made a shift to have some fire by them, and the
three men sat long about it that even while Birdalone told them
somewhat of her life; and as she told of the House under the Wood and
the Great Water, Gerard had some inkling of whereabouts it was; but
was nought so sure, because, as abovesaid in this tale, seldom did
any from the world of men venture in Evilshaw, or know of the Great
Water from its banks that gave unto the forest.

In like wise they rode the next day, and came at eventide to a thorp
in a fair little dale of the downland, and there they guested with
the shepherd-folk, who wondered much at the beauty of Birdalone, so
that at first they scarce durst venture to draw nigh unto her until
Gerard and his sons had had some familiar converse with them; then
indeed they exceeded in kindness toward them, in their rough upland
fashion, but ever found it hard to keep their eyes off Birdalone, and
that the more after they had heard the full sweetness of her voice;
whereas she sang to them certain songs which she had learned in the
Castle of the Quest, though it made her heart sore; but she deemed
she must needs pay that kindly folk for their guestful and blithe
ways. And thereafter they sang to the pipe and the harp their own
downland songs; and this she found strange, that whereas her eyes
were dry when she was singing the songs of love of the knighthood,
the wildness of the shepherd-music drew the tears from her, would
she, would she not. Homelike and dear seemed the green willowy dale
to her, and in the night ere she slept, and she lay quiet amidst of
the peaceful people, she could not choose but weep again, for pity of
the bitter-sweet of her own love, and for pity of the wide world
withal, and all the ways of its many folk that lay so new before her.



CHAPTER III. THEY COME TO THE CITY OF THE FIVE CRAFTS, AND BIRDALONE
MEETS WITH THE POOR-WIFE



They made not so much way that they came to the Five Crafts on the
fourth day, but lay under the bare heavens in a dale below the big
swell of the downland, whereof Gerard spake. But betimes in the
morning Birdalone arose and stirred up her men, and they gat to
horse, and rode the hill before them till they came on to the crest
thereof. Then Birdalone cried aloud with joy to see the lovely land
before her, and the white walls and the towers of the great city,
whereas Greenford was but small beside it.

So they rode down into the frank, and entered the gates of the city a
little after noon, and again was Birdalone in all amaze at the going
to and fro in the streets and the thronging of the markets, and the
divers folk, as chapmen and men-at-arms, and craftsmen and lords, who
used the said city; and to say sooth, somewhat her heart sank within
her, and it seemed to her that it would be hard and troublous to have
to deal with so much folk, and that they must needs go past her on
the right hand and the left without heeding her life.

Howsoever, Gerard, who knew the city, brought her to a fair hostel,
where she was well lodged, she and her men. Straightway, then,
before she went out into the streets again, she fell to getting
together what she had of fine broidered work and of fair script, and
to finishing what she had unfinished. And she sent forth Gerard and
his sons to find out where was the market for such goods, and if she
would have leave to sell the same therein, or anywhere in the town;
and Gerard found the hall of the embroiderers, and therein the master
of the craft, and he received the carle courteously when he heard
that there was fine work come to town, and did him to wit that none
in any such craft might have freedom of the market save by leave of
the guild of the craft; but, said he, the guilds were open-handed and
courteous, and were nowise wont to refuse the said leave, were the
work good and true; and he bade Gerard withal tell his mistress that
she were best to bring samplings of her work to the Guildhall so soon
as she might. So the very next day went Birdalone thither, and found
the master a well-looked tall man of some five-and-forty winters, who
looked on her from the first as if he deemed it were no ill way of
wearing the time. To this man she showed her work, and though he
found it not easy to take his eyes off Birdalone herself, yet when he
looked at her handiwork, he found it better than very good, and he
said to her: Damsel, here is what will be sought for at a great
price by the great lords and ladies of the land, and the rich
burgesses, and especially by the high prelates; and so much of it as
thou hast a mind to do is so much coined gold unto thee; and now I
see thee what thou art, I were fain that thou gathered good to thee.
But as diligent as thou mayst be, thou hast but one pair of hands,
wonderful soothly, and yet but one pair. He broke off at that word,
for he was verily staring at her hands, and longing to see more of
her arms than the wrists only, so that he scarce knew what he was
saying. Then he turned red and said: Soothly I wot that no other
hands save thine may do such needlework, or make the draughts for
them. But thou wilt need women-servants to help thee, both in
dighting the house for thee  for this big old carle here will be
scarce meet thereto  and as apprentices to help thee about the work
itself; and if thou wilt, I shall seek the best ones out for thee.
Moreover I must tell thee, that though I know for sure how that no
woman in the world may work such needlework as thine, yet whiles
there cometh hither a woman of middle age, a woman worn by troubles,
pious, meek, and kind; and by St. Lucia! now I look on thee again,
she might be somewhat like unto thee, were she young and fresh-
looking and strong as thou art. Now this woman I say, and thereat I
marvel, doeth needlework that is somewhat after the manner of thine,
and which seemed to us excellent till I had seen thine. Good
livelihood she earneth thereby, and is diligent therein; but she hath
no heart to get apprentices, or be made one of our guild, both of
which were lawful to her as to thee, lovely damsel. But now I shall
counsel her to be made of our guild along with thee, if thou wilt
have it so, and then may ye both have three apprentices each, and may
make in our city a goodly school, so that our guild shall be
glorified thereby, for there will be none such work in the world.
How sayest thou?

She thanked him much, and yeasaid him, and thought in her heart that
such work which would keep her hands and her head both busy, would
solace the grief of her heart, and wear away the time, that she might
live till hope might peradventure arise in her.

Then said the master: There is one thing else, that is, thy
dwelling-place; and if thou wilt I shall hire thee a house in the
street of the Broiderers, a goodly one: sooth to say, that same is
mine own, so thou mayst deem that I tell thee hereof to mine own
gain; and that may be  and he reddened therewith ; but there is this
in it, that if thou lackest money I shall let thee live therein
without price till thou shalt have earned more than enough to pay me.

Birdalone thanked him well, but she did him to wit that she was
nowise penniless; and presently she departed well pleased, though she
deemed that the said master was well-nigh more friendly than might be
looked for. And the next day he came to her in the hostelry, and
without more ado brought her to the house in the street of the
Broiderers, and she found it fair and well plenished, and so she fell
to work to get all things ready.

Now the next week was the day appointed when she should be received
into the broiderers' guild, and the day before came the master
aforesaid to see Birdalone. Sooth to say, he had not failed to come
to see her every day, on one pretence or another, since the first day
they had met, but ever he did to her with all honour and simply. But
on this day he brought with him the woman skilful of her hands, to
show her unto Birdalone, who received her gladly, and thereafter
Master Jacobus left them alone together.

The said woman looked worn and aged indeed, but was not of more than
five-and-forty winters even by seeming, after the first look at her;
she was somewhat tall and well-knit, her face well shapen, and her
hair yet goodly. There was a kind look in the eyes of her, as if she
might love anyone with whom she lived that would be kind to her.
Meek, or rather over-meek, of mien she was, and it seemed of her that
she had been sore scared and oppressed one while or another.

So when Master Jacobus was gone, Birdalone set her down on the settle
beside her, and spake to her full sweetly and kindly, and the woman
spake little in turn save answering simply to her questions.
Birdalone asked where she was kinned, and she answered: In Utterhay.
Then said Birdalone: Within these last few days I have heard that
town named twice or thrice, and never before, as meseemeth; and yet,
hearing the name from thy mouth, it seemeth to stir something in me,
as if I had been there one time and longed to be there again. Is
there aught in the place whereof folk tell wide about, so that I
might have heard it told of and not noted it at the time? Nay, lady,
said the dame, save perchance that it is on the verge of a very great
and very evil wood, otherwise it was once a merry town and of much
resort from the country-side.

Birdalone looked on her, and saw that the tears were coming from her
eyes and running down her cheeks as she spake; so she said to her:
Why dost thou weep, mother? Is there aught I may do to assuage thy
grief? Said the dame: Thou art so kind to me, and thy voice is so
dear and sweet, that I cannot choose but weep. Meseems it is because
love of thee hath taken mine heart, and therewith is blended memory
of past sorrow of mine. Thou askest me if thou mayest do aught to
assuage my grief; dear lady, I am not grieved now, that has gone by;
nay, now I am more than not grieved, I am made happy, because I am
with thee. But since thou art so debonair with me, I will ask thee
to do somewhat for me; and that is, to tell me of thy life gone by; I
mean, sweet young damsel, of thy life when thou wert a little child.

Then Birdalone kissed her and said: It goes to my heart that thou
lovest me; for soon as I set eyes on thee my heart went out to thee;
and now belike we shall be dear friends; and that is a thing that
shall avail me much, to have a friend who is so much older than I, so
that nought can come between us, of the love of men and other griefs.
Yea, now, said the dame, smiling somewhat sadly; now do I see the
water standing in thine eyes, and thy voice quavers. Is it so, thou
lovely kind damsel, that thou hast been grieved by love of a man?
Who then may prevail in love if thou prevail not? And she fell to
fondling Birdalone's hand; but Birdalone said: It is over-long to
tell of all my life, mother, though I be so young; but now I will do
as thou badest me, and tell thee somewhat of my days when I was
little.

And therewith she fell to telling her of her days in the House under
the Wood, and the witch and her surliness and grimness, and of her
love of the wild things, and how she waxed there. And she spake a
long while, for the memory of those days seemed to lead her along, as
though she verily were alive now in them; and the woman sat before
her, gazing on her lovingly, till Birdalone stayed her tale at last
and said: Now have I told thee more than enough of a simple matter,
and a life that was as that of a wild creature of the woods. Now
shalt thou, mother, tell me somewhat of thee, and what was thy grief
of Utterhay: for thou shalt find that the telling thereof shall
solace thee. Ah! so think young folk, said the woman sadly, because
there are many days left for them to hope in. But though the telling
of my sorrow be a fresh sorrow to me, yet shalt thou hear it. It is
but of the loss of my babe; but she was of all babes the fairest and
the sweetest.

Then she fell to telling Birdalone all that concerning the witch at
Utterhay and the poor-wife that ye have heard in the beginning of
this book, until the time when she left the house to buy meat for the
witch; for she herself was the said poor-wife. And then she told how
she came back again and found her guest gone and the child withal;
and though she had wept for love of Birdalone, she wept not at
telling of this grief, but told it as a tale which had befallen some
other one. And she said: And so when I had done running up and down
like a wild thing, and asking of the neighbours with lack of breath
and fierceness of speech who had taken my child away from me; and
when I had gone up to the wood and even some way into it, and when I
had wandered up and down again, and night was falling, I came back at
last again to my poor house so weary with my woe, that I scarce knew
what had befallen me. And there upon the board lay the victual and
drink which I had brought, and the money which the witch had given
unto me; and despite of grief, hunger flamed up in me at the sight,
and I threw myself on to it and ate and drank, and so came to myself,
that is, to my grief. But the next day I ran about hither and
thither, and wearied folk with my asking and my woe; but it was all
of none avail. The child was gone away from me. There is little
more to tell of me, sweet lady. If I were to live, needs must I take
the poor price of my little one, to wit, the witch's money, and deal
with folk for my livelihood; wherefore I bought me cloth and silks,
having now the wherewithal, and set to work on broidery, for even
then was I a cunning needle-woman. So were God and the saints good
to me, and inclined the folk to me, that they were good and piteous,
and I lacked not work nor due livelihood; but after a while I wearied
of Utterhay, where my dear child should have been running about
before my feet; and having by this time gotten a little money
together, and being exceeding deft in my craft, I came on hither to
live, and, praise be to St. Ursula! I have found it easy to live:
and praise be to All-hallows withal that I have found thee, who art
so kind and lovely; and thou by seeming of the very age my child
should be if she be living: or how old art thou, dear lady?

Birdalone laid her hand on her breast, and she was turned pale, but
she said in a low voice: I deem that I am of twenty summers.

Then they both sat silent, till Birdalone might master the fluttering
of her heart, and she said: Now meseems I have a memory even earlier
than those I told thee erst. A woman took me out of a basket and set
me on the back of an ass, and I looked about, and I was in a grassy
lawn of the woods; and I saw a squirrel run up a tree-trunk before
me, and wind round the tree and hide him; and then I stretched out my
hands and cried out to him; and then came the woman unto me, and gave
me wood-strawberries to eat out of her hand.

Brake out the poor-wife thereat, pale and trembling: Tell me now, my
child, hast thou any memory of what the woman was who set thee on the
ass and gave thee the strawberries? Birdalone looked on her, and
scanned her face closely, and then shook her head, and said: Nay, it
was not thou, mother. Nay, surely; nay, surely, said the woman; but
think again. Said Birdalone, speaking slowly: Was it my mistress
then? She was a tall woman, somewhat thin and bony, with goodly red
hair and white-skinned, but thin-lipped. Quoth the poor-wife: No,
no; it is of no use; nought such was she. Then Birdalone looked up
and said eagerly: Yea, but it was her other shape belike: therein
was she a tall woman, dark-haired, hook-nosed, and hawk-eyed, as if
of thirty summers; a stark woman. Hast thou seen such? dost thou
remember her?

The woman sprang up and cried out, and was like to have fallen, but
Birdalone arose and held her in her arms and comforted her, and set
her in her seat again and knelt before her; and presently the poor-
wife came to herself and said: My child, thou sayest do I remember
her; how shall I ever forget her? she was the thief who stole my
child.

Therewith she slid from off her seat, and knelt by Birdalone, and
stooped low down on the floor as if the tall maiden were but a little
one, and she fell to kissing her and patting her, her face and her
hands, and all about; and said, sobbing and yet smiling: Suffer me a
little, my child, mine own lovely child! For in good sooth I am thy
mother, and it is long since I have seen thee: but hearken, when I
come quite to myself I shall pray thee not to leave me yet awhile,
and I shall pray thee to love me.

Birdalone clipped and kissed her, and said: I love thee dearly, and
never, never shall I leave thee.

Then they stood up, and the mother took Birdalone by the shoulders,
and held her a little aloof, and devoured her with her eyes; and she
said: Yea, thou hast grown tall, and belike wilt grow no taller:
and how fair and lovely thou hast grown; and thou that wert born in a
poor man's house! no wonder that any should covet thee. And I, I
wonder if ever I was as fair as thou art; forsooth many called me
fair for a little while; and now behold me! Nay, child and darling,
let not thy face grow downcast, for now shall I know nought more of
fear and grief; and is it not like that I shall grow fairer of flesh,
and shapelier, in the happy days we shall dwell together? And
therewith she took her to her arms, and it seemed as if she might
never have enough of clipping and embracing her; and she would look
at Birdalone's hands and her feet and her arms, and stroke them and
caress them; and she wondered at her body, as if she had been a young
mother eaten up with the love of her firstborn. And as for
Birdalone, she was as glad of her mother as might be; and yet in her
heart she wondered if perchance one of the fellowship might stray
that way, and be partaker in her joy of this newfound dear friend;
and she said, might it be Viridis; but in her inmost heart, though
she told it not to herself, she longed that the Black Squire might
find her out at last.



CHAPTER IV. OF THE LOVE OF GERARD'S SONS AND OF JACOBUS FOR
BIRDALONE



Now dwelt Birdalone in rest and peace when she had been taken into
the guild along with her mother, and they had taken the due
apprentices to them; and they began to gather much of goods to them,
for of fine broidery there was little done in the Five Crafts, and
none at all that could be put beside their work, either for beauty of
the draught of it, or for skill of handiwork. She declared unto all
folk how that the poor-wife  who had to name Audrey  was her very
mother, from whom she had been stolen in her youngest days; but she
told none any tale of how she was stolen. And the twain dwelt
together in the greatest loving-kindness; and it was with Audrey as
she had forecast, that now her days were happy, and she living in all
ease and content, that the goodliness of her youth came back to her,
and she became a fair woman as for her years; and therewith it grew
to be clear that the two were so much alike one to the other, that
all might see that they were mother and daughter.

Gerard and his two sons she maintained yet as her men; and not only
were they of much use to her in fetching and carrying, but also true
it is that her beauty was so manifest, that she whiles needed a stout
lad weaponed at her back when she was in the streets or amidst the
throng of the market; and many were they, and whiles of the highest,
who craved love of her, some with honour, and some with lack of it.

Of these, forsooth, were but two that anywise troubled her; and the
most trouble was this, that she might not fail to see that the love
of her had entered into the hearts of the two Gerardsons, Robert and
Giles; so that times were when she deemed she must even send them
away, but when it came to the point she had not the heart thereto;
though none other remedy there seemed, so sorely as their souls were
wounded by longing for her. It is not to be said that they ever
spake to her thereof, or wittingly wearied her with signs of love;
but they could not so easily cover it up but that it was ever before
her eyes. But she suffered it all for friendship's sake and for
their true service, and in all friendliness did what she might to
solace their grief. Forsooth so good and true she found that father-
kind, and the young men so goodly and kind, that she said to herself,
had she not another man lying in her heart, she might well have
chosen one of those twain for her very speech-friend and true lover.

The second wooer that troubled her was the master, Jacobus, who, when
but three months were worn of her dwelling in her house, did all
openly crave her love and offer her marriage, he being a man
unwedded. Sore was her heart that she must needs gainsay him, so
kind and courteous as he had been to her at their first coming
together; though this indeed is sooth, that straightway, so soon as
he saw her, he fell into the captivity of her love. Howsoever,
gainsay him she needs must, and he took the naysay so hardly that he
was scarce like a man before her, and wept and prayed and lamented
many times over, till she wearied of it, and well-nigh fell to
loathing him. So that it came to this at last, that one day she
spake to him and said that she might no longer bear it, but must seek
another house and leave his. There then was the to-do, for he fell
on his knees before her, and kissed her feet, would she, would she
not, and cried out in his grief, till at last for pure weariness of
his folly she gave way unto him, and said that she would still abide
there; whereon he rose up from her and went away with all the grief
run off him for that time, and as glad a man to look on as you might
see on a summer's day.

But the next morning he came unto her again, and she thinking all was
begun afresh, made him no glad countenance; but he stood up before
her and spake friendly, and said how that she was in the right of it,
and that if they both dwelt in one house together they were like to
have but a weary time of it, both she and he. But, said he, I will
not that thou shouldst depart out of this house, for a goodly one it
is, and full meet for thee; it is for me to depart, and not for thee.
I tell thee, forsooth, that I had from the first meant this house as
a gift from me to thee. And therewith he drew from his pouch a
scroll, which was a deed of gift of the said house, duly sealed and
attested, and he gave it into her hands; but she was sore moved
thereat, and at the demeanour of him that morning, and she let the
scroll fall to the floor and wept for pity of him, and reached out
both her hands, and he kissed them, and then her lips also, and
sithence he sat down beside her. But she said: Alas! that thou wilt
give me what I may not take, and wouldst have of me what I may not
give.

But now he waxed hotter, and said: This once I command thee to do my
will, and take my gift. It will be nought to my gain if thou take it
not; for I may not live in this house when thou art gone from it; and
I swear by All-hallows that I will not let any have it to hire, nor
will I sell it, since thou hast made it holy by dwelling therein.

Yet was she sore moved by his generous fashion, and she said: I will
take thy gift then, and live here in honour of thee and thy
friendship; for well I wot thou hadst no mind to buy me with thy
gift.

So she spake, and he stood up stark and stern, and so departed, and
kissed her not again; though meseems she would have suffered him had
he offered it. Nay, belike had he at that moment pressed his wooing
somewhat masterfully, it is not so sure but she might have yeasaid
it, and suffered him to wed her and lead her to bed; though it would
have gone ill both with him and with her thereafter.

Thenceforth dwelt Birdalone with her mother and her maidens and her
men in that house, and it became famous in the Five Crafts because of
her beauty and her wisdom, which minished not, but waxed day by day;
but therewithal as the time wore, waxed her longing and sadness. But
all this she hid in her own heart, and was debonair to all about her,
and so good to poor folk that none had a word save of blessing on her
beauty and her wisdom.



CHAPTER V. OF THE DEATH OF AUDREY, MOTHER TO BIRDALONE. SHE IS
WARNED IN A DREAM TO SEEK THE BLACK SQUIRE, AND IS MINDED TO DEPART
THE CITY OF THE FIVE CRAFTS, AND SEEK AGAIN THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST



Thus dwelt Birdalone in the Five Crafts in such rest and peace as her
heart would let her; and dear and good friends she had about her; her
mother first, whose love and desire for love of her made all things
soft and dear unto her. Gerard and the Gerardsons were next, who
were ever faithful and true unto her, and deft both of hand and of
mind, so that they wrought many things for her avail. Then came the
master, Jacobus, who held himself unwedded for her sake, and though
he no longer dwelt in the same house with her, might scarce endure to
miss the sight of her for two days running: a dear friend she deemed
him, as forsooth he was, though whiles he tormented and wearied her,
and belike had wearied her more, but for the sorrow which lay on her
own heart, whereof it came that she might not think of any man as of
one who might be a lover, and so felt safe even with so kind a friend
and so stubborn in his love as was this one. Moreover he never again
craved love of her in so many words, but only in his goings and
comings so did, that it was clear how he had her, and the love of
her, ever in his heart.

Wore thus a five years; and then came a sickness on the city, and
many died thereof; and the said sickness entered into Birdalone's
house, and slew Audrey her mother, but spared all else therein.
Thereby at the first was Birdalone so overwhelmed that she might heed
nought, neither her craft nor her friends, nor the days to come on
the earth for her. And moreover when she came more to herself, which
was not for many days, and asked why her friend Jacobus had not been
to see her the last days, she was told that he also was dead of the
pestilence; and she sorrowed for him sorely, for she loved him much,
though not in the way he would.

And now did the city and land of the Five Crafts begin to look
unfriendly to Birdalone, and she fell to thinking that she must needs
depart thence, as she well might do, whereas she had foison of goods:
and at first it was in her mind to go with Gerard and his sons unto
Utterhay; but then she deemed the thought of her mother, and how she
would be ever thinking of the loss and the gain, and the loss once
more stood in the way; and she turned one thing and another over in
her mind, and might not face it.

On a night, as she slept, came to her dreams of her days in the House
under the Wood  as very seldom betid , and the witch-wife was
speaking to her in friendly fashion  as for her  and blaming her for
fleeing away, and was taunting her with the failure of her love, and
therewith telling her how fair a man and lovesome was the Black
Squire, and what a loss she had of him; and Birdalone was hearkening
and weeping for tenderness' sake, while the witch was unto her
neither fearful nor irksome, and forsooth nought save a mouthpiece
for words that both grieved Birdalone and yet were an eager pleasure
unto her. But in the midst thereof, and ere the dream had time to
change, Birdalone awoke, and it was an early morning of later spring,
and the sky was clear blue and the sun shining bright, and the birds
singing in the garden of the house, and in the street was the sound
of the early market-folk passing through the street with their wares;
and all was fresh and lovely.

She awoke sobbing, and the pillow was wet with her tears, and yet she
felt as if something strange and joyous were going to betide her, and
for joy of the love of life the heart beat fast in her bosom.

She arose all darling naked as she was, and went to the window and
looked out on the beauty of the spring, while the sound of the
market-wains brought to her mind the thought of the meads, and the
streams of the river, and the woodsides beyond the city; and she fell
a-longing for them, as a while she knelt on the window-seat, half
dreaming and asleep again, till the sun came round that way, and its
beams fell upon her bosom and her arms; and she stood up and looked
on the fairness of her body, and a great desire took hold of her
heart that it might be loved as it deserved by him whom she desired.
And thus she stood there till she became ashamed, and hastened to do
on her raiment; but even as she was about it, it came upon her that
what she had will to do was to seek to the Castle of the Quest, and
find out where was her love if there he were not, and so to seek him
the world over till she found him. And such a flood of joy possessed
her when she thought this, and so eager to begone she was, that she
deemed every minute wasted till she were on the road.

Nevertheless, in a while, when her mind was steadied, she knew that
she had somewhat to do ere she might be gone, and that here, as oft,
it would be more haste less speed.

So she abode a little, and then came into her hall duly dight, and
found Gerard and his sons there to serve her; and she brake her fast,
and bade them sit by her at table, as oft she did; and she spake to
them of this and that, and Gerard answered lightly again; but the two
Gerardsons looked at one another, as though they would speak and ask
a question from time to time, but forbore because they durst not.
But Gerard looked on them, and deemed he wotted what was in their
minds; so at last he spake: Our lady, both I, and meseemeth my sons
also, deem that there is some tidings toward which are great unto
thee; for thine eyes sparkle, and the red burns in thy cheeks, and
thine hands may not be quiet, nor thy feet abide in one place;
wherefore I see that thou hast something in thy mind which strives to
be forth of it. Now thou wilt pardon us, our dear lady, that we ask
concerning this, because it is in our love for thee that we speak,
lest there be some change toward which shall be a grief to some of
us.

My men, said Birdalone, flushing red, sooth it is that there is a
change at hand, and I shall tell you straightway what it is. Years
ago I told you that I was fleeing from my friends; now the change
hath betid that I would seek them again; and needs must I leave the
Five Crafts behind to do so. And moreover there is this ill word to
be said, which I will say at once, to wit, that when I am but a
little way gone from the Five Crafts I must wend the other deal of my
journey birdalone, as my name is.

All those three sat silent and aghast at that word, and the young men
grew pale; but after a while spake Gerard: Our lady most well-
beloved, this word which thou hast spoken, to wit, that thou needest
us no longer, I have looked to hear any time this five years; and
praise be to the saints that it hath come late and not soon. Now
there is no more to be said but that thou tell us what is thy will
that we should do.

Birdalone hung her head awhile for sorrow of sundering from these
men; then she looked up and said: It seemeth, my friends, as if ye
deem I have done you a wrong in sundering our fellowship; but all I
may say hereon is to pray you to pardon me, that I needs must go
alone on my quest. And now what I would have you do, is first of all
to fetch hither a notary and scrivener, that he may draw up a deed of
gift to you, Gerard and Gerardsons, of this house and all that is
therein, saving what money I may need for my journey, and gifts such
as I shall bid you to be given to my workwomen. Ye must needs yeasay
this, or ye are forsworn of your behest to do my will. But
furthermore, I will have you to let the workwomen of mine  and the
head one ruling  to hire the aforesaid house, if so they will; for
now are they skilled, and may well earn good livelihood by the work.
But the next work is simple; it is to furnish for me the array of a
young man, with such armour as I may easily bear, to dight me for my
road. Forsooth ye wot that not unseldom do women use the custom of
going arrayed like men, when they would journey with hidden head; and
ye may happen upon such gear as hath been made for such a woman
rather than any man; but thou shalt get me also a short bow and a
quiver of arrows, for verily these be my proper weapons that I can
deal with deftly. Now my last command is that, when all is done,
maybe to-morrow, or maybe the next day, ye bring me out of the city
and the frank of the Five Crafts, and bring me somewhat on my way
over the downs, for loth am I to part from you ere needs must. Then
they knelt before her and kissed her hands, and they were full of
grief; but they saw that so it had to be.

Thereafter Gerard spake with his sons apart, and in a while came to
Birdalone, and said: Our lady, we will do your will in all wise; but
we shall tell thee, that the Five Crafts will look but strange to us
when thou art gone, and that we have a mind to betake us to Utterhay
and the land of our kindred. Wherefore we pray thee to give this
house that hath been so dear to us unto thy workwoman and her mates;
for we need it not, nor the hire thereof, but shall do well enough
with what money or good thou mayst give us. Is this according to thy
will, or have I spoken rashly?

She said: Ye are good and ungreedy, and I bless you for it; be it as
ye will; and this the more, as I were fain that ye go to Utterhay;
for whiles I have deemed that I myself am drawn thitherward,
wherefore it may be that we shall meet again in that place.

And when she had so spoken, she might not refrain her tears; and the
Gerardsons turned away, for they were ashamed, both that they should
see her weep, or she them. But at last she called to them and said:
Now make we the speediest end we may of this, for sorry work is the
tarrying of farewell; so I pray you, my friends, to go about the work
I have bidden you.

So all was done as she would, and the day after the morrow was
Birdalone abiding the coming of Gerard and his sons with the horses;
and despite of the sundering of friends and the perils that belike
lay before her, the world seemed fair to her, and life beginning
anew. And she made no doubt that she would soon be at the Castle of
the Quest, and there find all things much as she had left them; and
there at least would be the welcome of her dear friend Viridis.



CHAPTER VI. OF THE SUNDERING OF BIRDALONE FROM GERARD AND HIS SONS



Presently were the horses come with Gerard and his sons, and
Birdalone gat to horse amongst them. She was armed in a light
hauberk, and over it a long and loose surcoat that came down beneath
the knee of her; and a sallet she had upon her head, wide but light,
so that not very much of her face was to be seen. She had made up
her mind to this tale upon the road, when she was among folk, that
she was under a vow not to do off her helm for a seven days' space.
Withal she had covered up the lovely shapeliness of her legs with
long boots of deer-leather, and her surcoat was wide-sleeved; she was
well hidden, and whereas she was a tall and strong woman, she might
well pass for a young man, slender and fair-faced. She was girt with
a good sword, and Gerard had gotten her a strong horseman's bow and a
quiver full of arrows, wherewith, as aforesaid, she knew well how to
deal; wherefore she was by no means without defence.

So they went their ways through the streets and out-a-gates; and it
must be said, that were not Birdalone's thoughts turned toward the
Castle of the Quest, and what she should meet there, her heart had
been somewhat sore at leaving the city which had cherished her so
well these years past; nay, as it was, the shadow of the southern
gate, as she past thereunder, smote somewhat cold upon her, and she
silently bade farewell to the City of the Five Crafts with some
sorrow, though with no fear.

Forth they rode then through the frank and up on to the shepherd
country, and whereas their horses were of the best, and they had no
sumpter-beast with them till they came to Upham, where they must
needs have victual, they made but five days of it to the place where
the road turned aside from the country of Mostwyke. There then they
drew rein, and Birdalone lighted down from her horse, and they all,
and they lay upon the grass and ate and drank together.

But when they were done, spake Birdalone and said: Dear friends,
this is the hour and the place when we must needs part; for ye shall
go back again to Five Crafts, and do what I have bidden of you, and
do your will, and wend your ways with your livelihood unto Utterhay.
But as for me, I must go my ways first unto Greenford, and thence to
seek my friends from whom erst I was fleeing when ye first became my
friends. Now perchance ye will say that I have taken you up in my
need, and cast you aside at my pleasure; but I may only say that
there be at present two deals of my life, and of one of them have ye
been partakers, and of the other ye may not be. Forsooth that is a
grief unto me, as I suppose unto you is it a greater one. But unto
me also were it heavier but that my heart tells me it shall not ever
be so; for as I said to you some days agone, I have a hope that we
shall yet meet again, be it in Utterhay or in some other place. And
now I pray you to pardon me wherein I may have done amiss unto you,
and begrudge it not that there be others, who indeed were first-
comers in regard to you, and whom I love better than you; for of your
truth and your good-will and loving-kindness will I bear witness
wheresoever I may be.

Then spake Gerard: Do ye speak, my sons; for I have no grudge
against her, nor aught to bewail me as to her, save, it may be, that
I am now so well on in years that it may well befall that I shall not
live till the time of the meeting in Utterhay. But I will pray thee
this, dear lady, that if thou come to the place where I lie dead thou
wilt kiss my burial-stone, and sing due masses for me. Nay, she
said, but this is the worst shall betide betwixt us.

Then spake Robert Gerardson: I am not deft of speech, but this
parting makes me bold to say this: that from the time when first I
set eyes on thee I have loved thee in such wise that never mayst thou
love me as much as I love thee, if thou hast anywhere, as I deem thou
hast, a lover of thy body, whom thou lovest. Now I have seen that
for a long while thou hast known this, and hast ever because of it
been as meek and kind with me as thou mightest be. And this hath
partly grieved me the more, because it hath eked my longing for thee;
and yet it hath comforted me the more, because it hath made me deem
better of thee, and deem thee worthier of worship and holier;
therefore have thou all my blessing for it. And now I know that thou
sunderest from us that thou mayst go seek thy very bodily lover; and
I say, that if the sundering had been for any lighter cause, grieved
at heart should I have been; but since it is even so, once more I
bless thee, and ever shall I be happy in the thought of thee; and if
ever we meet again, still shalt thou find me as now I am in heart and
in soul.

She turned to him, not dry-eyed, and said: I know that what thou
sayest is sooth; and thou hast guessed right as to my goings; and I
take thy blessing with love and joy.

Then were they silent; but Giles Gerardson was struggling with words,
for he was slow to speech; at last he said: I say much as saith my
brother: but see thou, our lady, how ill it had gone if thou hadst
loved one of us with an equal love; woe worth the strife then! But
now I will crave this of thee, that thou kiss me on the lips, now
whenas we part; and again, that thou wilt do as much when first we
meet again hereafter. And I tell thee right out, that if thou
gainsay this, I shall deem it unfriendly in thee, and that those
lovely words which thou didst speak e'en now were but words alone,
and that thou art not as true as I have deemed thee.

She laughed amidst her tears, and said: Dear lad, doom me not till I
have been found guilty! I shall nowise naysay thee this, for I love
thee, and now and ever shalt thou be unto me as a brother, thou and
Robert also; for even so have ye done by me. But thou wottest, dear
lad, that whiles and again must sister sunder from brother, and even
so it has to be now.

Then they sat silent all four; and thereafter Birdalone arose and did
off her sallet, and kissed and embraced Gerard and his sons, and bade
them farewell, and she and the young men wept. Then she armed
herself and gat to horse, and went her ways towards Greenford, having
nought with her but the raiment and arms that her body bore, and her
horse, and some gold pieces and gems in a little pouch. So rode she;
and the others turned back sadly toward the Five Crafts.



CHAPTER VII. BIRDALONE COMETH TO GREENFORD, AND HEARS OF THE WASTING
OF THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST



Now came Birdalone riding into Greenford an hour before sunset on a
day of the latter end of May; and she had no doubt but to go straight
to the hostelry, and that the less as she had not abided there
before, as hath been told. To them that served her she told the tale
of her vow, that she might not do off her sallet that seven days; and
some trowed her, and some deemed her a woman, but whereas she seemed
by her raiment to be of condition none meddled with her. Moreover,
as she told her intent to ride on betimes in the morning, it mattered
the less unto them: withal she gave out that she came from foreign
parts, as sooth it was.

In the evening she sat in the hall, and with her were three chapmen
travelling with their wares, and two good men of the town sitting;
and they were talking together, and were courteous and blithe, and
amidst their talk they threw many a glance at the slim and fair young
squire, as Birdalone seemed, and were fain to speak unto him, but
refrained them for courtesy's sake. For her part, Birdalone longed
sore to ask them somewhat of the Castle of the Quest, but the words
clave to her throat for very fear; and she sat restless and ill at
ease. However at last said a townsman to a chapman: Art thou for
the Red Hold, Master Peter, when thou art done here? Birdalone
turned very pale at that word; and Master Peter spake: Yea, surely,
neighbour, if the folk leave aught in my packs for others to buy. He
spake in a jovial voice, as if he were merry, and the others all
laughed together, as though they were well pleased and in good
contentment. And now, deemed Birdalone, would be her time to speak
if she would learn aught; so she constrained herself at last, and
spake, though in a quavering voice: Meseems then, masters, this good
town is thriving as now? This I ask because I am a stranger in these
parts this long while, and now I am come back hither fain were I to
find the land in good peace; for I may chance to take up my abode
hereby.

The goodmen turned to her and smiled kindly when they heard the
sweetness of her voice; and one of them said: Sir of the sallet, ye
shall be content with the peace in this land, and the thriving of its
folk; the very villeins hereabout live as well as franklins in most
lands, and the yeomen and vavassours are clad as if they were knights
of a good lord's household. Forsooth their houses are both goodly
and easy to enter; and well is that, whereas there lacks never good
meat and drink on the board therein. And moreover their women are
for ever seeking whatso is fair and goodly, whatso is far-fetched and
dear-bought, whereof we chapmen also thrive, as thou mayst well deem.
Ah! it is a goodly land now!

The others nodded and smiled. But Birdalone spake, hardening her
heart thereto for very need: Belike then there is a change of days
here, for when I last knew of the land there was little peace
therein. And that will not be so long agone, said a townsman,
smiling, for I doubt we should see no grey hair in thine head if thy
sallet were off it. Birdalone reddened: It will be some five years
agone, said she. Yea, yea, said the townsman, we were beginning to
end the unpeace then, and it was the darkest hour before the dawn;
for five years agone we and the good knights of the Castle of the
Quest were lying before the walls of the Red Hold. Forsooth we
cleared out that den of devils then and there. What betid unto it
after ye won it? said Birdalone, and she trembled withal. Said the
townsman: Heard ye never of the Black Squire, a very valiant knight,
since thou sayest that thou hast known this country-side? She bowed
a yeasay, for this time she found it hard to speak.

Well, said the townsman, we held garrison in the Red Hold for some
three months, and thereafter we craved of him to come and be our
captain therein; for, even after the Hold was won, there was yet a
sort of runagates that haunted the country-side, men who had no craft
save lifting and slaying. And forsooth we knew this Lord Arthur for
the keenest and deftest of men-at-arms; so he yeasaid our asking, and
did all he might herein, and forsooth that was all there was to do;
for he was ever in the saddle, and at the work. Forsooth he was not
a merry man, save when he was at his busiest; and little he spake in
hall or chamber, else had he been better beloved. But at least by no
man better might the land have been served.

There was silence a little, and Birdalone waxed deadly pale; then she
strove with herself and said: Thou sayest he was and he was; is he
dead then? Said the townsman: Not to our knowledge. When he had
brought the land into good peace, which is some three years and a
half agone, he went his ways from the Red Hold all alone, and we saw
him no more. But some folk deem that he hath entered into religion.

Birdalone's heart sickened, and she thought to herself that now all
was to begin again; yet she felt that the worst was over since he was
not dead, and she was able to think what she should do. So she said:
Mayhappen he hath gone back to the Castle of the Quest? Nay, nay,
said the townsman, that may not be; for waste is that house now;
there is none dwelleth there, save, it may be, now and again a
wandering carle or carline abideth there a day or two. Said
Birdalone: How hath that befallen? or where is gone Sir Hugh, the
Green Knight? Said the townsman: We knew the Green Knight well;
frank and free and joyous was he; all men loved him; and his lady and
speech-friend, none ever saw a lovelier, and as kind as was he. But
we might not keep them with us; they are gone into their own country.
Sir Hugh left the Castle of the Quest some three months after the
Black Squire came to us for captain, and he gave over the castle to
Sir Geoffrey of Lea, an old and wise man of war. But not many months
thereafter we heard that he also had departed, leaving it ungarnished
of men; and we deem that the cause thereof is that something uncouth
is seen and heard therein, which folk may not endure. Is it not so,
my masters?

They all yeasaid that, and the talk went on to other matters. As for
Birdalone, though her hope to come amongst friends was so utterly
overthrown, yet she saw not what to do save to go her ways to the
Castle of the Quest, and see if perchance she might find any tidings
there. And she said to herself, that if the worst came to the worst,
she would herself dwell there as an hermit of love; or, maybe, to
face those uncouth things and see if any tidings might be compelled
out of them.



CHAPTER VIII. BIRDALONE COMETH TO THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST, HEARETH
THE TALE THEREOF FROM LEONARD, AND DEPARTETH THENCE BY THE SENDING
BOAT



She arose betimes on the morrow, and was out of Greenford so soon as
the gates were open, and at first made all speed that she might
toward the Castle of the Quest; and nothing hindered her, for the
land was verily in good peace, and she might have come there if she
would before sunset, for all whom she met furthered her. But as the
day waned her courage waned with it, so that at last she stayed some
six miles short of the house, and craved shelter at a yeoman's stead
there, which was granted her with all kindness; and they made much of
her, and she told them her vow of the sallet, and they deemed nought
save that she was a young man.

She departed early in the morning with their God-speed, and while the
day was yet young came into the meadows before the castle, and saw
the towers thereof rising up before her: then she checked her horse,
and rode on no faster than a foot's pace; yet as slow as she might
ride, needs must she get to the gate while the day was yet young.

So came Birdalone by that bower wherein she had slept that first
night she came to the castle; and she reined up to look on it; and as
she sat there gazing, came a man out from it clad as a man of
religion; and her heart beat quick, and she was like to fall from her
horse, for there came into her mind what the townsman had said, that
the Black Squire had gone into religion. But the hermit came towards
her with a cup of water in his hand, and he cast his hood aback from
him, and she saw at once that it was Leonard the priest, and though
it was not the friend whom she sought, yet was she glad that it was a
friend; but he came and stood by her, and said: Hail, wayfarer! wilt
thou drink of our well and rest thee a while? So she took the cup
and drank of the water, looking kindly on him, while he wondered at
the beauty of her hand, and misdoubted him. Then she gave him back
the cup and lighted down off her horse, and took the sallet from her
head, and spake: I may not pass by a friend without a word; think if
thou hast not seen me before?

Then he knew her, and might not refrain him, but cast his arms about
her and kissed her, weeping; and she said: It is sweet to me to find
a friend after what I have been told of yonder house. Yea, said he,
and art thou going up thither? Certes, said she, and why not? Said
he: They are gone, and all gone! How and whither? said she. But I
must full certainly go thither at once; I will go afoot with thee; do
thou tether my horse till thou comest back.

He said: But wilt not thou come back? I know not, she said: I know
nought save that I would go thither; let it be enough that I suffer
thee to go with me, and on the way thou shalt tell me what thou canst
of the tale.

Then went Leonard and tethered the horse, and they went together
afoot to the gate; and Birdalone told what she had heard of Arthur
and Hugh; and Leonard said: This is true, and there is not much else
to be said. When the Black Squire came back from the leaguer of the
Red Hold, and had heard before of thy departure, he was heavy of mood
and few-spoken, and wandered about as one who might find no rest; yet
was he not stern with Atra, who for her part was no less heavy-
hearted: soothly a sad company we were, and it was somewhat better
when my Lord Arthur went his ways from us; and indeed eager he was to
be gone; and it could be seen of him that he was fain of the toil and
peril which they of Greenford offered him. Then in some four months
spake my lord Hugh that he also would be gone to a place where were
both a land and folk that would look friendly on him; so he went with
my lady Viridis and my lady Aurea, and they had Atra also with them;
and me also they would have had, but my heart failed me to leave the
place where I had been so glad and so sorry with thee; death had been
better; wherefore in yonder bower as in an hermitage I serve God and
abide my time. But though I wot nought of where is gone the Black
Squire, I know whereto those four are gone, and it is but a seven
days' ride hence, and the land is goodly and peaceable, and if they
be not dead, most like they be there yet. How sayest thou then, thou
dearest and kindest, wilt thou thither to them? For if so, I may
well lead thee thither.

Birdalone shook her head. Nay, she said, I deem that I am drawn
elsewhither, but soon I shall tell thee. Lo now the gate. But ere
we enter, tell me of Sir Geoffrey of Lea, and why it was that they
might not abide the uncouth things, or if there were any such. Spake
Leonard: Things uncouth there were, and I was called upon to lay
them, and I did as biddeth Holy Church in all wise, but prevailed not
against them, and still were they seen and heard, till folk might
endure it no longer.

And what like were these things? said Birdalone, and are they yet
seen and heard? Said Leonard: Strange it is, but last night I went
into the great hall where they mostly betid, and laid me down there,
as whiles I do, for I fear them not, and would see if they yet
appear; but all night came nothing at all. As to the likeness of
them . . . Then he stopped, but said presently: Hard it is to tell
thee of them, but needs must I. There be two of these things; and
one is an image of a tall woman of middle-age, red-haired, white-
skinned, and meagre, and whiles she has a twiggen rod in her hand,
and whiles a naked short sword, and whiles nought at all. But the
voice of her is cursing and blaspheming and ill-saying.

Said Birdalone: This is then a fetch of my witch-mistress of whom I
told thee erst, and the image of her; what is the other? Said
Leonard: I were fain not to tell thee. Yet needs must thou, said
Birdalone. Dear lady, said Leonard, the other is an image of thee,
and even most like unto thee; but whiles clad in a scanty grey coat
and barefoot, and whiles clad in a fair green gown goodly broidered,
and broidered shoon; and whiles all mother-naked.

And what voice cometh from mine image? said Birdalone, smiling, yet
somewhat pale withal. Said Leonard: One while a voice of sweet
singing, as of a bird in the brake, and that is when thou art clad;
and again, when thou art naked, a voice of shrieking and wailing, as
of one enduring torments.

Spake Birdalone: And when did these wonders begin? Said he: Not
till after Sir Hugh and thy she-friends were gone hence.

Pondered Birdalone a little; then she said: I see herein the malice
of my witch-mistress; she would not send these fetches while Hugh was
here, lest he should turn to seeking me with all his might. But when
they departed, she would have the castle waste, and then she sent
them, wotting that thereby she would rid her of Sir Geoffrey of Lea;
while, on the other hand, I was nought so much unto him that he would
spend all his life seeking me. But now I deem I know so much of her
that I may bid thee to look on her as dead if these fetches come not
again within a little while. Then mayst thou send and do Sir
Geoffrey to wit thereof, and belike he will come back again; and fain
were I thereof for it will be merrier if the Castle of the Quest be
dwelt in once more.

Yea, verily, said Leonard; but far merrier yet wert thou to dwell
there. Nay, she said, but now I see that it is not fated for me.
Let us go in, for I would get to what I would do.

So therewith they passed under the shadow of the archway, and
Birdalone stayed not but went straightway into the hall, and through
it; and the priest, who lagged somewhat behind her speedy feet, cried
out unto her: Whither wilt thou? what chamber wilt thou visit first?
But she stayed not, and spake to him over her shoulder as she went:
Follow me if thou wilt; I have but one place only to come to ere I
leave the Castle of the Quest, save I must needs turn back on my
footsteps.

Then Leonard came up with her, and she went her ways out of the hall,
and out on to the waterswale of the castle, and so to the little
haven of the water-gate. There Birdalone looked about her eagerly;
then she turned to Leonard and pointed with her finger and said: Lo
thou! there yet lieth my ferry of old time, the Sending Boat; now wot
I wherefore I was drawn hither. And her eyes glittered and her body
quivered as she spake.

Yea forsooth, said Leonard, there it lieth; who of all folk in the
castle had durst to touch it? But what hath it to do with thee, O
kindest lady?

Friend, she said, if this day weareth, and I am yet within these
walls, then meseemeth there must I abide for evermore; and there
perchance shall I meet that seeming of myself, maybe for this night,
maybe for ever, till I die here in this castle void of all that I
love, and I over-young for it, friend. And I know now that there is
hope within me; for I bethink me of a dear friend over yonder water
of whom I have never told any, nor will tell thee now, save this,
that she is the wisdom of my life.

Wherefore now I will try this ferry and wot if the wight thereof will
yet obey the voice of the speaker of the spell, who has shed of her
blood to pay therefor. Put not forth a hand therefore nor speak a
word to let me, but take this farewell of me, with my pity and such
love as I may give thee, and let me go, and think kindly of me.

Then she went up to him, and laid her hands upon his shoulders, and
kissed him, and turned about without more ado and stepped into the
boat; then she sat down and stripped her arm of its sleeve, and drew
forth a knife and let blood of her arm, and then arose and smeared
stem and stern therewith, and then sat down with her face to the
stern and sang:


The red raven-wine now
Hast thou drunk, stern and bow;
Wake then and awake
And the Northward way take:
The way of the Wenders forth over the flood,
For the will of the Senders is blent with the blood.


Then she abode a little, while Leonard stood staring on her
speechless with grief and blinded with his bitter tears, till the
boat began to move under her, and presently glided out of the little
haven into the wide lake; then she turned her face back unto him and
waved her hand, and he knelt down and blessed her, weeping. And so
she vanished away from before him.



CHAPTER IX. BIRDALONE FINDETH THE ISLE OF NOTHING GREATLY BETTERED,
AND IS KINDLY ENTREATED THERE



Now it was scarce noon when she departed, and the dark night came
upon her in the midst of the water; and she fell asleep in the boat
ere the night had grown very old, and woke up in the morning, not
exceeding early, maybe about six o'clock; then she looked ahead and
thought presently to see the ill-favoured blotch of the Isle of
Nothing on the bosom of the blue waters, whereas it was a fair and
cloudless morning of latter May. Sure enough she saw land ahead, and
it lay low down on the water, but she deemed from the first that it
was green of hue, and as she neared it she saw that it was verily as
green as emerald. Thereat she was a little troubled, because she
thought that mayhappen the Sending Boat had gone astray, and that if
the wight thereof were not wending the old road, maybe he was not
making for the old haven. For now indeed she told herself right out
that her will was to go back again to the House under the Wood, and
see what might betide there, and if she and the wood-mother together
might not overcome the witch.

But whatever might happen nought could she do but sit in her place
and wend as the Sending Boat would; and in an hour's space she was
right under the lee of the land, and she saw that it was shapen even
as the Isle of Nothing had been aforetime. But this made her wonder,
that now the grass grew thick down to the lip of the water, and all
about from the water up were many little slim trees, and some of them
with the May-tide blossom yet on them, as though it were a fair and
great orchard that she was nearing; and moreover, beyond all that she
saw the thatched roofs of houses rising up.

Presently then the Sending Boat had brought her to the land, and she
stepped ashore, but was wary, and gat her bow bent and set an arrow
thereto she began to go up from the water. Yet she thought within
herself, it will be nought ill if I be come amongst folk, so long as
they be peaceful, or else how might I live the journey out to all the
isles and so home to the House under the Wood?

So she turned her face to where she had seen those roofs, which now
she saw no longer because of the thick leaves of the little trees,
and so went along a narrow path, which grew to be more and more
closely beset with trees, and were now no longer apple and pear and
quince and medlar, but a young-grown thicket of woodland trees, as
oak and hornbeam and beech and holly.

At last as she went she heard voices before her, so she stole warily
to the edge of the copse, finger on shaft; and presently could see
clear of the saplings and out on to a wide space of greensward,
beyond which was a homestead of many houses and bowers, like unto
that of a good yeoman in peaceful lands, save that the main building
was longer, though it were low. But amidst the said greensward was a
goodly flock of sheep that had been but of late washed for the
shearing, and along with the sheep four folk, two carles and two
queans, all of them in their first youth, not one by seeming of over
a score and two of summers. These folk were clad but simply, man and
woman, in short coats of white woollen  but the women's coats a
little longer than the men's , without shoon or hosen; they had
garlands of green leaves on their heads, and were wholly unarmed,
save that one of the men bore an ashen wand in his hand. As for
their bodies, they were goodly of fashion, tanned indeed by the sun's
burning, but all sweet of flesh were they, shapely and trim, clean-
made, and light and slim.

Birdalone's heart yearned toward them, and she stepped straightway
from out of the cover of the coppice, and the sun flamed from her
sallet and glittered in the rings of her hauberk, so that the folk
might not fail to see her; the sheep fled bundling from her past
their keepers, who stood firm, but seemed somewhat scared, and moved
not toward Birdalone. She gave them the sele of the day and stood
still herself; but the man with the ash-wand said: Hail, thou man;
but we would have thee come no nearer a while, though thy voice be
sweet: for we know what things they be which thou bearest, and that
thou art a warrior. Wilt thou hurt us?

Birdalone laughed as sweetly as the blackbird sings, and she did off
her sallet and shook the plenteous hair down over her, and then drew
forth her sword and dagger and cast them to earth, and laid her bow
and quiver of arrows upon them, and said: Now will I come to you, or
ye shall come to me, whereas I am unweaponed, and no warrior, but a
woman, and ye are four to one, and two of you carles; wherefore now
ye may bind me or slay me if you will; but in any case I pray you
first to give me a mouthful of meat.

When she had done her speech, she went up to the fairest of the women
and kissed her; but the two carles made no more ado but came to
Birdalone and kissed her one after other, and that as men who needed
nought to compel them therein, and each thereafter took a hand of her
and held it and caressed it. But the other woman had run into the
house as soon as Birdalone spoke, and came back again with a treen
bowl full of milk and a little loaf, not white but brown; and there
blundered about her legs as she came a little lad of some three
winters old, naked and brown, who was shy of the gleaming new-comer,
and hid him behind the woman one while, and the other while came
forth to see the new thing. But the woman said: Dear woman, here is
for thee some of the ewes' milk, and a bite of bread, and a little
deal of cheese; the said milk is yet warm, so that it is not yet
clottered; but if thou wilt come with us thou mayest speedily drink
cows' milk, and we be now at point to go milk them.

Birdalone thanked her with a heart full of content, and was not ill-
pleased to get her hands free from the two carles; so she sat down
and ate her breakfast while they talked with her, and told her of
diverse work of theirs; as to how their trees were waxing, and new
tillage they had done the past spring, and how it befell to the kine
and the goats; of their children also they spake, and how there were
already four thereof, and one of the women, the meat-bringer, already
quickened with child once more. So that ere we die, quoth the carle
who was speaking, we look to see many grandchildren, and shall have
some stout carles and queans here. And by that time will some of the
trees be well grown, so that we may fell timber and make us some keel
that will wend the lake, and help us a-fishing; or we may go to other
lands; or whiles folk may come to us, even as thou hast, thou dear-
handed, sweet-voiced woman. But wilt thou abide here ever?

Yea, said the other, but that is looking forward a long while, that
building of ships. What is nearer and well to think of is, that
these apple and pear trees be so well fruited, small as they be, that
this harvest we shall be able to make us cider and perry; yea, and no
little deal thereof. But art thou minded to abide with us ever?
That were dear to us; and belike thou wouldest bear us children, thou
also.

Then spake the meat-fetching woman and laughed withal: Nay, thou
also lookest aloof a pretty deal; whereas what is now to do is to go
milk the kine, and to take this guest with us, so that she may drink
somewhat better than ewes' milk though the cider be not ready to
hand. But tell me, our dear guest, art thou verily going to abide
with us a long while? that were sweet to us, and we will do all we
may to pleasure thee.

Nay, said Birdalone, it will no better be but that I depart on the
morrow; and all thanks do I give you for your kindness.

The woman kissed her, and she arose, and all they went together to
the milking of the kine some half mile inland; and they passed
through much of orchard, and some deal of tillage, wherein the wheat
was already growing high; and so came they to a wide meadow through
which ran a little stream, and therein was a goodly herd of kine. So
they fell to the milking, and made Birdalone drink of the sweet cows'
milk, and then went and lay down under the shade of the little young
trees, and talked and were merry together. But the men were both of
them somewhat willing at first to kiss Birdalone and toy with her,
but when she let them know that she desired it not they refrained
them without grudging.

All this while of their talk they asked Birdalone nought of whence
and whither, and she would not ask them, lest it might stir their
asking, and then she would have to tell them some deal of her story;
and telling it was now become unto her somewhat weary work.

In a while they arose all, and the men and one woman went their ways
to deal with the acre-land, but the meat-fetcher went back with
Birdalone into the house; and she showed her all that was therein,
which was for the more part, forsooth, the four babes aforesaid. The
others came back in the eventide, bearing with them foison of blue
hare-bells, and telling joyously how they had found them anigh the
coppice edge in such a place: and thereafter they were merry, and
sang and talked the evening away, and showed Birdalone at last to a
fair little chamber wherein was a bed of dry grass, where she lay
down and slept in all content.



CHAPTER X. OF BIRDALONE'S FLITTING FROM THE ISLE OF NOTHING



On the morrow Birdalone arose betimes, and would not tarry despite
all the kindness of that folk and the change which had come over the
Isle of Nothing; so the friends saw her down to the boat all
together, and bore down with them a deal of bread and cheese and late
apples of the last year, for her provision on the road, and a pail of
milk withal; and men and women they kissed her at departure, and the
meat-fetcher said: If by any means thou mayst find a keel which will
carry thee hither, at some time, I would thou wouldst come; for even
if thou be old, and we passed away, yet here shall be our children or
our grandchildren to welcome thee; and we will tell them the tale of
thee that they remember it and long for thee.

Then Birdalone kissed her again, and made much of her, and so stepped
into the boat, and fell to her sacrifice to the wight thereof; and
those others stared at her and wondered, and spake nought unto her
till she was gone gliding over the face of the waters; but as they
walked back to the house, they spake amongst themselves that this
must be some goddess  for of Holy Church they knew nought  who had
come to visit them in her loveliness; and in after times, when this
folk waxed a many, and tilled all the isle and made ships and spread
to other lands and became great, they yet had a memory of Birdalone
as their own very lady and goddess, who had come from the fertile and
wise lands to bless them, when first they began to engender on that
isle, and had broken bread with them, and slept under their roof, and
then departed in a wonderful fashion, as might be looked for of a
goddess.

But as for Birdalone, she came not back ever, nor saw that folk
again, and now she sped over the water toward the Isle of Kings.



CHAPTER XI. COMING TO THE ISLE OF KINGS BIRDALONE FINDETH THERE A
SCORE AND TWO OF FAIR DAMSELS WHO WOULD FAIN HAVE HER COMPANY



Birdalone came ashore at the said isle at the day-dawn, and saw but
little change in the isle when it grew light, and still the castle
stood looking down awfully on to the meadows. But when she had set
foot on the land, she handled her bow lest the worst might befall,
and looked about her, deeming that this time she would not go her
ways to the dread show that was arrayed in the castle, if forsooth
those dead folk yet abode there.

So now as she looked across the meadow, she saw one with light and
fluttering raiment come forth from the trees, and look toward her
whereas she stood flashing and gleaming in the sun like an image of
the God of Love turned warrior. Now Birdalone deemed for sure that
this was a woman; she saw her come a little nigher to her, and then
stand looking at her under the sharp of her hand; then she turned
about and ran back to the brake whence she came; and presently
Birdalone heard the sound of voices coming thence, and in a little
while thereafter came forth from the said brake a rout of women  one
score and two as they were told thereafter  and walked over the
meadow straight unto her. She stood where she was, so as to be nigh
unto her ferry in case they willed her unpeace; for though they were
weaponless by seeming, they were a many.

When they were come near they stood about her in a half ring,
whispering and laughing each to each. Birdalone saw that they were
all young, and that none of them might be called ungoodly, and some
were full fair. They were bright and fine of array. Most bore gold
and gems on fingers and neck and arms; they were clad in light, or it
may be said wanton raiment of diverse colours, which had only this of
their fashion in common, that they none of them hid over-much of
their bare bodies; for either the silk slipped from the shoulder of
her, or danced away from her flank; and she whose feet were shod,
spared not to show knee and some deal of thigh; and she whose gown
reached unsheared from neck to heel, wore it of a web so thin and
fine that it hid but little betwixt heel and neck.

Birdalone stood gazing on them and wondering, and she had a mind to
think that they were some show sent by her old mistress the witch for
her undoing, and she loosened her sword in its sheath and nocked an
arrow.

But then ran forward two of the damsels and knelt before her, and
each took an hand of her and fell to kissing it, and she felt their
hands that they were firm and their lips that they were soft and
warm, and they were doubtless alive and real. Then spake one of them
and said: Hail our lord! How can words say how we rejoice in thy
coming this happy morn! Now do all we give ourselves to thee as thy
slaves to do as thou wilt with. Yet we pray thee be merciful to us
and our longings.

Therewith all the sort of them knelt down on the grass before
Birdalone and joined their hands as praying to her. And Birdalone
was full ill at ease, and wotted not where she was. But she said:
Hail! and good days and fulfilment of wishes unto you, fair damsels!
But tell me, is this the Isle of Kings, as I deemed; for strange it
is for me to see ye womenfolk here?

Said she who had spoken afore: Yea verily this is the Isle of Kings;
but long ago are the kings dead, and yet they sit dead in the great
hall of the castle yonder, as thou mayst see if thou, who art a man
and a valiant warrior, durst follow up yon mountain path thereto; but
we, weak women and little-hearted, durst not go anigh it; and we
tremble when whiles a-nights cometh down thence the sound of clashing
swords and clattering shields, and the cries of men in battle. But,
praise be to the God of Love, nought cometh down from thence unto us.
Therefore do we live peaceful lives and pleasant here, lacking nought
but thee, lord; and lo now thou hast come unto us, and we are happy
in our inmost hearts.

Now was Birdalone perplexed and knew not what to do; but at last she
said: Gentle maidens, I pray you pardon me, but I must depart
straightway; for I have an errand, and life or death lieth on it. In
all else than my abiding here may ye have your will.

Therewith did she move a little way toward her ferry; but forthwith
all they brake out weeping and wailing and lamenting, and some of
them came up to Birdalone and cast themselves down before her, and
clasped her knees, and took hold of her skirts, and besought her
piteously to abide with them. But she put them aside as well as she
might, and stepped aboard the Sending Boat, and stood amidst it
waiting on their departure; but they went not, and stood along on the
lip of the land crying out and beseeching with much clamour.

Then Birdalone waxed somewhat wrath at their noise and tumult, and
she drew forth her knife and bared her arm and let blood from it.
But when they saw the whiteness and roundness of it, and how fine and
sleek it was, straightway they changed their tune, and cried out: A
woman, a woman, a fool of a woman! and they laughed in scorn and
mockery. And the speaker of them said: Now there is but one thing
for thee to do, and that is to come forth from thy boat and strip off
thy stolen raiment, and we shall make thee as fine as ourselves, and
thou shalt come with us, and with us abide the coming of our lord.
Nay, thou art so fair and lovely, that thou shalt be the Lady and
Queen of us, and we will do after thy commands, and thou mayst
chastise us if we fail therein. But now if thou wilt not come forth
of the boat uncompelled, we shall pluck thee forth of it.

And therewith she set her foot on the gunwale of the boat, and two or
three others did the like. But now had Birdalone her sword naked in
her hand, and she waxed as red as blood, and cried out: Forbear I
bid you! Yea verily I am a woman; but I will not take this offer
either, whereas I have an errand, as I told you. And so stern it is,
that if ye now let my departure I will not spare to smite with this
sword whoso first cometh aboard my ferry, and though I be not a man,
yet shall ye find that in this matter I shall be little worse,
whereas I am armed and ye be naked.

Then they drew back and stood gibing and jeering at her; but she
heeded it no whit, but reddened stem and stern of the Sending Boat,
and sang her spell, and forth glided the ferry, while the damsels
stood and stared astonished. As for Birdalone, as she sped on her
way she might not refrain her laughter. Thus she wended the wet
highway.



CHAPTER XII. BIRDALONE COMETH AGAIN TO THE ISLE OF QUEENS, AND
FINDETH A PERILOUS ADVENTURE THEREIN



It was not yet daybreak when Birdalone came ashore again, and the
moon was down, and it was dark; wherefore she durst not go up on the
land, but lay down in the ferry and fell asleep there. When she woke
again it was broad daylight, the sun was up, and a little ripple was
running over the face of the water. She stepped ashore straightway,
and looked up the land and to the right hand and the left, and saw at
once that it was indeed the Isle of Queens, and the house stood trim
and lovely as of old time; then she longed somewhat to tread the
green meadow a little, for yet young was the day, and she saw nought
stirring save the throstle and a few small beasts. However, she said
to herself that she would go nowhere nigh to the goodly house wherein
abode those images of death. Yet her body longed so sore for the
springtide freshness of the grass, and was so bewooed of the flowery
scent thereof, that though she durst not go unarmed, she did off her
footgear and went stealing softly barefoot and with naked legs over
the embroidered greensward, saying aloud to herself: If run for the
ferry I needs must, lighter shall I run so dight.

Nonetheless, she had gone but a little way ere a terror took hold of
her, though she saw no child of Adam anigh, and she turned and ran
back swiftly to her old place and sat down under a twisted oak-tree
hard by the Sending Boat, and abode there panting and quaking, and
scarce daring to look up from the grass for a while. Then her heart
came back to her, and she laughed, and said to herself: I am a fool,
for I need fear nought on this Isle of Queens save women like myself.

Yet she sat there a little while longer without stirring; then she
stood up and looked keenly around, and, as aforesaid, exceeding far-
sighted she was; but still she saw neither man nor maid nor suckling
child.

Then her eyes sought the lips of the lake, and rested on a little
bight some stone's throw ahead of the Sending Boat, where, a little
back from the water, slim willows made a veil betwixt the water of
the meadow; and she looked, and saw how pleasant a place it were for
a one to stand and look on the ripple just left, while the water
dripped from the clear body on to the grass. And her bare feet fell
to telling her clad sides of the sweet coolness of the water, and
waited for no naysay, but lightly bore her toward the willowy bight.
And when she was there, she did off her sallet and ungirt her, and
laid her sword on the grass, and did off her surcoat and hauberk, and
so was a woman again in one white coat above her smock. Then she
looked heedfully betwixt the willow-boughs, and saw no more than
before, nought but a little whitethorn brake, now white indeed with
blossom, some fifty yards landward from where she stood. So she
laughed, and did off her other raiment, and slid swiftly into the
water, that embraced her body in all its fresh kindness; and as for
Birdalone, she rewarded it well for its past toil by sporting and
swimming to her full.

Then she came forth from the water, and clad herself in no great
haste, and did on her hauberk and sallet and sword, and so went back
to her place, and sat down and began to do on her foot-gear.

But as she looked up from her work a moment, lo! a tall man coming
toward her, and just about the willows whereby she had bathed. Her
heart beat quick and her face changed, yet she hastened, and was shod
and stood up in knightly array by then he stayed his steps some five
paces from her, and gave her the sele of the day in courteous wise;
and she strove to think that he had not seen her, or at least noted
her otherwise dight; yet her heart misgave her.

He was a grizzled-haired man of over fifty summers by seeming, but
goodly enough and well-knit; he was clad in a green coat more than a
little worn, but made after the fashion of knighthood; he had nought
on his head but an oak-chaplet, and no weapons but a short sword by
his side and a stout staff in his hand.

She gave back his greeting in a quavering voice; and he said:
Welcome again, young man. Art thou come to dwell with us? Truly
thou art trim now, but ere some few months thine attire will be not
so much fairer than ours, and thine hauberk will be rusted, for here
be no joyous tiltings nor deeds of arms, and no kind ladies to give
the award of honour, so that if we fight amongst ourselves it will be
because we have fallen out, and spitefully. Yet  and he laughed,
mockingly, as she thought  thou mayst bring us luck, and draw some
fair damsels unto us, for that is what we await in this isle, which
is barren of their fair bodies, despite of its deceitful name.

Thereat Birdalone reddened, deeming that he divined her womanhood,
but she enforced her to speak hardily, and as manly as she might, and
said: Yea, fair sir, and if I be the God of Love, as thou deemest,
and not merely a poor squire  Louis Delahaye, at thy service , how
many damsels shall I send thee if there must needs be one to each man
of you? Quoth he: Thou must make up the tale to a score or more, or
some of us must lack. Sooth to say, at this time thou needest not
haste overmuch for all the tale, whereas there is but one other of
the company near at hand, a mere foolish young man; the others are
gone to the leeward side of the isle, to fetch us venison and fish,
both of which are more plenty there than here; wherefore are we two
somewhat lonesome in this stead, all the more as we be over-nigh to
the sorcery in the great house, which we durst not enter; for though
nought cometh out thence down unto us, yet hear we a-night-tides,
first songs, and then cries and shrieking, come out therefrom.

Then he stayed his speech, and drew a little nigher to Birdalone, and
then grinned, and said: Forsooth we can spare him, we twain. And he
looked on her hard, and the colour came into her cheeks, and she
laughed uneasily, as a dainty lady when she heareth some unmeet tale.

But again the old carle drew nigher to her, and said: Thou seemest
to have a good bow and store of arrows; if thou wouldst lend them to
me for a little, and come with me into the wood hard by, I might
shoot thee some venison with little toil to thee; whereas, forsooth,
thou lookest scarce like one who is meet for over-much toil. Again
she reddened, and spake nought this time; and he said: Deem not
there be no deer this end of the isle because I said that the others
were gone to fetch home venison; only the deer be tamer there and
more, and we have but evil shooting-gear, whereas thou art well found
therein. Wilt thou not come? we shall have merry feast after the
hunt.

Now had Birdalone come to her wits again, and she answered like a
merry youth, with a flavour of mockery in her speech: Fair sir, thou
shalt not deem that I need much help in slaying the dun deer; for I
do thee to wit that I shoot not ill in the bow; neither am I heavy-
footed. But I will not hunt in your park to-day, for I have an
errand which calleth me away, so that I shall depart hence presently.
Besides, wise elder, there is thine errand to see to; and if I be the
God of Love, as thou sayest, I must not keep thee and thy valiant
fellows languishing mateless; so with thy leave I will now depart,
that I may send you a score of fair damsels for your company.

And she turned about and made a step toward her boat; but the carle
drew nearer, laughing; and he said: Truly sayest thou that thou art
not heavy-footed, for never saw I feet lighter or fairer than glided
over the meadow e'en now; nor a fairer body than came like rosy-
tinted pearl fresh out of the water while I lay hidden in yonder
thorn-brake that while. Wherefore trouble not thyself to bring any
more damsels than thyself, fairest Goddess of Love, for thou art
enough for me.

And therewith he ran forward, and stretched out a hand to her; but in
that nick of time had she her sword naked in her hand, and the carle
drew back before the glitter thereof, and cried out: Ho, ho! is it
to be battle, my mistress? Deemest thou that thou wilt slay me as
lightly as the dun deer, and thou with thy bow unstrung at thy back?
Now shall I show thee a trick of fence; but fear not that I shall
hurt thee to spoil thee.

He advanced on her with his staff aloft, and her heart failed her,
and she quaked, and lightly he beat down her guard and did the sword
out of her hand; and again he turned on her to take her, but she
sprang aside and ran from him, but ran landward perforce, as he was
betwixt her and the boat; and he followed heavily, and had nought to
do in the race.

But she had not gone a two-score yards ere she heard a great shout,
and another man came running over the meadow; a slim young man was
this, and worse of attire than the old carle, for so tattered was his
raiment that he was half naked; but he was goodly of fashion, fresh-
coloured and black-haired. Birdalone stayed her feet when she saw
him, for though she doubted not to outrun him, yet whither should she
run, since her ferry was behind her?

So the young man came up to her, and the old carle met him all
panting, and the young man said: How now, Antony! what battle is
this? and wherefore art thou chasing this fair knight? And thou,
fair sir, why fleest thou this grey dastard?

Said Antony: Thou art but a young fool, Otter, this is no man, but a
woman, and I have taken her, and she is mine.

Well, said Otter, I say she is as much mine as thine; nay, more, if
she will give herself unto me. But if she will not, she shall go
whither she will in thy despite. Or art thou a woman?

Yea, yea, said Birdalone; and I pray thee, by thy mother's head,
suffer me to depart; for heavy and full of need is the errand that I
am about.

Go thou shalt then, said Otter; lead back to thy place, and I will
walk with thee. So did they: and Birdalone went beside the young
man quaking; but he put out no hand unto her; and sooth to say, she
deemed that she had seldom seen so fair a young man, but it were
Arthur or Hugh.

Now he, as Antony, was girt with a short sword, but he let it be in
its sheath; and as they went, Antony drew his blade again, and hove
it up to smite Otter, but as it befell Birdalone saw him, and turned
round sharp upon him and gat hold of his wrist, and therewith Otter
turned also, and caught the old carle by the nape as he turned away,
and put a foot before his and shoved mightily, so that he went
noseling to the earth.

Then turned Otter about again, laughing, and he said to Birdalone:
By Saint Giles! thou art well-nigh too valiant for a woman, and I
would that we two might be together; and then between us we might
achieve the adventure of the dead ladies up yonder. She hung her
head, and said: Fair sir, it may not anywise be; yet I thank thee, I
thank thee.

So came they to the water-side and the Sending Boat, and Birdalone
stayed her feet there, and the young man said: What is this keel,
that seemeth unto me as if it were a ferry for malefactors wending to
a death of torment, so grey and bleared and water-logged and sun-
bleached as it is, and smeared over with stains of I know not what?

Said Birdalone: Such as it is, it is my ferry over the water to
where I would be. Strange! said Otter; to my mind it is like to our
fortunes on this isle, we who were once knights and merry squires and
are now as gangrel men, and of ill conditions, thinking of nought
save our first desires, even those which we share with the wolf and
the kite.

She said: But art thou of evil conditions, thou who hast just
delivered me from trouble? He smiled grimly: Damsel, said he, I
have not delivered thee yet from me, though I have from him. But
tell me, art thou a sorceress? Not a black one, said Birdalone; but
I will tell thee at once that I have been bred by a witch most
mighty, and some deal of lore have I learned. And therewith she told
him of the Sending Boat, and how she would have to speed it on the
way.

He looked on her a little and then turned away, and saw her sword
lying on the grass; so he went to it and picked it up and brought it
to her, and said: Thou mayst yet need this keen friend. So she took
it and thrust it back into the scabbard, quaking somewhat because of
him; so feeble and frail as she felt before him. Then he said: If
thou deemest thou hast somewhat to reward me for, I have a boon to
ask of thee, and granting that, we shall be quits again. Yea, she
said faintly, and what is the boon? He said: Art thou pressed to
depart now, this minute? Nay, said Birdalone, not for an hour if
there be no peril here from other men, and . . . and . . . And if I
be true to thee and will let thee go? said he, laughing; hah! is that
not thy word? fear not, I swear by thine eyes that thou shalt depart
whenso thou wilt. Now then, the boon I crave is, that thou wilt sit
down here beside me and tell me the tale of thy life that has been.
Said she: It wearies me to think thereof; yet hast thou a right to
crave somewhat of me, and this is not hard to grant.

And she sat down by him; but he said: Do this also for me, take off
thine headpiece, since now that we know thee for a woman it serveth
thee nought. So did she, and began her tale straightway, and told
him all thereof, save as to the wood-wife, and he sat hearkening and
watching her face; and when she had made an end, he said: Now shall
I ask none other boon of thee, though I long sore for it; but best it
is that we sunder straightway, else maybe I might yet be for
hindering thee.

Therewith he stood up, and Birdalone also, and he looked on her
eagerly, and said: I am now to bid thee farewell, and it is most
like that I shall never see thee again, wherefore I will ask thee yet
to let one thing come from thy mouth; for I deem thee the dearest of
all women I have ever seen. What shall I say? said Birdalone,
smiling on him kindly; must thou needs put the word in my mouth?
Thou hast been friendly with me here when need was to me of
friendliness; wherefore I say, I would I might see thee again, and
thou better bestead than now thou art.

The young man's face brightened, and he said: Spake I not that thou
wert the dearest of all? This was even the word I would have put in
thy mouth. But now see thou, one goeth on from one thing to another,
and I must now ask thee, is there aught which thou hast a mind to
give me ere I depart, some keepsake which I durst not ask for?

She flushed red and said: I will with a good heart give thee my bow
and arrows for a keepsake; whereas the old carle told me that ye be
ill furnished of shooting-gear.

And she would have taken her bow from her back, but he laughed aloud,
and said: Nay, nay, I will not have that; for there be those who
gird them to a sword and know not how to use it, but few will cumber
their shoulders with bow and quiver who cannot shoot therewith; I
deem it like that thou art a fell bowman. Keep thy bow therefore,
and if thou wilt go without any other gift, even so be it.

And he made as if he would turn away; but she put forth both her
hands and took his in them, and lifted up her face and kissed him
kindly, and then turned away to her ferry; while Otter stood still
and said in a merry voice: Now is it better than well, for thou art
in all ways what I would have thee, and there is nought like unto
thee. And therewith he turned away and departed ere Birdalone had
stepped into the Sending Boat, and she blushing like a rose the
while. Then she did due sacrifice to the wight of the witch-ferry,
and sped on her way without any hindrance.



CHAPTER XIII. COMING TO THE ISLE OF THE YOUNG AND THE OLD, BIRDALONE
FINDETH IT PEOPLED WITH CHILDREN



Midst all this had worn some hours, but yet it was barely noon;
wherefore it was yet dark by then Birdalone made the Isle of the
Young and the Old; so she stepped out of the boat, and lay down on
the grass and abode the dawn sleeping. And she awoke with the
clatter of shrill voices, and she rose up and looked, and lo a
multitude of children all about her, both men and women children,
and, as it seemed, from five years old upward to fifteen. They cried
and crowed merrily when they saw her stand up, and pressed on her to
see her the nearer and to touch her hands or her raiment. They were
but little clad, and the younger ones not at all, but were goodly
younglings and merry. So great was the noise they raised, that loud
were the thunder which had not been hushed thereby; and Birdalone
stood looking on them, smiling, and knew not what to do. Anon she
turned to a tall thin lad of some fifteen winters, and said unto him:
Wilt thou now take me unto the house, and the place where dwelleth
the old man? Quoth he: I neither know of an old man, nor rightly
what it means, the word. Am not I old enough for thee? I am the
oldest of these here. But belike thou art hungry; wherefore if thou
come to the place where we sleep a-nights, and where we shelter us
from the storm and the rain when need is, I will give thee to eat;
for we have both bread and milk and cheese, and raisins of the sun.

So he took her hand and led her along, and asked her by the way
concerning her armour and weapons, and of the fashion of battle, and
she told him thereof what she would.

Thus came they to the place where erst had been the cot under the
ruin of the great ancient house; but now was gone all that ruin and
the great grey walls, though the cot was left; and all about it were
low bowers built of small wood and thatched undeftly. But the lad
smiled when he saw it, as if the sight thereof made him happy; and he
said: All these have we made since I have dwelt here, and no other
home have I known.

And he led her into the cot, and set her down to eat and to drink,
and through the open door she could see the children swarming, and
they that were nighest thrusting each other this way and that to
catch a sight of her.

Now she said: Fair child, how gattest thou this victual if there be
no older folk to help you? Said he: We dig the ground and sow it,
and the wheat comes up, and we reap it in harvest, and make bread of
it; and we have goats and kine, and we milk them, and turn the milk
with a little blue flower, which is fair to see. And there are in
this isle little hills where the grapes grow plenty; and some we eat
and some we dry for store. Lo thou, such be our ways for victual.
But tell me, said he, thou sayest old, and I know not the word; art
thou old? She laughed: Not very, said she, yet older than thou.

Said the lad: Thou art fair and dear to look on, and thy voice is
sweet; wilt thou not abide with us, and teach us what it is to be
old? Nay, said she, I may not, for I have an errand which driveth me
on; wherefore I must be gone within this hour.

Forsooth, she was growing eager now to be done with her journey and
come to the House under the Wood, whatever should befall her there.
Moreover she deemed it would not be restful to her to abide among all
these restless children, with their ceaseless crying and yelping: if
rest she might, she would rest, she deemed, in the Isle of Increase
Unsought, if there were no ill things abiding there.

Wherefore now she arose, when she had sat hearkening the sound of the
lad's prattle for a while, for as to the sense thereof she might not
heed it over-much. The youngling would not leave her, but led her,
holding her hand, down to her ferry again; she kissed him in thanks
for his meat, and he reddened thereat but said nought. All the whole
rout of little ones had followed her down to the water, and now they
stood, as thick as bees on a honeycomb, on the bank, to watch her
departure. But if they were keen to see her doings before, how much
keener were they when it came to the baring of her arm and the
smearing of the Sending Boat. To be short, so keen were they, and
pushed and shoved each other so sturdily, that more than one or two
fell into the water, and Birdalone was frighted lest they should
drown; but they swam like ducks, and got on to the land when they
would, which was not so very soon, for some of them hung unto the
gunwale of the boat, and hove their faces up to look over into it,
and left not hold till the ferry was fairly under weigh and beginning
to quicken its speed.

So left Birdalone the isle, and nought befell her on the way to the
Isle of Increase Unsought.



CHAPTER XIV. THE SENDING BOAT DISAPPEARETH FROM THE ISLE OF INCREASE
UNSOUGHT, AND BIRDALONE SEEKETH TO ESCAPE THENCE BY SWIMMING



It was as before that Birdalone came to the shore of the isle while
it was yet night; but the wizard keel was so loathsome to her, that
she stepped out of it and laid her down on the land for what was left
of the night; yet hard she found her bed, and neither grassy nor
flowery.

For all that, she slept, for she was weary, and it was broad day and
not very early when she awoke. She stood up trembling, for she
foreboded evil, so near as she was to the dwelling of her old
mistress; and she looked up to where in time past was the fair and
wicked house, and saw that all was changed indeed; for no longer was
the isle goodly with meadow and orchard and garden, but was waste and
bare, and nought grew on it save thin and wiry grass, already seeding
even ere June was born, and here and there hard and ugly herbs, with
scarce aught that might be called a flower amongst them. Trees there
were yet, but the most of them stark dead, and the best dying fast.
No beasts she saw, nor fowl; nothing but lizards and beetles, and now
and again a dry grey adder coiled up about a sun-burned stone. But
of great carrion flies, green and blue, were there a many, and whiles
they buzzed about her head till she sickened with loathing of them.
All this she found on her way as she went up toward the place where
erst was the great perron. But when she came to the top there was no
sign either of the stairs or the house, or aught that ever was
builded; there was nought but the bare bent top, ungrassed, parched
by wind, scorched by sun, washed by rain.

She wandered about the isle, to places where she had not been
herself, but which she deemed she might have known by the telling of
the Green Knight's tale, had there been no change since those days;
but now was all changed, and the whole isle was a mere waste, and
withal poisonous of aspect to her mind, as if many corpses lay
underneath the wretched stones of it. Nevertheless, though it seemed
so evil unto Birdalone, she lingered on it, wandering about till she
was to-wearied, for she had no will to depart at such time as she
would be like to come to her old abiding-place by night and cloud;
wherefore she dallied with the time, and came not back to the haven
of her ferry till it was nigh sunset, and the westering sun was in
her eyes when she came there; and she said to herself that this was
the cause why she might not see the Sending Boat.

So she cleared her eyes and looked on the thin grass awhile, and then
down over the edge of the land, and still she saw not her boat. She
turned pale, and a pang of anguish went to her heart; but she walked
a little east, deeming that perchance she had erred as to the place
of the haven on that dull and empty shore; but yet there was no boat.
Then she turned back wild with terror, and sought where erst she had
missed it, and found neither boat nor the world's end. And she
deemed that there might be some devilish malice of the wight of the
Sending Boat, to torment her with fear, and she walked along the
land's edge up and down, and down and up, further each time, and
still there was no boat.

Then she stood still and strove to think, and might not, nor might
she do aught, but spread abroad her hands and moaned in her agony;
for now indeed she felt herself in the trap; and she said that all
her past life of hope and desire and love and honour was all for
nought, and that she was but born to die miserably in that foul ruin
of an isle envenomed with the memories of bygone cruelty and shame.

But in a little while she came somewhat to herself, and she said: At
least this hideous land shall not mock my dying anguish; I will give
myself to the water and let it do with me as it will.

Therewith she cast off her helm and hauberk first, and her weapons,
and her pouch with the treasure that could buy nought for her now,
and thereafter all her raiment, till she was as naked as when she
first came aland there that other time. Again she moaned, and put up
her hand to her bosom and felt a little gold box lying there betwixt
the fragrant hills of her breasts, which hung to a thin golden thread
about her neck; and a thought came into her mind, and she stooped
adown and drew from her pouch flint and fire-steel, and then opened
the said golden box and drew thence the tress which Habundia the
wood-wife had given to her those years agone, and all trembling she
drew two hairs from it, as erst she did on the Isle of Nothing, and
struck fire and kindled tinder and burnt the said hairs, and then
hung the golden box with the tress therein about her neck again; and
she said: O wood-mother, if only thou couldst know of me and see me,
thou wouldst help me!

Thereafter she sought along the bank for bread which she had taken
from her store that morning, and she found it, and compelled herself
to eat of it for the strengthening of her body, and then she stood
and abode tidings; and by then the sun had just sunk below the rim of
the lake, and the stars began to twinkle, for the night was
cloudless, and exceeding fair, and very warm.

No visible token came to her, but her heart grew stronger, and she
seemed to see herself yet alive and in hope on the other side of the
water; and she said: Who wotteth what Weird may do, or where the
waters may bear me? and there is no swimmer stronger than I.

So then without more ado Birdalone slipped into the water, which lay
before her as calm and plain as a great sheet of glass, and fell to
rowing with her arms and her legs as though she were but swimming
from Green Eyot to the mainland, as so oft she had done in the other
days.



CHAPTER XV. BIRDALONE LACKETH LITTLE OF DROWNING, BUT COMETH
LATTERLY TO THE GREEN EYOT



On swam Birdalone, not as one who had a mind to drown her for the
forgetting of troubles, but both strongly and wisely; and she turned
over on to her back, and looked on the stars above her, and steered
herself by them thitherward whereas she deemed was the land under the
wood. When she had been gone from the evil isle for an hour or so,
there rose a fair little wind behind her, which helped her forward,
but scarce raised the water more than a little ripple.

Still she swam on, and it was some three hours she began to weary,
and then she floated on her back and let the wind and water have its
way with her; and now the night was as dark as it would be ere dawn.

Thus it went for another hour, that whiles she swam on and whiles she
floated; and now her heart began to fail her, and the great water was
no longer unto her a wet highway, but a terrible gulf over which she
hung fainting.

Nevertheless she did not give up doing what she might: she floated
supine a long while, and then, when she had gathered a little
strength, turned over again and struck out, still steering her by the
stars. But she had scarce made three strokes ere her arms met
something hard and rough; and at first in her forlornness she deemed
she had happened on some dread water monster, and for terror of it
she sank down into the deep, but came up presently blinded and
breathless, and spread abroad her arms, and again they came on the
thing aforesaid, and this time found that it was nought alive, but
the bole of a tree sitting high out of the water. So she clomb up on
to it with what might she had left, and sat her down, and saw in the
dim light that it was big, and that there was a fork betwixt two
limbs reaching up into the air, and she thrust herself in between
these two limbs and embraced one of them, so that she might scarce
tumble off; and a great content and happiness came over her that she
had thus escaped from the death of the deep; but therewithal
weariness overcame her, and she slept, whether she would or not; and
the bole went on over the waters no slower than might have been
looked for, whether it were by the pushing on of the south wind, or
by the hand of Weird that would not have her die.

Long she slumbered, for when she awoke it was broad day and the sun
was shining high in the heavens, and she cleared her eyes and looked
around, and saw before her the land, but yet blue in the offing. And
the tree-bole was yet speeding on towards the shore, as if it were
being drawn there by some bidding of might.

Now indeed grew Birdalone happy, and she thought if any had helped
her it must have been the wood-mother once again; and she said to
herself that she should soon meet with that helper; nor heeded she
that she was naked and unfurnished of any goods, whereas she deemed
indeed that it was but to ask and have of her friend.

For a while indeed she knew not whither she was wending, and if her
face were verily turned toward the land under the wood; but as the
morning wore the blue distance began to grow green, and then she saw
that a great wood was indeed before her, and thereafter, as it
cleared yet more, she knew the land she was nearing for the meadows
of the House under the Wood, and it was not long thence ere she saw
clear and close Green Eyot and Rocky Eyot, though the house was yet
hidden from her by the green shores of the first of those two isles.

Shortly to tell it, her tree-bole floated with her past the outer
ness of Green Eyot, and came ashore in that same sandy bight where
erst she was wonted to make her body ready for the water. She
stepped ashore all glad to feel the firm warm sand underneath her
foot-soles, and as one drunk with joy she was when the tall flowery
grass of the latter May was caressing her legs as they shook the
seed-dust off the bents, and smote the fragrance out of the blossoms;
and she might scarce at first lift her eyes from their familiar
loveliness. Glad she was indeed, but exceeding worn and weary with
the long voyage, and all the longing and fear and hope which had
encompassed her that while. She lifted up her eyes but once, and saw
the witch's house standing where it was wont, but no shape of man
moving about it; then she turned aside to a little brake of thorn and
eglantine in the meadow hard by, and laid her down on the grass in
the shade thereof, and almost before her head touched the ground she
fell asleep, and slept there long and peacefully.



CHAPTER XVI. BIRDALONE FINDETH HER WITCH-MISTRESS DEAD



It was some while after noon when she wakened, and the sun was
shining bright and hot. Somewhat she felt the burden of fear upon
her, even before she was fully come to herself, and knew not what it
was that she feared; but when she called to mind that it was even the
meeting with her old mistress, her flesh quaked indeed with the
memory of bygone anguish, but valiantly she arose and faced the
dwelling of the witch despite her naked helplessness. As she went
she looked up unto it, and saw no smoke coming from the chimney, but
marvelled little thereat since it was not yet cooking-time and the
weather hot. She drew nigher, and saw someone sitting on the bench
without the door whereas the witch was wonted; and her heart beat
quick, for she saw presently that it was none other than her
mistress. Moreover, near to her stood three of the milch-kine lowing
uneasily and as in reproach, even as such beasts use when their
udders be full and they desire to be milked.

Birdalone stayed a minute, and her legs nigh failed her for fear, and
then because of the very fear she hastened on till she came within
ten paces of the said witch; and sore she missed her bow and arrows,
and the cutting blade of her feigned squirehood, lest the carline
should arise and come raging and shrieking at her.

Then spake Birdalone in no feeble voice, and said: Dame, I am come
back unto thee, as thou seest, in even such plight as I fled from
thee; and I have a mind to dwell in this land: what sayest thou?
The witch neither moved nor spake at her word; and the kine, who had
held silence when she first came up, and had turned from her, fell to
their peevish lowing again.

Birdalone drew a step nigher, and said: Dost thou hear me, dame, or
art thou exceeding wroth with me, and art pondering what vengeance
thou wilt take on me? Still no answer came from the carline, and the
kine kept on lowing now and again. Once more Birdalone drew nigher,
and spake loudly and said: Tell me at least, is it peace between us
or unpeace?

But now when she looked she saw that the eyes of the witch were open
and staring, and her lips white, and her hands hard writhen; and she
cried out and said: Is she dead? or will she waken presently and
beat me? surely she is dead. And she put forth her hand and touched
her face, and it was stone-cold; and she found that she was dead
beyond any question.

Then was a great weight lifted off her heart, and she turned about
and looked on the meadows and up to the trees of the wood and down to
the rippling stream before her, and fair and sweet and joyous were
they gotten unto her; and she looked at the kine who were drawing up
towards her, and she laughed merrily, and went to the out-house hard
by and took forth a milking-pail and a stool and fell to milking them
one after the other, and the beasts went off down the meadow lowing
in a changed voice, for joy to wit, this time. But Birdalone knelt
down and drank a long draught of the sweet warm milk, and then arose
and went swiftly into the house, and saw nought changed or worsened
so far as she could see. There was her own bed in the corner, and
the mistress's, greater and much fairer, over against it; and the
hutch by the door wherein the victual was kept: she opened it now,
and found three loaves there on the shelf, and a meal-tub down below,
and she took a loaf and broke it and fell to eating it as she walked
about the chamber. There was her bow standing in a nook beside the
hutch, and the quiver of arrows hanging on the wall above it. There
was the settle lying athwart from the hearth; and she smiled, and
fitted her wrists to the back of the carven bear which made its
elbow, whereto the witch was wont to tie them when she chastised her.

Then she went to the coffers that stood against the wall behind it,
and threw up the lid of one of them, and found therein a smock or two
of her own, yellowed by the lapse of time, and her old grey coat,
ragged as it was when last she wore it, and now somewhat moth-eaten
withal; and she drew forth both smocks and coat and laid them on the
settle. Then she opened another coffer, and therein were gay and
gaudy gowns and gear of the witch's wear; but lying amongst them, as
if the witch had worn them also, her green gown and shoon which her
own hands had broidered. But she said: Nay, ye have been in ill
company, I will wear you not, though ye be goodly, at least not till
ye have been fumigated and hallowed for me.

Therewith she turned back to the settle and did on her her old smock
and her ragged grey coat, and said: To-day at least will these be
good enough for to-day's work. And she knit her brow withal, and
walked with a firm step out-a-doors and stood a while gazing on the
dead corpse of her enemy; and she thought how that here was that
which once was so great a thing unto her for the shaping of her life-
days, and which so oft came to her waking thoughts after she had
escaped from her hands,  though, as aforesaid, she seldom dreamed of
her a-night-time , and moreover an hour ago she yet feared it so sore
that she scarce might stand for the fear of it; and now it was nought
but a carven log unto her.

But she told herself that the work was to be done; so she dragged the
body away thence, and across the brook, and a little way into the
meadow, and then she went back and fetched mattock and spade from the
outhouse, where she knew they lay, and so fell to digging a grave for
the corpse of her dead terror. But howso hard she might toil, she
was not through with the work ere night began to fall on her, and she
had no mind to go on with her digging by night. Wherefore she went
back into the house, and lighted candles, whereof was no lack, and
made her supper of the bread and the milk; and then sat pondering on
her life that had been till the passion arose in her bosom, and the
tears burst out, and long she wept for desire of others and pity for
herself. Then she went to the bed she had been erst wont to, and
laid her down and fell asleep.

And her mistress walked not, nor meddled with her peace; nor did
Birdalone so much as dream of her, but of her mother and Master
Jacobus in the fair city of the Five Crafts; and in her sleep she
wept for thinking of them.



CHAPTER XVII. BIRDALONE LAYETH TO EARTH THE BODY OF THE WITCH, AND
FINDETH THE SENDING BOAT BROKEN UP



When morning was, Birdalone awoke, and felt a weight upon her heart,
and called to mind the task which lay before her. So she arose and
clad herself, and went straight to the grave begun, and toiled hard
till she had digged it out deep, and sithence she dragged the witch
thereinto and heaped the earth upon her. Then she bathed her in the
nighest pool of the brook, and went back into the house and made her
breakfast on the bread and milk, and it was then about mid-morning.
Thereafter she went about the house, and saw to the baking of bread,
and so out to the meadow to see to the kine and the goats, and then
stored the milk for making butter and cheese, and did in all wise as
if she were to dwell long in that stead; but thereafter she rested
her body, whiles her thought went wide about. But she said to
herself that she would not go up to the Oak of Tryst to meet the
wood-mother that day, but would abide the night, in case aught befell
that she should tell her.

But when the sun was getting low she roused herself and went out, and
walked about the meadow, and hearkened to the birds' song, and
watched the kine and the goats as they fed down the pasture; and now
a soft content came over her, that all this was free unto her to hold
in peace, and to take her pleasure in, as much as one lone child of
Adam might do.

At last she wandered down to the sandy bight of the lake and stood
gazing on Green Eyot, where the osiers and willows were grown wild
and long in all these years, and she said that she would swim over to
it on the morrow. But now her feet took her eastward thence toward
the haven of the Sending Boat amongst the alders; for in her heart
she would fain know if there were any tidings for her.

So she went softly along the path by the water, where she had sped so
swiftly that last time, and came at last to the creek-side, and
looked down on to the water somewhat timorously. There then she saw
what she deemed was the very boat itself lying as she had known it;
but when she looked again she saw that it lay from stem to stern all
loose staves with the water betwixt, and the thwarts and ribs all
sundered and undone, so that never again might it float upon the
waves. Then she said in a soft voice: Art thou dead then, as thy
mistress is dead? was it not so that thou wert at the point of death,
and she also, when thou failedst me at the Isle of Increase Unsought?
No voice came to her as she spake; and she said again: Must I then
bury thee as I have buried thy mistress? Nay, that will I not until
thou compellest me; belike in a short while little of the staves of
thee shall be left now that the life is out of thee. Let thy ghost
and hers foregather if ye will.

As she spake the last word, she saw a stir about the stern which lay
furthest in up the creek, and while she quaked with failing heart,
lo! a big serpent, mouldy and hairy, grey and brown-flecked, came
forth from under the stern and went into the water and up the bank
and so into the dusk of the alder-wood. Birdalone stood awhile pale
and heartsick for fear, and when her feet felt life in them, she
turned and stole away back again into the merry green mead and the
low beams of the sun, pondering whether this evil creature were the
fetch of the wight who drave the ferry under the blood of the sender.

So she hastened back again to the house, and lit a fire on the
hearth, and fell to cooking her somewhat of grout to her supper; and
she watched the fire, thinking withal: Now if some poor soul be
abroad, they may see the smoke and seek hither, and I may comfort
them with food and shelter and converse; or when night darkens, they
may see the litten windows and come to me; wherefore shall the fire
burn yet and the candles be lighted, for as warm as is the evening,
even as if it were Yule-tide and the snow deep without, and the wind
howling in the woodland trees. And therewith she wept for longing of
them that she loved.

But in a little she dried her tears, and reproached herself for her
much softness; and she ate her supper when she had lighted a candle
 for it was now dark , and again sat looking at the hearth, till she
said: Now am I getting soft again, and who knows but my softness may
tempt the ghosts to come in to me. I will give my hands somewhat to
do.

Therewith her eye caught sight of the rents and rags of her old grey
gown, and she smiled somewhat ruefully as she called to mind her
gallant knight's array, which lay now on the shore of the evil and
ruined isle; and her goodly attire of the days of the Five Crafts;
and the rich raiment wherein her friends of the Castle of the Quest
had clad her. Then she arose and sought needle and thread and some
remnants of green cloth, and did off the ragged coat and fell to
patching and mending it, and so sat at her work in smock-sewing till
the night was old and she was weary and sleep overcame her, and she
lay down in her bed and slept dreamlessly till the sun was high next
morning.



CHAPTER XVIII. THE WOOD-MOTHER COMETH TO BIRDALONE AND HEARETH HER
STORY



Now Birdalone arose and bathed her and broke her fast, and then went
about her work with the beasts and the dairy; but all that time
seemed long to her till she had bow in hand and quiver on back, and
was wending her way to the Oak of Tryst; and swift were her feet and
her heart beat quick with hope of pleasure.

Forsooth no long tarrying had she, for scarce had she set her down
beneath the oak, ere the wood-mother came forth from the thicket even
as the first time when Birdalone saw her, and presently she had her
arms about Birdalone and was kissing and clipping her. Then they sat
down together in the shade of the great tree, and the wood-mother
made much of her friend with few words and those but simple, while
Birdalone wept for joy.

At last spake Birdalone: Wood-mother, my dear, I look in thy face,
and I see thee that thou art nowise changed, so that thou callest to
my mind the Birdalone that met thee here when she was straying from
the House of Captivity like to a bird with a string to its leg.

Habundia smiled on her and said: So it is that now thou lookest
older than I. Rounder and fuller is thy body, and thy limbs greater
and fairer, and thy flesh sleeker; lovelier art thou in all wise, and
such as I have thought of thee during these years, save that thy face
is grown wiser and sadder than might be looked for. Mother, she
said, I am grown older than I should be by the tale of the years, for
I have had joy and grief, and grief and joy, and grief again; and now
that the years have worn, the grief abideth and the joy hath
departed, save this joy of thee and the day of the meeting I have so
often thought of.

Said the wood-wife: Were I to hear the story of thee, I deem it most
like that I would fain buy thy joy with thy grief, both that which
has been and that which is to come. And now I will ask thee right
out to tell me all thy tale, as much as thou canst; and all thou
canst tell to me, who am thine other self: and I wot moreover that
thou hast not told of me to any whom thou hast met in the world since
we were last together: is it not so? In faith and in troth so it
is, said Birdalone. Said Habundia, after she had looked hard on
Birdalone a while: Now there is this I find in thee, that though
thou callest me wood-mother still, thou art not my daughter as thou
wert erewhile, nor I thy mother; and I know not whether to be glad or
sorry thereof, since thou art even as much my friend as ever thou
wert. But much do I rejoice herein that thou hast not told any one
soul of me.

Said Birdalone: I must tell thee that part of the tale I shall tell
thee is how I have found my mother in the flesh, and loved her
sorely; and then I lost her again, for she is dead.

Quoth the wood-wife, smiling on her lovingly: Then should I be even
more thy mother than erst I was: there will be something else in thy
tale, sweetling.

Then Birdalone flushed very red, and she smiled piteously in
Habundia's face; but then she put up her hands to hide the change
therein which the anguish of longing wrought, and her shoulders shook
and her bosom heaved, and she wept bitterly; but the wood-wife still
looked on her smiling, and said softly at last: Yea, how sweet it
were to be grieved with thy pain.

But in a while Birdalone grew calm again and the very smile blossomed
out in her face, and they kissed together. Then Habundia rose up and
looked on her, and said at last and laughed out withal: One thing I
must needs say, that thou hast not fetched thee raiment of price from
the knighthood and the kings' houses; or have I not seen thy grey
coat of old time, while thou wert living amidst the witch's cruelty?
Yea forsooth, said Birdalone; thou needest not to ask this. Verily
not, said Habundia, nor why thou art not clad in the fair green gown
which thou didst broider; for whiles I have seen the witch flaunting
it on the wooden ugly body of her, and thou wouldst not wear it after
she had cursed it with her foulness. Is it not so? Yea, it is even
so, said Birdalone; dost thou love me the less therefor? Habundia
laughed again: Were I a man of Adam's sons, said she, I might make
thee many words on the seemliness of thy short coat, and the kindness
of it, that it will be for ever slipping off one or other of thy
shoulders. But now am I at least enough thy mother, and thou art
dwelling even so much in my house, that the next time we meet  and
that shall be to-morrow  I shall fetch thee raiment which shall make
us forget that thou camest back again to this land as naked as thou
didst depart thence.

Birdalone reddened and hung down her head, but the wood-mother sat
down beside her and kissed her and said: But now forget all save thy
tale, and tell all as closely as thou mayest, for I would lose nought
thereof. Yea, said Birdalone; and where shall I begin? Said
Habundia: I know nought thereof save the beginning, that thou fledst
away naked and escaped the witch; and the ending, to wit, that the
Sending Boat failed thee at the last of the Wonder Isles, and that
thou calledst on me not wholly in vain, whereas the witch was dead,
and therefore there was nought to stay me from sending thee one of my
trees and the wight thereof  whom belike I may show to thee one day 
to save thee from the bottom of the deep water.

At that word Birdalone threw herself on the wood-wife and clipped and
kissed her, and thanked her for the helping with all the dearest
words she might. But the wood-mother laughed for joy, and stroked
her cheeks and said: Now I deem thee my daughter again, whereas thou
thankest me with such sweet passion for doing to thee as a kind
mother needs must without any thought thereof. And I bid thee, my
dear, never again to go so far from me as that I may not easily help
thee and comfort thee from out of my realm wherein I am mighty. And
now tell me all in thy dear speech.

Therewith Birdalone began her story without more ado, even as ye have
heard it afore. Yea and many more things than we can set down did
she tell, for full filled she was with the wisdom of the wood. And
between whiles the wood-mother fed her with dainty meat and drink,
such as Birdalone had never erst tasted the like of. And by then she
had got so far as her flight from the Isle of Increase Unsought, the
sun was set and the twilight begun. And the wood-wife said: Now
shalt thou go home to thine house; and have no fear of witch or evil
thing, for I am not far from thee and will watch over thee. Sweet is
thy tale, my daughter, and dear are thy she-friends; and if ever it
may be that I may do them any pleasure, fain were I; and that
especially to thy Viridis, who meseemeth is both sweet and wise even
as thou thyself art. Nay, dost thou begrudge my loving her? Nay,
nay, said Birdalone, laughing; but I rejoice in it. And hereafter
when I tell thee how sorely they paid for helping me, I will bid thee
to love them yet more than now thou dost. Therewith they parted, and
Birdalone came to her house; and on the way she made as it were a
feigned tale in mockery of her old trouble, that there would be the
witch-mistress awaiting her to whip her. So that when she came to
the door she was half frighted with her own mock, lest the witch
might now at last have taken to walking.

But all was quiet when she entered with the last of the twilight, and
she rested that night in all peace, as in the best of her days in the
Five Crafts.



CHAPTER XIX. HABUNDIA HIDETH BIRDALONE'S NAKEDNESS WITH FAERY
RAIMENT



Next morning Birdalone tarried about the house as little a while as
she might, and then went hastening up to the wood; and when she came
within sight of the Trysting Tree, lo! there was Habundia before her,
and the hands of her busy turning over goodly raiment, so that it was
well-nigh as if the days had gone back to the time of the Captivity,
and the sitter under the oak was Birdalone herself dealing with her
half-finished gown.

Joyously they met and embraced each other, and then spake the wood-
wife: Now, thou darling of the world, I have been no worse than my
word, and if thou durst wear web of the Faery thou shalt presently be
clad as goodly as ever thou wert down there amongst the knighthood;
and then thy tale, my dear, and, if it may be, the wisdom of the
barren wood-wife set thereto.

And therewith she laid on Birdalone's outstretched arms the raiment
she had brought with her, and it was as if the sunbeam had thrust
through the close leafage of the oak, and made its shadow nought a
space about Birdalone, so gleamed and glowed in shifty brightness the
broidery of the gown; and Birdalone let it fall to earth, and passed
over her hands and arms the fine smock sewed in yellow and white
silk, so that the web thereof seemed of mingled cream and curd; and
she looked on the shoon that lay beside the gown, that were done so
nicely and finely that the work was as the feather-robe of a
beauteous bird, whereof one scarce can say whether it be bright or
grey, thousand-hued or all simple of colour. Birdalone quivered for
joy of the fair things, and crowed in her speech as she knelt before
Habundia to thank her: then in a twinkling had she done off her
beggar's raiment, and then the smock clung about her darling
nakedness, and next the gown was shimmering all over her, and the
golden girdle embraced her loins as though it loved them worthily;
and Birdalone looked to the wood round about her and laughed, while
Habundia lay in her place and smiled upon her with gentle loving-
kindness.

But in a little while was Birdalone sobered; for the thought of how
fair she should look to the eyes of her beloved when she was shown
unto him on the day of days, thrust her light and eager pleasure
aside; and she took up her shoes from the ground  for she had not
done them on , and sat down beside the wood-wife and fell a-toying
with the marvel of them; and thus without more ado began her tale
again, whereas she had left it last even, when she had told of how
the Sending Boat was speeding her over the waters toward the Isle of
the Young and the Old.



CHAPTER XX. BIRDALONE TELLETH HABUNDIA OF HER LOVE FOR ARTHUR, AND
GETTETH FROM HER PROMISE OF HELP THEREIN



Long they sat there that day, and until the sun was down, and by then
had Birdalone little to tell of her story, for she was gotten therein
to the days of the Five Crafts. Many times had she wept and turned
to Habundia for solace as she told, not without shame, but without
any covering up, all the tale of her love for Arthur the Black
Squire, and how she was surprised by the love of him, and of his
wisdom and grace and loveliness. And the wood-mother was ever as
sweet and kind unto her as could be; yet might another than a lover
have seen that much of all this was strange unto her, and she looked
upon Birdalone as a child who has broken her toy, and is hard to
comfort for the loss of it, though there be a many more in the world.
But when it grew dusk as aforesaid, and it was time to part, she
spake to Birdalone, and said: True it is, my child, that thou hast
lived long in these six years time; neither do I wonder at the
increase of thy beauty, and the majesty thereof; for fair is the life
thou hast lived, although thou hast been grieved and tormented by it
at whiles. And now I know what it is for which thou longest; and
herein again will I play the mother unto thee, and seek about to
fetch thee that thou wouldst have; so be not over-anxious or
troubled; and thou mayest be good herein, as my fair child should be;
for this I have noted in thee, that Love is not so tyrannous a master
but that his servants may whiles think of other matters, and so
solace their souls, that they may live despite of all.

Now was Birdalone arisen, and stood before her friend confused and
blushing. But Habundia put her two hands on her shoulders and kissed
her, and said: Go home now and sleep, and come again to-morrow and
let us hear the last of thy tale; and when that is done, maybe I
shall be able to do something for thine avail.

So they parted, and on the morrow Birdalone came again and told the
remnant of her story, which was not so long now that the Black Squire
was out of it. And when she had done, Habundia kept silence awhile,
and then she said: One thing I will tell thee, that whereas erewhile
it was but seldom indeed that any son of Adam might be seen in the
woodland here, of late, that is, within the last three years, there
be many such amongst us; and to our deeming they be evil beasts, more
pitiless and greedy than any bear; and but that we have nought to do
with them, for they fear us and flee from us, we should have
destroyed them one and all. And now that I have heard all thy story,
it seemeth unto me not so unlike but these may be the remnants of the
bands of the Red Hold, and that they have drifted hither fleeing
before the might of thy friends of the knighthood. Wherefore now,
trust me that I will look into this, but I must needs be away from
here for a little; so hold thy soul in patience though hear thou
nought of me, and dwell quietly at home for seven days' space, and
then come hither and find me, farewell now, my child!

So they kissed and departed; and Birdalone went home to the house,
and wore the days thereafter doing what was needful about the stead,
and wandering through the meadows, and swimming the waters about
Green Eyot; and the days were not unrestful unto her.



CHAPTER XXI. HOW THE WOOD-WIFE ENTERED THE COT, AND A WONDER THAT
BEFELL THEREON



But when it was the sixth day since those two had met, Birdalone
arose in the morning and stood in the door of the house, and she
looked toward the bent which went up to the wood and saw one coming
down it, and knew it for Habundia clad in her huntress' raiment and
bearing something over the left arm, for her bow was in her right
hand. So Birdalone ran to meet her, and embraced and kissed her, and
was merry over her, and said: Dear mother, thou farest far from thy
fastness to-day. Said Habundia: There is nought in the meadows now
save the neat and the goats and thou; of none of that folk am I
afraid. But mayhappen thou shalt be afraid to come with me into the
depths of the wildwood, for thither would I lead thee. I will be
afraid of nought with thee beside me, said Birdalone. But come now
and look upon the house that I have won for me. And she took her
hand and led her along; and the wood-wife said no more till they were
across the brook and standing by the porch.

Then said Birdalone: Thou hast a green gown over thine arm; is that
also for me? Yea, certes, said Habundia; the old rag which thou hast
on thee, and which thou lovest so sore, is not fine enough for my
company; and the glitter-gown I gave thee may be too fine for the
thorns and the briars, and moreover thou mayst be over-easily seen if
thou bear that broidered sunshine mid the boughs. Wherefore go in
now and do on this other coat, though the faery have made it, and
then come out to me with thy bow and thy quiver, and I shall find
thee sandal-shoon and girdle withal.

Nay, wood-mother, said Birdalone, hallow my house by entering it, and
eat a morsel with me and drink the wine of the horned folk ere we go
our ways.

Habundia shook her head and knit her brows somewhat as she looked
hard on the house; then she said: I know not, Adam's daughter; I
have little to do with houses, and doubt if a house be safe for me.
And this one that the witch builded! and belike she buried some human
being at one of its four corners. Tell me, fair child, sawest thou
ever here at night-tide the shape of a youngling crowned with a
garland straying about the house?

Nay, never at all, said Birdalone. Said the wood-wife: Then maybe
thou hast hallowed it with the wisdom and love of thee, and I may
venture; and moreover I note that it is all builded of trees and the
grass of the earth; and thou art free to use them by my leave. But
if aught befall of my coming under thy roof, heed it not too much,
but think, whatsoever my aspect may be, I am thy wood-mother and
wisdom-mother that loveth thee. And I bid thee also wish with all
thy might that my aspect may not change to thee. Also, if I eat,
thou wert best not to sign the meat as Adam's sons are wont. Lead in
then; for now am I grown wilful, and will enter whatever betide.

Birdalone marvelled at those words, but she fell to wishing strongly
that her friend might not lose her lovely youthful shape either then
or ever, and she took her hand, which trembled somewhat, and led her
over the threshold; and when they were under the roof herseemed that
the wood-mother dwindled in a wondrous way, though her face was as
sweet and her limbs as shapely as ever; and she laughed shrilly yet
sweetly, and spake in a thin clear voice: Birdalone, my dear, wish
strongly, wish strongly! though thou shalt see nothing worse of me
than this. And she was scarce three feet high, but as pretty as a
picture.

Thereat indeed was Birdalone affrighted, but she wished all she
might, and stooped down to kiss this little creature; and therewith
again the wood-wife seemed to wax again as great and tall as ever she
was, and her voice came full and strong again, as she laughed and
said: Now is it all over for this time, and I see how well thou
lovest me; and I pray thee love me no less for this wonder thou hast
seen in me. But now it were better that I never go under a roof
again. And she took her arms about Birdalone and clipped her
lovingly; and glad was Birdalone to feel her so strong and solid
again.

Then they sat to the board and ate a simple meal of bread and cheese
and wood-berries, and drank milk withal; and the wood-mother was
merry, and the smiles danced over her face as she looked on Birdalone
with all loving-kindness, so that Birdalone wondered what was toward;
but so light-hearted and happy she grew, that she deemed it might be
nought save good.

But when they had eaten, then Birdalone did off her old coat, which
she said was meet enough for her daily toil, and did on the fair
green hunting-gown and the sandal-shoon, and girt her with the fair
girdle which Habundia had fetched her, and drew up the laps of her
gown therethrough till her legs were all free of the skirts. And
Habundia looked on her, and laughed and said: Now are these white
and smooth legs as bad as the gleam-gown for the lying hid; but it
may no better be, and thou must draw thy skirts down and stumble, if
needs must be, when we come to the ambushment.

Birdalone reddened as she laughed at the word, and took down her bow
and hung her quiver at her back and thrust her sharp knife into her
girdle, and forth they went both of them, and were presently past the
bent which went up from the meadows and in amongst Habundia's trees.



CHAPTER XXII. BIRDALONE WENDETH THE WILDWOOD IN FELLOWSHIP WITH
HABUNDIA



Now as they went their ways lightly through the wood, spake Habundia
and said: Birdalone, my child, fair is the gold ring with the
sapphire stone that the third finger of thy right hand beareth;
seldom have I seen so fair a stone as that deep blue one; hangeth any
tale thereby? Said Birdalone: Did I not tell thee thereof, wood-
mother, how that my beloved who is lost gave it unto me the very last
time I saw him, woe worth the while? Nay, said Habundia, I mind not
the tale. But deemest thou he would know it again if he saw it?
Yea, surely, said Birdalone, hanging her head; for when first he gave
it, the gift was not to me, but to another woman. And she held her
peace, and went on with hanging head and all the glee faded out of
her a while.

At last she turned to Habundia, and said: I have now bethought me to
ask thee whither we be going and on what errand; for at first I was
so glad at heart, I know not why, and it was so merry to be wending
the wood with thee freely, that I had no thought in me as to whither
and wherefore. But now wilt thou tell me?

Said the wood-wife: How if I were to tell thee we were going a-
hunting? Birdalone said: Then I should ask thee what like the
quarry were. And suppose it were men? said the wood-wife. Birdalone
turned somewhat pale. My mother, she said, if we be going against
some of those men of the Red Bands, I am not happy over it. I am no
warrior, and fear strokes. Said Habundia, laughing: Yet art thou a
fell archer; and thou mayest shoot from an ambush of the thick
leaves, since June is in to-day. But neither would I slay or hurt
any man, said Birdalone, but it were to save me from present death.

Habundia looked on her with a sly smile and said: Well maybe though
we take cover and get within wind of our quarry thou shalt not need
to speed an arrow to him. Have patience therefore. For this is a
strange beast which I have marked down; he is not ill to look on, and
his voice, which we may well hearken, for whiles he singeth, is
rather sweet than surly. What meanest thou, mother? said Birdalone,
growing red and then paler yet; what man is it? since thy calling him
a beast is a jest, is it not?

Nay, said Habundia, I neither name him nor know him; only I deem him
by no means to be one of the Red Band. For the rest, he may be a man
in a beast's skin, or a beast in a man's skin, for aught I know;
whereas he seems, so far as I have seen him, to be not wholly man-
like or wholly beast-like. But now let us hold our peace of him till
we be come nigher to his haunt.

So they went on their way, and Birdalone said but little, while the
wood-wife was of many words and gay. They made all diligence, for
Birdalone was not soon wearied, and moreover as now she was anxious
and eager to see what would befall, which she might not but deem
would be something great.

They went without stay till past noon, when they were come to a
little shady dale wherethrough ran a clear stream; there they rested
and bathed them, and thereafter sat under the boughs and ate the
dainty meat which the wood-wife provided, howsoever she came by it;
and when they had rested a while, the wood-wife turned the talk once
more unto Arthur the Black Squire, and would have Birdalone tell her
all nicely what manner of man he was; and Birdalone was nothing loth
thereto; for had she her will she had talked of him day-long.



CHAPTER XXIII. THE WOOD-WIFE BRINGETH BIRDALONE TO THE SIGHT OF
ARTHUR IN THE WILDWOOD



Now they go on again, no less speedily than before, and rest but
little, until it was hard on an hour before sunset. And now Habundia
began to go warily, as if they were come anigh to their journey's end
and the thing that they sought. They were come by now to a long bent
of the forest well grown with big-boled oak-trees, not very close
together, so that short fine greensward was all underneath them; and
Habundia went heedfully from bole to bole, as if she would be ready
to cover herself if need were; and Birdalone went after her, and was
now flushed of face, and her eyes glittered, and her heart beat fast,
and her legs trembled under her, as she went running from tree to
tree.

So came they nigh to the crown of the bent, and before them were the
oak-trees sparser and smaller as they went down the further side,
which seemed by their sudden shortening to be steeper than the hither
side; and betwixt them showed the topmost of thorn and whitebeam and
logwood, intertwined with eglantine and honeysuckle and the new
shoots of the traveller's joy. There the wood-wife put forth her
hand to bid Birdalone stay, who came up to her friend and stood
before her eager and quivering: and anon came the sound of a man's
voice singing, though they could hear no words in it as yet amidst
the rustle of the trees and the tumult of song which the blackbirds
and throstles raised in the dale below them.

Then spake the wood-wife softly: Hearken, we are right and the time
is good, our beast is giving tongue: now below us is the bent-side
steep, and goeth down into a very little dale with a clear stream
running amidst; and therein is the very lair of the thing that we are
hunting. Wherefore now let us slip warily down between the bushes
till we get close to the bottom, and then belike we shall see the
very creature quite close, and we shall then consider and think what
we shall do with him.

Birdalone had no voice wherewith to answer her, but she stole quietly
along by her side till they came to the bank of the dale and plunged
into the thicket that flourished there, and fell to threading it,
making them as small as might be. But ere they had gone but a little
way the wordless song of what was below had ceased, and they heard
the sweet tingle of the string-play, and the wood-wife stayed her to
hearken, and the smiles went rippling over her face and she beat time
with her fingers; but Birdalone, she stared wildly before her, and
would have scrambled down the bank straightway at all hazards, for
that string-play was a melody of the Castle of the Quest, but
Habundia withheld her by the arm. And then suddenly the music died,
and there came up a voice of wailing and lamenting, and Birdalone put
her hands and held the palms tight against her ears, and was at point
to cry out aloud herself; but Habundia drew a hand of her down and
whispered into her ear: Child, child, make thyself strong and
forbear, and then perchance joy may come to thee; hold thy peace and
come softly along with me!

So Birdalone forbore, and strove with her passion, though the sobs
rent her bosom for a while; and by then the loud lamenting waned and
was done, and the sound of sobbing came up from below, as it had been
an echo of Birdalone's grief.

Then Habundia drew her on again till they saw the level of the dale
and its stream piecemeal betwixt the leaves, and they had a glimpse
of a man on the hither side of the stream; and again they went lower,
till they were well-nigh on a level with the greensward of the dale;
and as Birdalone knelt with head bent low, and her hands covering her
eyes, the wood-wife put away from before her the thick leaves of a
hazel-bush, and whispering said: Child, child! look forth now and
see what is before thee, and see if thou knowest him, or if he be
strange to thee, and thy mother hath done nought for thee when all is
said.

Birdalone looked up, pale and wild-eyed, and into the dale, and saw a
man sitting on the grass by the stream-side with his head bowed down
on to his knees and his face covered with his hands; he was clad but
in two or three deerskins hung about him, with a strip of skin for a
girdle, wherein was thrust a short sword; his brown hair hung down
long and shaggy over his face. Close by his side lay a little harp,
and further off a short spear roughly hefted with an ash-staff. He
was beating the earth with his feet and writhing him about over them.
And Birdalone looked, and her breath well-nigh failed her. For
presently he sat more quietly, and lifted up his head, and she saw
his face that it was Arthur, her beloved; and now she durst not move
lest he should spring up and flee away; and the mingled pain and
longing within her was sweet indeed, but well-nigh deadly.

Now his hand sought round to his harp, and he took it in his arms and
fondled it as it were, and his fingers went among the strings, and
anon the voice of it came forth, and it was nought changed from the
last time it spake, and Birdalone hearkened breathlessly, till the
melody died again and Arthur looked about him and raised his face as
a dog when it fares to howl.

Then Birdalone gave a great cry, and leapt forth out of the thicket
and stood on the greensward with nought betwixt them two, and she
stretched out her arms to her beloved and cried out: O! no, no, no!
do it not, I beseech thee, lest I deem that thou art all changed, and
that the man and the dear heart beloved of thee has gone out of thee
and left thee but a beast in a man's shape!

He leapt up as she spake, and thrust forward his head and looked
fierce at her, and cried out: What! art thou come again? This is
the second time I have seen thee, thou image of her that hath
tormented me so long; of her that left me in my most need and hid
herself away from me. Hah! a man, sayest thou? Did I not strive
with it, and hold my manhood so long as I might; and at last it might
no longer be, and I became a beast and a man-slayer? But what avails
it to talk with thee, since thou art but the image of her that hath
wasted my life. Yet perchance of the image I may make an end since I
may not lay hand on the very destroyer herself; and, woe's me, how I
loved her! yea, and do still; but not thee, O false image!

And forthwith he drew the blade from his girdle and sprang forward at
Birdalone; and she cowered and cringed, but moved not else. But
therewithal the wood-wife came leaping through the bushes, and she
nocked an arrow on her bended bow, and threatened him therewith, and
cried out: Thou man-beast, I will slay thee if thou hurt my child
and my dear; so forbear! Nay, I tell thee more, unless thou make her
as glad at the sight of thee as I meant her to be, I will in the long
run slay thee; so look to it.

He laughed and said: What! there is another image of the love that
wasted me, is there! Nay, but by the Hallows, this new-comer is the
first one, and the one who chattered at me is the second. Or is it
this, that all women now have the semblance of the evil one that has
undone me, and there is nought else left?

And he stood staring at Birdalone and moved not a while; and she
stood with her hands before her face cringing before him. Then he
raised his arm and cast the weapon far into the bushes of the bank-
side, and then came forward and stood before Birdalone, and drew down
her hands from her face and stared in the eyes of her, holding her by
the two arms; and he said: Thou hast forgotten now, belike, how fair
a life we two might have lived if thou hadst not fled from me and
spoiled me.

And thou! by the looks of thee, for thou art sleek and fair, though
this moment thou art pale for fear of me, thou hast lived a happy
life through all these years, with many a merry thing to think of:
and dost thou deem that my life was happy, or that I thought of any
merry thing, or of anything save my sorrow? Dost thou doubt it? go
ask the good spears of Greenford, or the Riders of the Red Hold, and
the field of the slaughter! If there was little joy there, less was
there elsewhere.

He left go of her therewith and stood trembling before her, and she
bowed down and put palm to palm and held them out to him as one who
prays; and she knew not what she did.

Then he cried out with a lamentable cry and said: O woe's me! for I
have frighted her and scared the wit out of her, so that she knows
not who I am nor what I would; and I would pray to her and beseech
her to pity me, and not depart from me again or mock me with images
of herself.

Then he went down on his knees to her, and he also joined his hands
to pray to her; but it seemed as if she was stricken to stone, so
wholly she moved not. But for him, he sank his forehead to earth,
and then he rolled over and his limbs stretched out, and his head
turned aside and blood gushed out from his mouth. But Birdalone
shrieked out and cast herself on his body, and cried: I have found
him, and he is dead! he is dead, and I have slain him, because I was
a timorous fool and feared him; and he was coming to his right mind
and knew me for what I was!

But Habundia came and stood over them, and drew up Birdalone, and
said: Nay, nay, be comforted! for now he is thus, and the strength
is gone out of him for a while, we may deal with him. Abide, and I
will fetch the blood-staunching herb and the sleepy herb, and then we
will heal him, and he will come to his right mind and be a man again.

Therewith she hastened away and was gone but a little; and meanwhile
Birdalone knelt down by her love and wiped the blood from him, and
caressed his sword-hardened hands and moaned over him. But when the
wood-wife came back she put Birdalone aside once more, and knelt down
by the squire and raised his head, and laid the blood-stauncher to
his mouth and his heart, and muttered words over him, while Birdalone
looked over her shoulder with her pale face; then the she-leech
fetched water from the stream in a cup which she drew from her
wallet, and she washed his face, and he came somewhat to himself, so
that she might give him drink of the water; and yet more he came to
himself. So then she took the sleepy herb and bruised it in her
hands and put in his mouth and again said words over him, and
presently his head fell back and his eyes closed and he slept
peacefully.

She stood up then and turned to Birdalone and said: Now, my child,
have we done all that we may do, save that we shall bring him to a
place where the dew and the sun shall not torment him and sicken him;
for he shall lie thus till the sun comes up to-morrow, or longer; and
fear nor, for when he awaketh he shall be in his right mind, and
shall know thee and love thee. This I swear to thee by the earth and
the sun and the woodland.

Said Birdalone, trembling yet: O mother, but may I kiss him and
caress him? Yea, surely, said the wood-mother, smiling in her face,
but be not too long over it, for lo! the last of the sun, and it were
better that he be under cover ere the twilight falls.

Birdalone knelt down by her love quietly at that word, and fell to
kissing him softly, and laid her cheek to his, and called him gentle
names such as none can tell again without shame, till the wood-wife
laid her hand on her shoulder and said kindly and sweetly: Rise up
now, for thou must make it enough for this present; thou shalt have
time enough hereafter for more and much more.

So Birdalone arose and said: How shall we bear him to his place?
Shall I not take him by the shoulders and thou by the legs? For I am
stronger than thou after all these years.

Laughed the wood-wife: Nay, little one, said she; thou knowest me
not utterly as yet. Thou shalt not bear him at all, nor any part of
him; I am strong enough for more than that; see thou! And she
stooped down and took him up in her arms as if he were a little
child, and stepped off lightly with him; but looked back over her
shoulder and said to Birdalone: But thou mayest walk by me and hold
a hand of him as we go, though it will hinder me somewhat; but I know
thine heart and would pleasure thee, my child.

Birdalone ran up to her and thanked her and kissed her, and took
Arthur's left hand, while Habundia bore him on down the dale and out
of it, and still along the stream till they came to a place where it
was narrow on either side thereof, and a sheer rock came down so near
to the water that there was but a strip of greensward three yards
wide betwixt water and rock; and in the face of the rock was a cave
wide enough for a man to enter by stooping somewhat. Therein the
wood-wife lightly bore Arthur, and Birdalone followed; and they found
the cave dry and roomy within; there was a bed therein of dry heather
and bracken, and thereon Habundia laid her burden, and said: Now, my
child, there is nought to do but abide till he comes to himself
again, which may be some time to-morrow; and be of good cheer, for he
will come to his right self, but he will be weak and humble; but I
shall have meat and drink ready for him. Now if thou wilt be ruled
by me, thou wilt keep out of the way when he awakens; moreover, be
thou not scared if I meet his awakening with another shape than that
which thou hast known of me; for sure it is that it will trouble his
wits over-much if again he seeth the two of us alike. But fear not;
for thy sake, my child, I will take no ugly shape, though it may well
be less beauteous than thine.

I will do what thou wilt, mother, said Birdalone, for I see that thou
art helping me all thou mayest; yet I beseech thee let me sit by him
till the time of his awakening draweth nigh.

The wood-wife smiled and nodded yeasay on her, and they sat down,
both of them, beside the sleeping man, and the day died into the
night as they sat hearkening to the ripple of the brook and the song
of the nightingales.



CHAPTER XXIV. THE WOOD-MOTHER CHANGETH HER FORM TO THAT OF A WOMAN
STRICKEN IN YEARS



When the morrow came, there yet lay Arthur sleeping peacefully, and
Birdalone awoke from the slumber which had at last fallen on her, and
looked about her and saw not Habundia in the cave; so she arose and
bent over Arthur and kissed him, and so went forth and stood in the
door and looked about her. And she was still dim-eyed with her just
departed slumber and the brightness of the morning sunlight, and she
scarce knew whether it were a part of a dream, or a sight that was
verily before her, that she seemed to see one coming across the brook
toward her, stepping heedfully from stone to stone thereof: a woman
stricken in years, but slim and trim and upright, clad in a gown of
green cloth, with a tippet of some white fur. When she was come on
to the greensward she spake to Birdalone in a sweet voice, but thin
with eld, and gave her the sele of the day; and Birdalone was
somewhat afraid to see a newcomer, but she greeted her, drawing back
a little from her shyly. But the old woman said: What maketh thee
here, my daughter? Dost thou not know that this is my land and my
house, and that I am said not to be unmighty in these woods?

I pray thee pardon me if I have done amiss, said Birdalone; but here
have I a sick friend, a young man, and I would pray thee suffer him
to abide here in this cave a little longer; for there hath been also
another friend, a woman, but she hath gone out while I slept, belike
to gather simples, for she is wise in leechcraft, and is tending the
sick man. I pray thee humbly to suffer us lest we lose our friend.

As she spake, she heard the carline chuckle softly, and at last she
said: Why, Birdalone, my dear, dost thou not know me after all these
years? Look on me again, look! and thou shalt see that I am not so
much changed from what thou sawest me last night. I am still thine
image, my dear, only I was the image of what thou wert, and now I the
image of what thou shalt be when two score years and ten of happy
life have worn for thee. Tell me, am I now aught like to thy mother
in the flesh?

How hast thou frighted me, mother, said Birdalone; I thought that my
friend had forsaken me, and that perchance the new-comer was another
witch like unto the old one, and that I was never to be at rest and
happy. But as to my mother in the flesh, nay, thou art not now
wholly like unto her; and sooth to say I shall be fainer when thou
hast thine own shape of me young back again, for I love thee not so
much as now thou art.

The wood-wife laughed: Well, she said, thou shalt not see over-much
of me in this shape; and that the less because of something I shall
now tell thee, to wit, that I have been thinking the matter over, and
I would have thee leave us twain together alone before the young man
awaketh. I would have thee get thee home and abide him there; it
shall not be long I promise thee; and this also, that he shall come
home to thee sound in body and whole in limb.

Birdalone's countenance fell, and she said: Why this second mind,
mother? why, I pray thee? Said Habundia: I fear for thy love lest
he be not strong enough to open his eyes upon thy face; but after he
hath been a day in the woods, and I have spoken to him diversely and
cheered him with the hope of meeting thee, he may well be strong
enough to seek thee for a mile's length, and find thine house first
and then thee. So now wilt thou obey me? Nay, if thou must needs
weep, I will be gone into the thicket till thou hast done, thou
wilful! Birdalone smiled through her tears, and said: I pray thee
pardon my wilfulness, mother, and I will depart without turning back
into the cave. Nay, said Habundia, there is no need for so much
haste as that: I will in now, and do my leechdoms with the sick man.
But do thou go across the stream, thou barefoot, and thou wilt find
on the other side, by the foot of the quicken-tree yonder, honeycombs
and white bread and a bicker of wild goats' milk. Bathe thee then if
thou wilt, and bring those matters over hither; and then shalt thou
go in and kiss thy mate's sick face with thy fresh one, and
thereafter shall we sit here by the ripple of the water and break our
fast; and lastly, thou shalt go in and kiss again and then take to
the road. But tell me, deemest thou surely that thou canst find it
again? Yea, surely, mother, said Birdalone; I am wood-woman enough
for that; and now I will do all thy will. And therewith she stepped
out lightly on to the greensward and sought up the stream till she
found a smooth-grounded pool meet for her bath, and when that was
done, she fetched the victual and came back to the wood-wife; then
they two sat down together, and ate and drank while the water rippled
at their feet. But when they were done, Birdalone gat her into the
cave again, and kissed the sleeping man fondly, and came forth
lightly and stood a moment before the wood-wife, and said: Tell me
this at least, mother, when shall he be there? To-morrow quoth the
wood-wife; and, for my part, I would keep thee within doors and abide
him there, lest there be trouble; for he may not yet be as strong as
the strongest. Birdalone hung down her head and answered not, but
said presently: Farewell, wood-mother, and be thou blessed. Then
she took up her bow and betook her lightly to the woodland way, and
the wood-wife stood looking at her till the thicket had hidden her,
and then turned back and went into the cave.



CHAPTER XXV. THE WOOD-WIFE HEALETH AND TENDETH THE BLACK SQUIRE



She stood over Arthur for a minute or two, and then stooped down and
whispered a word in his ear, and presently he stirred on the bed and
half opened his eyes, but straightway turned on his side, as if to
gather sleep to him, but she took him by the shoulder and said in a
clear voice: Nay, knight, nay; hast thou not slept enough? is there
nought for thee to do? He sat up in the bed and rubbed his eyes, and
his face was come to its wholesome colour, and his eyes looked out
quietly and calmly as he looked about the cave and saw the wood-wife
standing by him; and he spake in a voice which was somewhat weak, but
wherein was no passion of rage or woodness: Where am I then? and who
art thou, dame? She said: Thou art in a cave of the woodland, and I
am for one thing thy leech, and meseemeth thou desirest to eat and to
drink. He smiled and nodded his head; and she fetched him the milk,
and he drank a long draught, and sighed thereafter, as one who is
pleased; and she smiled on him, and fetched him the bread and the
honey, and he ate and drank again, and then lay down and fell fast
asleep. And she suffered his slumber for two hours or so, and then
awoke him again; and again he asked where he was and what was she,
but she said as before. And said she: The next thing thou hast to
do is to arise, as thou well mayest, and take this raiment, which is
fair and clean, and go wash thee in the brook and come back to me;
and then we will talk, and thou shalt tell me of how it was with
thee, and peradventure I may tell thee somewhat of how it shall be
with thee. As she spoke she went to a coffer which stood in a nook
of the cave, and drew forth from it a shirt and hosen and shoon, and
a surcoat and hood of fine black cloth, and a gilded girdle and a
fair sword, red-sheathed, and said: These may serve thy turn for the
present, so take them and don them, and thou shalt look like a squire
at least, if not a knight.

So he arose as one in a dream and went out; but as he passed by her
she saw something gleaming on his breast, and noted that it was
Birdalone's fair sapphire ring which hung about his neck; so she
smiled, and said under her breath: Crafty is my dear daughter! But
that shall save me some words at least. And she abided his return.

Anon he cometh back clad in the fair raiment, with the sword by his
side; and the wood-wife smote her palms together and cried out: Now
indeed thou art fair and well-liking, and a fair lady might well take
pleasure in beholding thee.

But his brow was knit, and he looked sullen and angry, and he said:
What is all this play? and where gattest thou this ring which I found
e'en now about my neck? And who art thou, and why have I been
brought hither?

His eyes looked fiercely on her as he spake, holding out his palm
with the ring lying thereon. But the wood-wife answered: Many
questions, fair youth! but I will tell thee: the play is for thine
healing and pleasure, whereas both sick hast thou been and sorry. As
to the ring, it is thou hast got it and not I. But I will tell thee
this, that I have seen it on the finger of a fair damsel who haunteth
the woodland not far hence. As to what I am, that were a long tale
to tell if I told it all; but believe this meanwhile, that I am the
lady and mistress of hereabouts, and am not without power over my
folk and my land. And as to why thou wert brought hither, I brought
thee because I had no better house handy for a sick man to lie in.

Then Arthur stood a long while considering the ring that lay on his
palm, and at last he put his hand on the wood-wife's shoulder, and
looked into her face beseechingly, and said: O mother, if thou be
mighty be merciful withal, and have pity on me! Thou callest me a
youth, and so I may be in regard to thee; but I tell thee it is five
long years and there hath been no other thought in my heart but what
was loathsome to me, and it hath worn and wasted my youth, so that it
waneth and withereth and is nought. O, if thou be mighty, bring me
to her that I may see her at least one time before I die. And
therewith he fell down on his knees before her, and kissed the hem of
her gown, and wept. But she drew him up and looked on him with the
merry countenance of a kind old woman, and said: Nay, nay, I am not
so hard to be won to thy helping that thou needest pray so sore and
weep: here need we tarry no longer, and if thou wilt come with me we
shall go seek the damsel who bore this ring, though how it should
come to thee why should I know? Neither do I know if the said ring-
bearer be the one woman whom thou needest. But I will tell thee at
once that she is a dear friend of mine.

Then Arthur threw his arms about her, and kissed her cheeks and
blessed her, while she laughed on him and said: Nay, fair sir, if
thou wilt do so much with the withered branch, what wilt thou with
the blossom of the tree? And he was abashed before her, but hope
made his heart to dance.

So the wood-wife took up her bow, slung her quiver at her back, and
girt her short sword to her, and then led him forth, and so into the
thicket out of the dale and forth into the oaken bent, and lightly
she led him thereafter through the woodland.



CHAPTER XXVI. THE BLACK SQUIRE TELLETH THE WOOD-WIFE OF HIS DOINGS
SINCE BIRDALONE WENT FROM THE CASTLE OF THE QUEST



As they went Habundia said to Arthur: Now shalt thou talk and tell
for the shortening of the way, and let us know somewhat of thy story.
But first I must tell thee, for thou mayest not know it, so witless
as then thou wast, that yesterday we found thee down in the dale
yonder, playing the string-play sweetly indeed, but otherwise dight
like a half beast more than a man, so that we wondered at thee and
pitied thee.

Arthur knit his brows as if he strove with some memory and might not
master it; then he said: Thou sayest We, who then was the other?
Said Habundia: I had a dear friend with me. Quoth he: And did she
pity me also? Yea, said the wood-wife, else scarce had she been a
friend to me. O let us on swiftly, said Arthur, so long as the time
may be! And they quickened their pace and ate up the way speedily.

Presently spake the wood-wife again: Now for the tale of thee, fair
sir; yet will I shorten it somewhat by telling thee that I know thy
name, that thou art Arthur the Black Squire of the Castle of the
Quest. He stared at that word, and said: How knewest thou this? how
couldst thou guess it, who hast never seen me erst? A friend told
me, said she; too long it were as now to tell thee thereof. Rather
do thou tell me how thou didst fare when ye found thy friend gone
from the castle that time ye came home from the winning of the Red
Hold.

Arthur stared astonished, and said: What is it? Dost thou verily
know my love? or art thou a sorceress and knowest somewhat of me by
spell-work? I am somewhat more than a sorceress, may-happen, said
the wood-wife; but heed it not, since I am thy friend to-day, but
tell me what I ask, that I may have all the tale of thee; it will
serve for the shortening of the way. Said Arthur: And who but I
needeth it as short as may be? so stand we not loitering here, and I
will talk as we wend on speedily.

On they sped therefore, and said Arthur: How did I fare? as one
stunned, mother, and knew not what had happened; and when I heard
their babble of how she had done wrong here and right there, I was
driven half mad by it, so that I hastened back to the Red Hold, and
became the captain of Greenford, to hunt down their scattered foemen;
for I said to myself that needs must I rage and slay, and that were
worser amongst my friends than mine unfriends. What then? that
business came to an end; though all the ill men were not slain, but
all were driven away from the parts of Greenford; and sooth to say
they durst not come anywhere nigh where they heard of me. Then
became each day like every other, and the thought of my hope and my
despair ate mine heart out, and I was of no avail unto any. Now it
so happened, amidst my many battles and chases, I had hunted the
bands of the Red Hold into the northwest marches of the woodland; and
I noted that even they, howsoever hard bestead, and the worst of men
to boot, would scarce at the first be driven into the thickets
thereof, though at last, whether or no they have made covenant with
the devils, there I know not, they have betaken them to the depths of
the wood and have borne off women from the dwellings and got children
on them, and are like to breed an evil folk. That then I noted that
this Evilshaw was a dwelling loathed and desert, and little like it
was that any would meddle with me there. Three years had worn since
I was cast away at the Castle of the Quest by her that loved me, who
must needs sacrifice both her and me to the busy devil of folly; and
I also deemed that if I sought for her I should not find her; and yet
more forsooth, that if I found her she would be as hard unto me as
when she fled from me. And as for me, I was gotten hard and crabbed,
and no man, if his heart would let him, would have aught to say to
me. So I gat me away from the Red Hold, as I had from the Castle of
the Quest, and I gave out that I would enter into religion, and
forbade any man to follow me. Neither did any desire it. First of
all I set me down at the very outskirts of the woodland, and raised
me a bower there, rude and ill-shapen. Few folk came anigh me, and
yet some few, charcoal-burners, and hunters of the edges of the wood,
and suchlike. These deemed me a holy man, whereas I was but surly.
Somewhat also they feared me, whereas in some of their huntings or
goings and comings after prey I had put forth all my strength, eked
out by the lore of knighthood, which was strange to them. One man
there was of them who was fashioned of the minstrel craft by nature,
and who forgathered with me specially, till we became friends, and he
was a solace to me, with his tales and his songs of a rougher people
than I had been wont to deal with. But when I had been in that place
for two years he died of a sickness, and I was left lonely, and my
soreness of heart fell upon me till I scarce knew what next I should
do. So I fared away yet deeper into the wildwood, taking with me the
harp which my friend had given me before he died. It was summer, and
I wandered about ever deeper into the wood, until belike I had scarce
been able to win out of it if I had tried. At last, when the autumn
came, I built myself again some sort of a bower in a clearing of the
wood wherein was water, and the resort of plenteous venison.

What befell next? My mind is not over-clear concerning it all, for I
was now becoming more of a beast than a man. But this I know, that
some men of the bands whom I had chased happened on me. They knew me
not for their old foeman, but of their kind it was to torment and
slay any man whom they might lightly overcome. Yet was not the
battle so over-light but that I slew and hurt divers of them ere they
got me under and stripped me and bound my hands and tormented me,
after the manner that the devils shall do with them when they shall
go to their reward. Yet somehow I lived, though they deemed me dead,
and I crawled away thence when they were gone; and somehow I was
healed of my body, but I was confused of my wit thereafter, and now
can call to mind but little of what befell me as I strayed from place
to place, save that I remember I was hapless and heart-sore ever:
and also meseemeth that I saw visions at whiles, and those who had
been in my life before these things, their images would come before
me to mock me as I sat singing whiles and whiles playing the string-
play  for my harp I bore ever with me ; and whiles I bewailed me, and
called for help on them that would not or might not help me. And now
I may not even tell the years of my abiding in the desert, how many
they be. But I pray thee let us on more swiftly yet.

Said the wood-wife: Thou hast told me but little of thy life, Black
Squire, but it is enough maybe; and I see that thou mayst not tell me
more because thou hast thy mind set on what may betide thee when this
day is over. But thou must know that thou hast come into the wood of
Evilshaw, wherein, besides those savage men who quelled thee and
their like, there be uncouth things no few, and wights that be not of
the race of Adam; wherefore no great marvel is it that thou sawest
visions, and images of them that were not by thee. Yea, said he, but
one vision had I that confused and overcame me more than all others,
and meseemeth that came to me not long ago. For first I saw the
shape of her that my soul desireth ever, and it wept and lamented for
me; and then for a little I seemed as if I were coming forth from my
confusion of wit; when lo! there issued from the thicket another
image of my beloved and blamed me and threatened me. God wot good
cause there was of the blame. But tell me, mother, since thou
callest thyself wise, what may this portend?

The wood-wife laughed: Since I am wise, said she, I will foretell
thee good days. And now we will talk no more of thee or thy love or
thy sorrow, but since thou wilt so fiercely devour the way, I will
tell thee a tale or two of this wood and its wights to save us from
over-much weariness.

So did she, talking and telling as they went; and she went on a pace
before him, and howsoever long or hardly he might stride he might not
overgo her. And so fast they went, that they were within a little
way of the Oak of Tryst a good while before the sun had set, though
they had set out from the cave three hours after the hour when
Birdalone and the wood-wife had left the House under the Wood on the
yesterday. They had come to a steep rock that rose up from a water's
side, and the wood-wife bade stay, whether Arthur would or no, and
she made him eat and drink, bringing the victual and wine from out of
a cleft in the said rock. And she held him there till the night was
come and there was a glimmer of the rising moon in the east, and he
was ill at ease and restless; but still she held him there till the
moon rose high and shone upon them, and the shadows of the oak-boughs
lay black all around.

Then she bade him arise, and let him on to the Oak of Tryst, yea and
somewhat beyond it toward the great water. Then she spake to him:
Black Squire, I am now come home, and will lead thee no further; I
was deeming that we should have slept in the wood a good way from
this, and then would I have brought thee on thy way to-morrow
morning; but the eagerness of thine heart hath made thy feet so
speedy, that we be here somewhat rathe, and yet I am not ill-pleased
therewith. Then she turned him about and said: Look down the bent
and tell me what thou seest. He said: I see the boles of goodly
trees, and betwixt them the gleaming of a great water. She said: Go
thitherward then while the moon is yet at her brightest, and thou
shalt presently come to wide meads lying along the water, and a
stream running through them. Enter then into the meads and look
about thee, and thou shalt see a little house  there is none other
nigh  standing just across the said stream; go up thither boldly and
crave guesting from whomsoever thou shalt find there, and maybe
things shall go after thy mind. More than this I may not do for
thee. Farewell then, and if thou wilt thou mayst meet me again; that
is to say, that which is verily me: but it is like that this shape
which hath been striding on with thee daylong thou shalt not see any
more.

He looked on her wondering, for she seemed to grow goodly and stately
before his eyes. But even as he stretched forth his hand to take
hers, she turned about suddenly and fared into the wood out of his
sight, wending full as swiftly as might have been looked for. Then
he drew his sword and turned his face from the wood, and went down
toward the water.



CHAPTER XXVII. SIR ARTHUR COMETH TO THE HOUSE UNDER THE WOOD



So came Arthur into the meadows, and went eagerly but warily over the
dewy grass. And here and there a cow rose before him and went
bundling down the mead a little way, and the owls cried out from
behind him, and a fox barked from the thicket's edge. Then he found
himself on the stream-side, and he stayed and looked from side to
side, and lo! on the other side of the stream a little house that
looked familiar to him as a yeoman's dwelling in the builded lands,
and the thatch thereon shone under the moon and its windows were
yellow with candle-light; and so homely it seemed to him, that he
thrust his sword into the sheath and lightly crossed the brook, and
came to the door and laid his hand upon the latch and lifted it and
shoved the door, and all was open before him.

His eyes, coming from the night, dazzled with the bright light of the
candles, but he saw a fair woman rising up in her place, and he said:
May a traveller in the woodland be welcome here to-night, dealing
with all in all honour?

But the woman came toward him holding out her two hands, and ere he
could cry out that he knew her, she had thrown herself upon him, and
had cast her arms about him and was kissing his face, and murmuring:
O welcome indeed! welcome, welcome, and welcome! And so sore did his
past grief and his desire move him, that he was weak before her, and
held down his hands and let her do. And both those were breathless
with wonder and joy and longing; and they stood aloof a little in a
while and looked on each other, she with heaving bosom and streaming
eyes, and he with arms stretched forth and lips that strove with his
heart's words and might not utter them; but once more she gave
herself to him, and he took her in his arms strongly now, so that she
was frail and weak before him, and he laid his cheek to her cheek and
his lips to her lips, and kissed her eyes and her shoulders and
murmured over her. And then again they stood apart, and she took him
by the hand and led him to the settle, and set him down by her, and
herself by him; and a while they said nought. Then she spake as one
who had come to herself and was calm, though her heart was aflame for
love: Tell me, love, when thine hand was on the latch didst thou
look to find me here in this house? for thine hand it was that waked
me; I heard not thy foot before the threshold, for I was weary and
slumbering. Alas! that I lost the sound of thy feet! He spake, and
his voice sounded false unto him, as if it came from another's mouth:
I wot not; the woman that led me nearby seemed to bid me hope. Then
he said: Nay, the sooth is that I should have died if I had not
found thee here; I have been sick so long with hoping.

Again were they silent till she said: I would that I had heard thee
crossing the brook. But the wood-wife bade me look for thee no
earlier than to-morrow; else had I time enough; and I would have made
the house trim with the new green boughs, and dighted our bed with
rose blooms; and I would have done on me my shining gown that the
wood-wife gave me. For indeed she was but clad in her scanty smock
and nought else.

But he laid his head on her bosom and kissed her all about, and said:
Nay, my own love, it is well, it is better. And she murmured over
him: O friend, my dear, think not that I had will to hide me from
thee. All that is here of me is thine, and thine, and thine.

And she took his hand and they arose together, and she said: O
friend, I fled from thee once and left thee lonely of me because I
deemed need drave me to it; and I feared the strife of friends, and
confusion and tangle. Now if thou wilt avenge thee on me thou
mayest, for I am in thy power. Yet will I ask thee what need will
drive thee to leave me lonely?

He said: The need of death. But she said: Mayhappen we shall lie
together then, as here to-night we shall lie.



CHAPTER XXVIII. FAIR DAYS IN THE HOUSE OF LOVE



On the morrow it was sweet times betwixt those twain, and what was
hard and fierce of their love they seemed to have put behind them. A
dear joy it was to Birdalone that day to busy herself about the
housekeeping, and to provide whatsoever seemed now, or had seemed to
her in her early days, to be dainties of their meadow and woodland
husbandry, as cream and junkets and wood-fruit and honey, and fine
bread made for that very occasion.

Withal she was careful as a mother with a child that he should not
over-weary himself with the sun of the early summer, but rather to
follow the brook up into the wood and lie adown in the flecked shadow
and rest him wholly, as if there were nought for him to do but to
take in rest all that was done for his service, both by the earth and
by the hands and nimble feet of Birdalone. And as she was wilful in
other ways of her cherishing, so also in this, that for nought in
that daylight would she go anywise disarrayed, nay not so much as to
go barefoot, though he prayed her thereof sorely, and told her that
fairer and sweeter she was in her smock alone than in any other
raiment. For in the morning she went in her woodland green let down
to her heels, and when the day wore towards evening, and the wind
came cool from over the Great Water, then she did on her wonder-
raiment which the wood-wife had given her, and led Arthur over the
meadows here and there, and went gleaming by the side of the black-
clad man along the water's lip. And they looked forth on to Green
Eyot and Rock Eyot, and stood by the shallow bight where she had
bathed those times; and they went along to the dismal creek where the
Sending Boat was wont to lie, and where yet lay the scattered staves
of it; and then along the meadow-land they went from end to end,
resting oft on the flowery grass, till the dews began to fall and the
moon cast shadows on the greensward. Then home they fared to the
house; and again on the way must Birdalone feign for their disport
that the witch was come back again, and was awaiting her to play the
tyrant with her; and Arthur fell in with her game, and kissed her and
clipped her, and then drew his sword and said: By All-hallows I
shall smite off her head if she but lay a finger on thee.

So they played like two happy children till they came to the door of
the house, and Birdalone shoved it open, and they two looked in
together and saw nought worse therein save the strange shadows that
the moon cast from the settle on to the floor. Then Birdalone drew
in her love, and went about lighting the candles and quickening a
little cooking fire on the hearth, till the yellow light chased the
moon away from the bed of their desire.



CHAPTER XXIX. THOSE TWAIN WILL SEEK THE WISDOM OF THE WOOD-WIFE



Again next day was their life such as it had been the day before; and
as they lay in cool shadow of a great oak, Birdalone fell to telling
Arthur all the whole story of her dealings with the wood-wife, and
how that she had so loved her and holpen her, that through her love
and her help she had escaped the witch and her snares, who would have
turned her into a half-devil for the undoing of manfolk. And how
that the said wood-wife had never appeared to her but as an image and
double of herself, save on the time when she played the leech to him.
Then she told him how all had gone when the wood-wife had sought him
out for the fulfilment of their love, and of the dreadful day when
they had come upon him out of his wit and but little manlike.

Then she asked, would he, within the next day or two, that they
should go see the wood-wife together and thank her for her help, and
bring him within the ring of her love and guarding; and he yeasaid it
with a good will.

After this she would have him tell her of how things had gone with
him since that evil day when he had come home from the Castle of the
Quest and found her gone. So he told her somewhat, and of his dole
and misery, and his dealings with the foemen of Greenford; but yet
scantly, and as one compelled; and at last he said:

Dear love, since thou art cossetting me with all solace of caresses,
I pray thee remember my trouble and grief, how sore they were, and do
with me as with a sick man getting well, as I wot surely thou
wouldest do; and do thou that which is at this present the softest
and merriest to me, and that forsooth is, that thou shouldest talk
and tell, and I should hearken the sweetness of the music, and only
here and there put in a word to rest thee and make thy tale the
sweeter.

She laughed with love on him, and without more ado fell to telling
everything she might think of, concerning her days in the House of
Captivity, both when she was but a bairn, and when she was grown to
be a young woman; and long was she about the tale, nor was it all
done in one day; and a multitude of things she told him which are not
set down in this book.

In the evening when they were going again to and fro the meads, it
was other talk they fell on, to wit, of their fellows of the Quest,
both of Sir Hugh and the three lovely ladies: and now was Arthur
nought but kind when he spake of Atra, nor spake Birdalone otherwise;
but she said: I shall now say a hard word, yet must thou bear it, my
loveling, since we twain are now become one, and have but one joy
together and one sorrow. Deemest thou that Atra is yet alive? Sooth
it is, said Arthur, it may well be that I have slain her. And what
may we do by her if ever we fall in with her alive? said Birdalone.
I wot not, said Arthur; some would say that we have done penance for
our fault, both thou and I; and what other penance may we do, save
sundering from each other? And by God above I will not. By thine
head and thine hands I will not, said Birdalone.

So said they; but therewith their eyes told tales of the fair eve and
the lovely meadows, and the house, the shrine of the dear white bed
no less sweet to them than erst; but then presently Birdalone stayed
her love, and took her arms about him, and each felt the sweetness of
the other's body, and joy blossomed anew in their hearts. Then fell
Arthur to telling of the deeds and the kindness of Baudoin, whom
never again they should see on the earth; and they turned back home
to the house, and on the way spake Birdalone: This is what I would
we should do: whereas I have sought thee and thou me, and we have
found each other, whereas ye sought me when I went astray in the
Black Valley of the Greywethers, and before, when ye three sought
your own loves, now I would that we should seek our fellows and have
joy in them, and thole sorrow with them as in days gone by.

Spake Arthur: Dear is the rest with thee in this wilderness; yet
were it a deed of fame, and would bring about a day of joy, might we
find our friends again, and knit up the links of the fellowship once
more. But thou the wise and valiant! belike thou hast in thine head
some device whereby this might be set about.

Birdalone said: Simple is my device, to wit, that we ask one who is
wiser than I. Let us tarry not, but go to-morrow and see the wood-
wife and talk with her concerning it. Then she smiled upon him and
said: But when thou seest her, wilt thou be aghast if she come
before us in my shape of what I was five years agone, or six?

Nay, nay, he said, thou art not so terrible as that; not very far do
I run from thee now. And therewith they kissed and embraced, and so
entered the House of Love.



CHAPTER XXX. THEY HAVE SPEECH WITH HABUNDIA CONCERNING THE GREEN
KNIGHT AND HIS FELLOWS



When the morrow was they arose and went their ways toward the wood,
and Birdalone in her hunter's coat, quiver at back and bow in hand.
They came to the Oak of Tryst, and Birdalone was at point to call on
the wood-wife by the burning of a hair of hers, when she came lightly
from out the thicket, clad as Birdalone, and her very image. She
stood before them with a glad countenance, and said: Welcome to the
seekers and finders. But Arthur stepped forth and knelt before her,
and took her right hand and kissed it, and said: Here I swear
allegiance to thee, O Lady of the Woods, to do thy will in all
things, and give thee thanks from my heart more than my tongue can
say.

Quoth the wood-wife: I take thine allegiance, fair young man, and
mine help shalt thou have henceforward. Then she smiled and her eyes
danced for merriment, and she said: Yet thy thanks meseemeth for
this while are more due to the wise carline who brought thee through
the woods two days ago, and only left thee when the way was easy and
clear to thee.

Lady, said Arthur, I know now how great is thy might, and that thou
canst take more shapes than this only; and humbly I thank thee that
for us thou hast taken the shape that I love the best of all on the
earth.

Said the wood-wife: Stand up, Black Squire, and consider a little
what thou wouldst have me do for thee, while I have speech with mine
image yonder. And therewith she came up to Birdalone, and drew her a
little apart, and fell to stroking her cheeks and patting her hands
and diversely caressing her, and she said to her: How now, my child,
have I done for thee what I promised, and art thou wholly happy now?
O yea, said Birdalone; if nought else befell us in this life but to
dwell together betwixt the woodland and the water, and to see thee
oft, full happy should we be.

Nevertheless, said Habundia, art thou not come hither to ask somewhat
of me, that ye may be happier? So it is, wise mother, said
Birdalone; grudge not against me therefor, for more than one thing
drives me thereto. I will not grudge, said the wood-wife; but now I
will ask thy mate if he has thought what it is that he will have of
me. And she turned to Arthur, who came forth and said: Lady, I have
heard thee, and herein would we have thee help us: There were erst
six fellows of us, three caries and three queans, to whom was added
this sweetling here; but one of them, to wit the Golden Knight, was
slain, and for the rest . . . Yea, I know, said the wood-wife; my
child here hath told me all; and now ye wot not where they are or if
they be yet alive, all or any of them. Now is it not so that ye
would seek these friends, if it were but to greet them but once, and
that ye would ask of the wise wood-wife help to find them? Is there
any more of the tale? Nay, lady, said Arthur.

Said she: Well then, that help shall ye have, were it but for the
sake of that little Viridis whereof my child hath told me. Wherefore
abide tidings of me for a fourteen days, and seek not to me ere then;
and meantime fear not, nor doubt me, for many messengers I have, and
ever may I do somewhat if the end of the tale is to be told in these
woodlands: and I deem these friends will not be hard to draw hither,
for it is most like that they be thinking of you and longing for you,
as ye for them. And now I will depart on my business, which is
yours, and do ye be happy to-day in the woodland, and to-morrow in
the meadows and by the water; and let no trouble weigh down your
happy days.

Therewith she flitted away from them, when she had kissed them both.
But when she was gone they fared away together deep into the wood,
and were exceeding merry disporting them, and on their return they
gat them venison for their meat, and so came back to the House of
Love when the moon was up and shining brightly.



CHAPTER XXXI. HABUNDIA COMETH WITH TIDINGS OF THOSE DEAR FRIENDS



Wore the days thenceforth merrily; and one day it was delight in the
wide meads, and another they went a long way west along the water-
side, and so into another meadow-plain, smaller than their home-
plain, which Birdalone had never erst come into; and three eyots lay
off it, green and tree-beset, whereto they swam out together. Then
they went into the wood thereby in the heat of the afternoon, and so
wore the day, that they deemed themselves belated, and lay there
under a thorn-bush the night through.

Another day Birdalone took her mate over on to Green Eyot and Rock
Eyot, and showed him all the places she was used to haunt. And they
had their fishing-gear with them, and angled off the eyots a good
part of the day, and had good catch, and swam back therewith merrily.
And Birdalone laughed, and said that it seemed to her as if once
again she were ransoming her skin of the witch-wife by that noble
catch.

Divers times also they fared into the wood, and thrice they lay out
the night there in some woodlawn where was water; and on one of these
times it happed that Arthur awoke in the grey dawn, and lay open-eyed
but not moving for a little; and therewith he deemed he saw the gleam
of war-gear in the thicket. So he kept as still as he might, but gat
his sword out of its sheath without noise, and then leapt up
suddenly, and sprang thitherward whereas he had seen that token, and
again saw armour gleam and heard some man crashing through the
underwood, for all was gone in one moment. So he woke up Birdalone,
and they bended their bows both of them, and searched the thicket
thereabouts heedfully, arrow on string, but found nought fiercer than
a great sow and her farrow. So came the full day, and they gat them
back to their meadows and their house; but thereafter were they
warier in going about the woodland.

In all joyance then wore the days till the fifteenth, and in the
morning early they went their ways to the Oak of Tryst, and had no
need to call Habundia to them, for presently she came forth out of
the thicket, with her gown gathered up into her girdle and bow in
hand. But she cast it down and ran up to Birdalone, and kissed her
and clipped her, and then she took a hand of Arthur and a hand of
Birdalone, and held them both and said: My child, and thou dear
knight, have ye still a longing to fall in with those friends of
yours, and to run all risk of whatsoever contention and strife there
may be betwixt you thereafter? Yea, certes, said Arthur; and even so
said Birdalone. Well is that then, said the wood-wife; but now and
for this time, ere I help you, I shall put a price upon my help, and
this is the price, that ye swear to me never wholly to sunder from
me; that once in the year at least, as long as ye be alive and
wayworthy, ye come into the Forest of Evilshaw, and summon me by the
burning of a hair of mine, that we may meet and be merry for a while,
and part with the hope of meeting once more at least. And if ye will
not pay the price, go in peace, and ye shall yet have my help in all
other matters that may seem good unto you, but not in this of joining
your fellowship together. How sayest thou, Birdalone, my child? How
sayest thou, Black Squire, whom, as meseemeth, I have delivered from
a fate worse than death, and have brought out of wretchedness into
bliss?

Spake Birdalone: Had I dared, I would have bidden thee to swear to
me even such an oath, to wit, that thou wouldst never wholly sunder
thee from me. How then may I not swear this that thou biddest me,
and that with all joy and trustiness?

Spake Arthur: Lady, had I no will to swear oath for thy sake, yet
with a good will would I swear it for my true-love's sake who loveth
thee. Yet verily of mine own will would I swear it joyfully, were it
for nought else save to pleasure thee, who hast done so kindly by me,
and hath given me back my manhood and my love, which else I had
miserably lost.

Spake the wood-wife: It is well again. Join hands then, and swear
as I have bidden you by the love ye bear each other.

Even so they did, and then the wood-wife kissed them both and said:
Now do I deem you earth's very children and mine, and this desire of
yours is good, and it shall be done if I may bring it about; yet
therein the valiance and wisdom of you both may well be tried. For
this have I found out by my messengers and others, that your friends
are alive, all of them; and they have thought of you in their inmost
hearts, and have long determined that they must needs go seek you if
they are to live lives happy and worthy. Furthermore, their quest
hath drawn them hither to Evilshaw  nor say I that I have been
nothing therein , and they are even now in the wood. But ye shall
know that peril encompasses them; for they fare but a few, and of
those few be there two traitors who are minded to deliver them to the
men of the Red Company, unto whom three women as fair as your she-
friends were a prize indeed. Wherefore the Red Folk are dogging
them, and will fall upon them when they find the occasion. But I
shall see to it that the occasion shall be in time and place where
they shall not be unholpen. Now what ye have to do for your parts,
is to waylay the waylayers, and keep watch and ward anigh the road
they must needs take, and to fall on when need is. But this again I
shall see to, that your onset fail not.

But now ye may say: Since thou art mighty, why shouldst not thou
thyself take our friends out of the hands of these accursed, as thou
couldst well do, and we to take no part therein? My friends, this
might indeed well be; but thou, Birdalone, hast told me the whole
tale, and how that there be wrongs to be forgiven which cannot be
made right, and past kindness to be quickened again, and coldness to
be kindled into love, and estrangement into familiar friendship; and
meseems that the sight of your bodies and your hands made manifest to
the eyes of them may do somewhat herein. Yet if otherwise ye think,
then so let it be, and go ye back to the House under the Wood, and in
three days' time I will bring you your friends all safe and sound.

Now they both said that they would not for aught that they should
have no hand in the deliverance of them; so the wood-wife said: Come
with me, and I shall lead you to the place of your ambush.

Then all they went on together, and fared a long way west, and toward
the place where erst they two had found Arthur; and at last, two
hours before sunset, they came to where was a glade or way between
the thickets, which was as it were a little beaten by the goings of
man-folk. And the wood-wife did them to wit, that the evil folk
aforesaid had so used it and beaten it, that it might just look as if
folk were wont to pass that way, whereas it was not very far from
their chiefest haunt and stronghold. A little on the north side of
this half-blind way, and some ten yards through the thicket, the
ground fell away into a little dale, the bottom whereof was plain and
well grassed, and watered by a brook.

Thither the wood-wife brought the twain; and when they all stood
together on the brook-side, she said to them: Dear friends, this is
your woodland house for this time, and I rede you go not forth of it,
lest ye happen upon any of those evil men; for nought have ye to fear
from any save them. Here amidst these big stones, which make, see
ye, as it were a cavern, have I stowed victual for you; and armour
therewithal, because, though both of you are in a manner armed, yet
who knoweth where a shaft drawn at a venture may reach.

And from the said stones she drew forth two very fair armours, helm
and hauberk, and leg and arm wards; and they were all of green, and
shone but little, but were fashioned as no smith of man-folk could
have done the like.

This is thine, Sir Arthur, said the wood-wife, and thou wilt wear it
like as it were silk; and this thine, my child, and thou art strong
enough to bear such light gear. And I charge you both to do on this
gear presently, nor do it off till ye have achieved the adventure.
And now this is the last word: here is a horn of oliphant which thou
shalt wear about thy neck, Birdalone; and if thou be sore bestead, or
thy heart faileth thee, blow in it, yet not before the onfall; and
then, whether thou blow much or little, thou shalt be well holpen.

Now be not downcast if nought befall to-night or to-morrow, or even
the day after; but if the third day be tidingless, then at sunset
burn a hair of my head, Birdalone, and I will come to you. And now
farewell! for I have yet to do in this matter.

With that she kissed Birdalone fondly and embraced Arthur, and went
her way; and those twain abode in the dale, and slept and watched by
turns, and all was tidingless till the morrow's dawn; neither was
there aught to tell of on that day and the night that ended it.



CHAPTER XXXII. OF THE FIGHT IN THE FOREST AND THE RESCUE OF THOSE
FRIENDS FROM THE MEN OF THE RED COMPANY



Light was growing on the dawn of the next day, and the colours of
things could be seen, when Birdalone, who was holding this last watch
of the night, stood still and hearkened, deeming that she could hear
some noise that was neither the morning wind in the tree-boughs nor
the going of the wild things anear them in the wood.

So she did off her helm to hear the better, and stood thus a little;
then she turned about and stooped down to Arthur, who was yet
sleeping, and put forth a hand to rouse him. But or ever she touched
him, broke forth a sound of big and rough voices and laughter, and
amidst it two shrieks as of women.

Arthur heard it, and was on his feet in a moment, and helmed, and he
caught up his bended bow and cast on the quiver  for Birdalone was
already weaponed , and without more words they went forth swiftly up
the bank and through the thicket till they were looking on the half-
blind way, but under cover, and there was nothing before them as yet.

There they stayed and hearkened keenly. There were no more shrieks
of women, nor heard they any weapon clash, but the talking and
laughter of men went on; and at last they heard a huge and grim whoop
of many men together; and then thereafter was less sound of talking,
but came the jingle as of arms and harness; and Arthur whispered in
Birdalone's ear: Stand close! they have gotten to horse, and will be
coming our way. Nock an arrow. And even so did he.

Therewith they heard clearly the riding of men, and in less than five
minutes' space they saw three big weaponed men riding together, clad
in red surcoats, and they were so nigh that they heard the words of
their speech. One said to the other: How long shall the knight hold
out, think ye? Oh, a week maybe, said the other. Meseems it was
scathe that we stayed not a while to pine him, said the first man.
Nay, said the second, we be over-heavy laden with bed-gear to tarry.
And they all laughed thereat, and so went on out of hearing.

But then came four on together, whereof one, a gaunt, oldish man, was
saying: It is not so much how long we shall be getting there, but
what shall betide when we get there. For this is not like lifting a
herd of neat, whereof sharing is easy, but with this naked-skinned,
two-legged cattle, which forsooth ye can eat and yet have, there may
well be strife over the sharing. And look to it if it hath not begun
already: we must needs dismount three of our best men that these
white-skinned bitches forsooth may each have a horse to herself, or
else would they be fighting as to which should have a damsel of them
before him on the saddle: curse the fools!

Laughed out they who were about him, and one young man cast a jeer at
him the meaning whereof they might not catch, and again they laughed;
and that deal passed on. And next came a bigger rout, a half score
or so, and they also laughing and jeering; but amidst them, plain to
see riding a-straddle, their ankles twisted together under the
horses' bellies, their hands bound behind them, first Atra, black-
clad as erst; then Aurea, in a gown of wheat-colour; then Viridis,
green-clad. Atra rode upright, and looking straight before her;
Aurea hung her head all she might, and her long red hair fell about
her face; but Viridis had swooned, and was held up in the saddle by
one of the caitiffs on each side of her. They were but little
disarrayed, save that some felon had torn the bosom of Viridis' gown,
and dragged down the cloth so that her left shoulder was bare.

Arthur looked, and drew at the caitiff who went afoot beside Atra,
and Birdalone at him who went by Viridis, for she wotted whitherward
Arthur's shaft would be turned. The loose of the two bows made but
one sound; both men fell stark dead, and the others huddled together
a moment, and then ran toward the thicket on either hand, and they
who ran north, two of them saw not Arthur, because of his green
armour, ere they felt the death which lay in his sword. And then he
brake out amidst them, and there were three of them on him, yet for
no long while, whereas their weapons bit not on the armour of the
Faery, and his woodland blade sheared leather and ring-mail to the
flesh and the bone: mighty were his strokes, and presently all three
were wallowing on the earth.

Even therewith the seven who had passed on had turned back and were
come on him a-horse-back; and hard had it gone with him, despite of
his might and his valour and the trustiness of Habundia's mail. But
meanwhile Birdalone had run to Viridis, who had fallen a dead weight
aside of her horse, and lay half hanging by the bonds of her ankles.
Birdalone swiftly cut the cords both of her feet and her hands, and
drew her off her horse as best she might, and laid her down on the
grass; and then ran to Arthur sword aloft, just as his new battle was
at point to begin.

But as she ran it came into her mind in a twinkling that her sword
would be but weak, and the horn hung about her neck. Then she stayed
her feet, and set the horn to her lips and blew; and the oliphant
gave forth a long singing note which was strange to hear. But while
it was yet at her lips one of the caitiffs was upon her, and he cried
out: Hah the witch, the accursed green witch! and fetched her a
great stroke from his saddle, and smote her on the helm; and though
his sword bit not on that good head-burg, she fell to the ground
unwitting.

Yet was not the wood-wife's promise unavailing, for even while the
voice of the horn was in the air, the way and thickets were alive
with men-at-arms, green-clad as those twain, who straightway fell on
the caitiffs, and with Arthur to help, left not one of them alive.
Then went some to Viridis, and raised her up, and so dealt with her
that she came to herself again; and the like they did by Birdalone,
and she stood, and looked about confusedly, but yet saw this, that
they had gotten the victory. Some went withal to Aurea, and cut her
bonds and took her off her horse and set her on the ground; and she
was all bewildered, and knew not where she was.

But Arthur, when he saw Birdalone on her feet, and unhurt by seeming,
went to Atra, and cut her bonds and loosed her, and set her on the
earth, all without a word, and then stood before her shyly. Came the
colour back into her face therewith, and she flushed red, for she
knew him despite his outlandish green war-harness, and she reached
out her hand to him, and he knelt before her and took her hand and
kissed it. But she bent over him till her face was anigh his, and he
lifted up his face and kissed her mouth. And she drew aback a
little, but yet looked on him earnestly, and said: Thou hast saved
my life, not from death indeed, but from a loathsome hell; I may well
thank thee for that. And O, if my thanks might be fruitful to thee!
And her bosom heaved, and the sobs came, and the tears began to run
down her cheeks. And he hung his head before her. But in a while
she left weeping, and turned about her face and looked round the
field of deed; and she said: Who is yonder slim green warrior who
hath even now knelt down by Viridis? Is it not a woman? Arthur
reddened: Yea, said he; it is Birdalone. Thy love? she said. He
said swiftly: Yea, and thy friend, and this time thy deliverer. So
it is, she said. It is five years since I beheld her. My heart
yearns for her; I shall rejoice at the meeting of us.

She was silent, and he also a while; then she said: But why tarry we
here in idle talk when he is yet bound, and in torment of body and
soul; he the valiant, and the kind and the dear brother? Come, tarry
for no question. And she stepped out swiftly along the green road
going westward, and Arthur beside her; and as they went by Viridis,
lo! Aurea had wandered unto them, and now was Birdalone unhelmed and
kissing and comforting her. Then cried out Atra: Keep up thine
heart, Viridis! for now we go to fetch thee thy man safe and sound.

So they went but a little way on the green road ere they came to Sir
Hugh bound hard and fast to a tree-bole, and he naked in his shirt,
and hard by lay the bodies of two stout carles with their throats
cut; for these honest men and the two felons who had betrayed them
were all the following wherewith the Green Knight had entered
Evilshaw. And as it fell, the traitors had been set to watch while
the others slept; and sleeping the caitiffs found them, and slew the
said men-at-arms at once, but bound Hugh to a tree that he might be
the longer a-dying; since none looked for any but their own folk to
pass by that way. All this they heard afterwards of Hugh.

But now the said Hugh heard men going, and he opened his eyes, and
saw Atra and a man-at-arms with her; and he cried out: Hah, what is
this now, sister? a rescue? Yea, she said, and look thou on the face
of the rescuer; and there is another hard by, and she is a woman.

Therewith was Arthur on him and cutting his bonds, and when he was
loose they fell into each other's arms, and Hugh spake: Now then at
last doth life begin for me as I willed it! And hast thou my sweet
she-fellow, Birdalone, with thee? Yea, said Arthur. How good is
that! said Hugh. And yet, if it might but be that Baudoin were yet
alive for us to seek! Then he laughed and said: These be but sorry
garments wherewith to wend along with dear and fair ladies, brother!
Nay, said Arthur, that may soon be amended, for yonder, where sword
met sword, lieth raiment abundantly on the grass. Fie on it! said
Hugh, laughing; shall I do on me the raiment of those lousy traitors?
Not I, by the rood! Thou must seek further for my array, dear lad!
So they all laughed, and were glad to laugh together. But Atra said:
It is easier even than that, for thine own fair garments and weapons
shall we find if we seek them. Sooth to say there was none left to
bear them off, save it were this man, or Birdalone his mate.

With that word she looked kindly on Arthur, and again they laughed
all three; though forsooth they were well-nigh weeping-ripe; one for
joy, and that was Hugh; one for memory of the days gone by; and one
for the bitterness of love that should never be rewarded; albeit dear
even unto her was the meeting of friends and the glory of forgiveness
and the end of enmity.



CHAPTER XXXIII. VIRIDIS TELLETH THE TALE OF THEIR SEEKING



Now came they back to where were the three others, and Viridis was
quite come to herself and ran to meet her man, and he took her in his
arms and caressed her sweetly; and then he turned to Birdalone, and
spared no sign of friendly love to her; and Arthur, for his part, did
so much for Aurea and Viridis. No long tale there was between them
for that while, for they would busk them to be gone. But first they
dug a grave for those two poor men who had been slain by the felons,
and prayed for them. As for the caitiffs who lay slain there, one
score and two of them, they left them for the wolves to devour, and
the tearing of the kites and crows; nor meddled they with any of
their gear or weapons. But they speedily found Hugh's raiment, and
his pouch, wherein was money good store; and they found also rings
and ouches and girdles, which had been torn from the damsels in the
first rage of their taking.

First though, when they had gathered together such horses as they
needed, and let the rest run wild, Birdalone brought her she-friends
down into the dale, and did them to bathe in a pool of the stream,
and tended them as if she were their tire-woman, so that they were
mightily refreshed; and she made garlands for them of the woodland
flowers, as eglantine and honeysuckle; and herself, she bathed her,
and did not on her battle-gear again, but clad her body in her
woman's array.

Then she brought forth victual and wine from Habundia's store, and
set it out on the stream-side; and thereafter she went up the bent to
the green way and fetched down Hugh and Arthur, and brought them to
the ladies, and bade them note how trim and lovely they were gotten
again, and again it could scarce be but that kisses and caresses were
toward; and in all content and love they took their breakfast, though
bitter-sweet unto Atra had been the holding of her hand by Arthur and
the kissing of her cheek, albeit not for worlds had she foregone it.

So there they abode merrily for some three hours, whereas the day was
yet young; and they asked and told each other much, so that the whole
tale, both of the seekers from the world and of the seekers from the
water-side, came out little by little. Now of the last ye have heard
what there is to tell, but for the others Viridis took up the tale,
as erst she did with the dealings of the Knights of the Quest in the
Isle of Increase Unsought; and it seemed by her tale that Hugh and
the ladies, though they were living happily and prosperously in the
land of the Green Mountains, wherein Hugh had wealth enow, yet the
thought both of Arthur and of Birdalone would not out of their minds,
and often it was that they thought of them, not as friends think of
friends of whom they are content to know that they are yet alive and
most-like thriving, but as friends think of friends whose absence
cuts a shard out of their lives, so that they long to see them day by
day. Wherefore it came to this at last, after much talk hereof, that
Hugh left his possessions and his children  for he had two women-
bairns born of Viridis  in the keeping of trusty folk, and took with
him Viridis his wife, and Aurea and Atra, and they set out to seek
those twain the world over till they should find them. And first by
the rede of Atra they fared to Greenford, and there tarried a month,
and sought tidings of many, and heard a word here and there whereby
they deemed that Birdalone had passed therethrough some little time
before. So they went thence to the Castle of the Quest, and found it
in such plight as ye have heard, and it went sore to their hearts to
behold it and to be there. But therewithal they happed upon Leonard
the priest, and he was rejoiced beyond measure to see them, and told
them all that ye have heard concerning Birdalone's coming thither and
departing thence; and he told them therewith about those hauntings
and sendings in the hall of the castle, and that they came to an end
the very day that Birdalone departed thence in the Sending Boat. Yet
for the last three days there had been visions therein; but being
questioned he was loth to tell thereof, so they forbore him a while.

At these tidings they were sore moved, and they talked the matter
over betwixt themselves  and Leonard also was in their redes , and
they must needs deem that either Birdalone was cast away, or that she
had come to her old dwelling, the House under the Wood, and belike
had fallen into the hands of the witch once more, and thereat were
they sore downcast; and yet somewhat it was, that they had heard sure
tidings of her; though meanwhile of Arthur had they heard nought.

While they talked this over, Atra, who had been somewhat silent,
spake and said: Here are we brought to a stop with the first tidings
which we have heard, whereas we know no manner of wending the Great
Water. This seemeth evil, but let us not be cast down, or die
redeless. Ye have heard of what sayeth Sir Leonard of these
hauntings in the hall, and how that they have come back again,
wherefore why should we not sleep in the hall this night, those of us
at least who have not so much fear as not to note them well, to see
if we may draw any avail from them? How say ye? For my part I will
try the adventure, whatever may come of it.

Now they all yeasaid it, though Aurea was somewhat timorous, albeit
she would not be parted from the others; so when night came there
they made their beds and lay down; and the end of it was, that a
little before midnight Atra waked the others, and did them to wit
that by her deeming something was toward; and presently they were all
four as wide awake as ever they were in their lives; and next,
without any sound that was strange, there came the image of a woman
on to the dais, clad in green like to an huntress of ancient days,
her feet sandalled, her skirts gathered up into her girdle, so that
her legs were naked; she had a quiver at her back, and a great bow in
her hand.

Now to all of them save Atra this appearance seemed to be the image
of Birdalone; but she told her fellows afterwards, that to her it
seemed not to be altogether Birdalone, but rather some other one most
like unto her, as it were her twin-sister.

Gazed the image kindly and sweetly on them, so that they beheld it
without fear; and it seemed to them that it gave forth speech; yet
not so much that the sound of words was in the air about and smote
their ears, as that the sense of words reached the minds of them.
And this was the tale of it: Ye, who are seeking the lost, have done
well to come hither, and now shall ye do well to wend the straightest
way to the dwelling of the wildwood, and that is by way of the
western verge of Evilshaw the forest. Greenford is on the way. Way-
leaders ye shall get; be wise, yet not prudent, and take them, though
they be evil, and your luck may well avail.

Therewith the image vanished away as it had come, and Leonard, who
with the others took the appearance for an image of Birdalone, said
that it was such as he had seen it the three last days. So they lay
not down again, but departed for Greenford without tarrying, and rode
the other end of the short night through till they came to Greenford.
But Leonard would not with them; and Hugh behight him, if he lived
and did well, to come back somehow to the Castle of the Quest, and so
redo it that it should be no longer desolate. So to Greenford they
came, and spared not to do folk to wit that they would ride a
pilgrimage in Evilshaw, and were fain of way-leaders; and there they
dwelt a day or two, and many would let them of that journey, which,
said they, was rather deadly than perilous only. But on the third
day came to Sir Hugh two stout carles well weaponed, who said that
they knew well all the ways that led to Evilshaw, and the ways that
went therethrough, and they offered themselves for a wage to Sir
Hugh. Now these said carles were not over fair of favour, but seemed
somewhat of ribalds, nor would Sir Hugh have taken them to service in
his house at home; but he called to mind that it were more prudence
than wisdom to spoil his journey and lose the occasion of finding his
dear friends for the hasty judgment of a man's face and demeanour,
wherefore he waged these two men, and they set out for the western
edges of Evilshaw.

Many towns and thorps they passed through, and everywhere, when men
knew whither they were bound, they letted them all they might in
words; but little heed they paid thereto, whereas they were all fixed
in their rede that nought was to be done save the finding of their
friends, and that their life-days were spoiled if they found them
not. And moreover, each one of them, but especially Atra and
Viridis, had dreams of the night from time to time, wherein they
seemed to see the green-clad woman, were she Birdalone or another,
beckoning and bidding them to enter the Wood of Evilshaw.

As to those two way-leaders withal, whether it were that they got
used to their faces, or that their ways and manners were nought
uncourteous or fierce, they doubted them less and less as time wore;
all save Viridis, whose flesh crept when they drew anigh her, as will
betide one who comes across an evil-looking creeping thing. As for
Atra, she now began to heed little the things about her, as if her
heart were wholly set on the end of the journey.

But now at last were they come so far that they had no choice but to
use the said way-leaders, for they were gotten to the edge of
Evilshaw. So they entered it, and those two led them by half-blind
ways and paths amongst the thickets, and fumbled never with the road.

Five days they went thus, and on the fifth evening they lay down to
sleep in the wood, and it was the turn of those two hirelings to keep
watch and ward, and they woke not the next morn save with the hands
of the Red Felons at their throats, so that Hugh was bound, and his
two trusty men who came with him from the Green Mountains were slain
before a stroke might be struck.

This was the end of Viridis' tale, save that she told how that it was
she that had uttered those two shrieks which Arthur and Birdalone had
heard from the thicket; and that she had so done when the two false
way-leaders laid hold of her to drag her away from her man, who stood
there before her bound to a tree that he might perish there, whereon
the two caitiffs had smitten her into unwit that they might have no
more of her cries.

Now when all this had been told, and they had abided awhile in the
fair little dale, and had said many kind endearing words of
friendship, they went up on the green way again, and took what of the
horses they needed and trussed their goods thereon  and Birdalone
would not leave that brave armour which Habundia had given her , and
they dight others for their home-riding, and the rest they turned
loose into the woods, and so rode their ways, Birdalone going ever
with Atra, and Arthur by Aurea; but Viridis must needs have Hugh
within reach of her hand all the way.

Good speed they made, so that ere the night had fallen on them,
though the sun was set, they 'had come to the House under the Wood;
and there again was joy and wondering of the new-comers, and merry
feasting on such simple victuals as were there, and good-night and
rest in all contentment in the house where erst had Birdalone tholed
so many griefs and fears.


Here ends the Sixth Part of the Water of the Wondrous Isles, which is
called The Days of Absence, and begins the Seventh Part, which is
called The Days of Returning.




THE SEVENTH PART: THE DAYS OF RETURNING




CHAPTER I. SIR HUGH ASKETH BIRDALONE WHERE SHE WOULD HAVE THE ABODE
OF THEIR FELLOWSHIP TO BE



On the next day, they arose and were glad, and it was to them as if
the sun of the early summer had arisen for nought save to shine on
their happy day. And they went about from place to place whereas
tidings had befallen Birdalone; and she served them one and all as if
she were their handmaid, and they loved her and caressed her, and had
been fain to do all her will did they but know it.

In this wise wore day after day till June began to wane, and then on
a time came Hugh unto Birdalone, and spake unto her and said: All we
have been talking together, and I am sent to ask thee what is in thy
mind as to abiding here or going elsewhither. For now that we be
come together again, not for all the kingdoms of the world would we
sunder again; and above all, none of us would leave thee, O my
sister. But if thou wilt come with me to our land under the Green
Mountains, there is for thee a pleasant place and a fair dwelling,
and honour from all folk, and our love that shall never leave thee;
and I, and Arthur my brother, we shall win fame together amongst the
knighthood, and thou shalt be proud and glad both of him and of me.

She said: And if I may not go with thee thither, what other way is
there to escape the sundering? Said Hugh: This, that thou choose in
the world what land liketh thee for a dwelling-place, and we will go
with thee and leave thee never, and thou shalt be our lady and queen.
Then he laughed and said: Yet, our lady, I have left behind me under
the Green Mountains certain things which I love, as two fair women-
children, and a squire or two whose fathers served my fathers, and
whose children I would should serve my children. And moreover I have
left there certain matters of avail, my wealth and livelihood to wit.
Wilt thou begrudge it if I must needs go fetch these, and bring them
to the land where thou dwellest, through whatever peril we may have
to face?

Dear art thou, she said, and my very friend, but tell me: how sorry
wouldst thou be to leave thine own land and follow after me for the
sake of one who is neither thine own true love nor of thy kindred?
Said he: Not so sorry that I should grudge against thee thereafter.
Moreover if that much of sorrow came to me, I should deem it not ill,
lest I grow so over-happy that the luck rise up against me and undo
me.

She said, smiling on him kindly: Meseems that I am over-happy,
whereas I have such dear cherishing of noble friends. But now I will
tell thee all, and maybe thou wilt love me the less for the telling.
In these woods here, and lady and mistress of them, dwelleth one who
is not of the race of Adam. And she helped and cherished me and gave
me wisdom when I was tormented and accursed, and she it was who saved
me from the evil witch, and gave me the good hap to meet your loves
and to fetch you to their helping; and twice hath she saved me from
mortal peril otherwise. And she hath found me my love, thy brother
Arthur, and delivered him from unwit and wanhope; and she it is who
drew all you hither unto us, and who delivered you from the felons
who had mastered you. And I have sworn unto her that I would never
wholly sunder me from her; and how shall I break mine oath and grieve
her, even had I the will thereto, as God wot I have not? And she
wept therewith.

But Hugh kissed her and said: Birdalone, my dear, why weepest thou?
Didst thou not hear my word, that thy people should be my people, and
thy land my land, and that whither thou goest I will go? Dost thou
not trow me then? Or how deemest thou I may tear thy friend Viridis
from thee, when she hath just found thee? But tell me, hast thou in
thy mind any dwelling-place other than this?

Yea, she said: I may not depart very far from this forest of
Evilshaw lest I grieve my wisdom-mother overmuch. But if one go
westward through the wood, he shall happen at last, when he cometh
forth of it, on a good town hight Utterhay, which lieth on the very
edge thereof. There was I born, and there also I look to find three
dear and trusty friends to whom I owe return of their much kindness.
It is a noble town in a pleasant land, and thou and my lord Arthur
may well win both honour and worship and lordship there. And wholly
I trust in thy word that thou wilt not grudge against me for dragging
thee thither.

Therewith she gave him her hand, smiling on him, though there was yet
trouble in her face. But he took the hand and held it, and laughed
merrily and said: Lo now! how good it is for friends to take counsel
together! What better may we do than go with thee thither? And how
greatly will Viridis rejoice when she heareth of this. Now will I go
and tell her and the others.

Go then, dear lad, she said; but as to the matter of thy fetching thy
children and livelihood hither, that may be not so hard nor so
perilous as thou deemest; and thou shalt go about it whenso thou
wilt, and the sooner the better, and we shall abide thee here as long
as need may be. And therewith he went his ways to tell Viridis and
the others of this rede which they had come to between them.



CHAPTER II. BIRDALONE TAKETH COUNSEL WITH HER WOOD-MOTHER CONCERNING
THE MATTER OF SIR HUGH



On that same day went Birdalone to the Oak of Tryst and called her
wood-mother to her, and she came glad and smiling, and kissed and
embraced Birdalone, and said unto her: Now I see that thou art well
content with this last matter I have done for thee, whereas thou art
come to crave a new gift of me. How knowest thou that? said
Birdalone, laughing. Said Habundia:

Wouldst thou have come to me so soon otherwise from out of all that
happiness? I have come to tell thee of my rede, said Birdalone, and
to ask thee if thou art like-minded with me thereon. Said the wood-
wife: And what is thy rede, my child? Wood-mother, said Birdalone,
we deem that it were good for us all to go down into Utterhay where I
was born, and to take up our abode therein.

Said the wood-wife: This rede I praise, and even so would I have
counselled you to do; but I abided to see if it should come from out
of thy breast, and now even so it hath done; wherefore I understand
thy wisdom and rejoice in thee. And now crave thy boon, my child,
and thou shalt have it without fail.

Yea, said Birdalone, that will I, and the more that it is a simple
one and easy for thee to do. Thou knowest that Hugh the Green Knight
hath come with my she-friends seeking us all the way from under the
Green Mountains, and he hath left there goods that he needs must have
and folk whom he loves; and now he would go back thither, and fetch
all that away hither, and see to his matters as soon as may be. And
I would have thee counsel us what to do, whether to build a barque,
as perchance we may get it done, and sail the lake therein to the
Castle of the Quest or thereabout, and thence to ride to his land; or
else to take thy guidance and safe-conduct through the wood, and to
bring his folk back the same way.

Said the wood-wife: As to the way by water, I may help you little
therein, and meseemeth that way be many traps and wiles and many
perils. Wherefore I bid you try it not, but let the Green Knight
come up hither to this tree to-morrow before noon, all horsed and
armed and arrayed, and there shall he find three men armed in green
gear, horsed well, and leading two sumpter-beasts with them; and they
shall be his until he giveth them back unto me. But if he doubteth
any thing betwixt the wood's end and under the Green Mountains, let
him wage what folk he will besides, for these my men will have money
enough of his with them. But by no means let him send them away till
he hath done with the wood altogether, both betwixt here and the
western dwelt-land, and here and Utterhay, save thou be with him.
But while these be with him, both he and whatsoever money he bringeth
shall be sure from all peril whiles they be in the wood. Now, my
child, was not this the boon thou camest up hither to ask of me?

Yea verily, said Birdalone; yet also I came up hither to praise thee
and thank thee and love thee. And she threw herself into Habundia's
arms and kissed and caressed her, and Habundia her in like wise.

Spake the wood-wife: Thou art the beloved child of my wisdom; and
now I see of thee that thou wilt be faithful and true and loving unto
me unto the end. And I think I can see that thou and thy man shall
do well and happily in Utterhay; and the Green Knight also and thy
she-friends. And whatsoever thou wilt of me that I may do for thee
or thy friends, ask it freely, and freely shalt thou have it. But
this I will bid thee, that the while the Green Knight shall be gone
about his matter, thou shalt come hither to me often; and thy friends
also thou shalt bring to me, that I may see them and talk to them and
love them. And specially shalt thou bid Atra unto me; for meseems
she is so wise already that I may learn her more wisdom, and put that
into her heart which may solace her and make her to cease from
fretting her own heart, and from grief and longing overmuch. And I
were fain to reward her in that she hath forborne to grudge against
thee and to bear thee enmity. For I know, my child, not from mine
own heart, but from the wisdom I have learned, how hardly the
children of Adam may bear to have that which they love taken away
from them by another, even if they themselves might in the long last
have wearied of it and cast it away their own selves. Go now, my
child, and do thy friend to wit what I will do for him.

Therewith they parted, and Birdalone fared home to the house, and
found the fellowship of them all sitting by the brookside, and
talking sweetly together in all joy and hope of what their life
should be in the new land whereto Birdalone would lead them.
Straightway then she told them of Hugh and his journey, and how well
he should be guarded in the wood both coming and going. And they
thought that right good, and they thanked her and praised her, and
took her into their talk, and she sat down by them happily.



CHAPTER III. OF THE JOURNEYING THROUGH THE FOREST OF EVILSHAW UNTO
THE TOWN OF UTTERHAY



On the morrow in due time Birdalone, going afoot, led Sir Hugh, all-
armed and horsed, to the Oak of Tryst, and there they found the three
men-at-arms, well-weaponed and in green weed, abiding them. They did
obeisance to Sir Hugh, and he greeted them, and then without more ado
he kissed Birdalone and went his ways with his way-leaders, but
Birdalone turned back to the house and her friends.

Next day Birdalone brought her three she-friends unto the Trysting
Oak, and showed them to the wood-mother, and she was kind and soft
with them; and both Aurea and Viridis were shy with her, and as if
they feared her, but Atra was frank and free, and spake boldly. And
thereafter when Birdalone went to meet her wood-mother, Atra would go
with her if she were asked, and at last would go alone, when she
found that Habundia was fain of her coming, so that there were not
many days when they met not; and the wood-wife fell to learning her
the lore of the earth, as she had done aforetime with Birdalone; and
Atra waxed ruddier and merrier of countenance, whereof was Birdalone
right glad, and Arthur yet more glad, and the others well content.

So wore the time till Hugh had been gone for twenty and three days,
and as they walked the meadows anigh the house about undern, they saw
a knight riding down the bent toward them, and presently they knew
him for Hugh, and turned and hastened to meet him, so that he was
straightway amidst them, and on foot. Dear then were the greetings
and caresses betwixt them, and when it was over, and Birdalone had
led away his horse and dight it for him, and had gotten him victuals
and drink, and they were all sitting on the grass together, he told
them how he had fared. He had done all his matters in the Land under
the Green Mountains, and had given over his lands and houses to a man
of his lineage, his cousin, a good knight, and had taken from him of
gold and goods what he would. Then he had taken his two bairns and
their nurse, and an old squire and five sergeants, whereof one was
his foster-brother, and the others men somewhat stricken in years,
and had departed with them. Sithence he had come his ways to
Greenford, and had held talk therein with the prior of a great and
fair house of Black Canons, and had given him no little wealth
wherewith to re-do the Castle of the Quest what was needed, and for
livelihood of four canons to dwell there, and Leonard to be their
prior, that there they might remember Sir Baudoin their dear friend
daily in the office, and do good unto his soul. Sithence he had
ridden to the Castle of the Quest with the said Prior of St. Austin
of Greenford, and had found Leonard, and had settled all the business
how it was to be done. Thereafter he had returned to Greenford, and
gathered his folk, and got him gone, under the guidance of Habundia's
folk, by castles and thorps and towns the nearest way to the edge of
Evilshaw. And they had come to the forest, and ridden it six days
without mishap; and when they had come to the Oak of Tryst once more,
the way-leaders said that it were well if all they together tarried
not much longer in the forest; wherefore they had brought them to a
fair wood-lawn, and there they encamped, and were there as now. And,
said Hugh, there are they abiding me, and it is in my mind that this
very eve we go, all of us, and meet them there, if ye may truss your
goods in that while; but as to victuals, we have plenty, and it
needeth not. And then to-morrow shall we wend our way as straight as
may be toward the good town of Utterhay.

All they yeasaid it, though in her heart maybe Birdalone had been
fain of abiding a little longer in her own land; but she spake no
word thereof. And they all set to work to the trussing up of their
goods, and then turned their backs on the Great Water, and came up
into the woodland, and so to the camp in the wood-lawn. And there
had Viridis a joyful meeting with her babes, and she gladdened the
hearts of Sir Hugh's men-at-arms by her kind greeting; and they
rejoiced in meeting Aurea and Atra again, and they wondered at
Birdalone and her beauty, and their hearts went out to her, both the
old men's and the young ones. But Habundia's men looked on it all
like images of warriors.

There then they feasted merrily that evening. But when the morrow
was come they were speedily on the way toward Utterhay; and the way-
leaders guided them so well and wisely, that by noon of the fifth day
they were come forth of the wood and on to the bent that looked down
upon the town of Utterhay. There turned to Hugh the three way-
leaders, and spake: Lord, we have done thee the service which we
were bidden; if thou hast no further need of us, give us leave.

Said Hugh: Leave ye have, and I shall give you a great reward ere ye
go. Said the chief of them: Nay, lord, no reward may we take, save
a token from thee that thou art content with us. What token shall it
be? said Hugh. Quoth the way-leader: That each of us kiss the Lady
Birdalone on the mouth, for she it is that is verily our mistress
under our great mistress.

Laughed Hugh thereat, but the men laughed not; then spake Hugh: This
must be at the lady's own will. Even so, said they.

Then Hugh brought Birdalone thither and told her what was toward, and
she consented to the kiss with a good will, and said to each of the
men after they had kissed her: Herewith goeth my love to the
mistress and queen of the woods; do ye bear the same unto her. And
thereafter those way-leaders fared back into the woods.

Now they gather themselves together and go down toward Utterhay, and
make a brave show, what with the sumpter-horses, and the goodly array
of the four ladies, and the glittering war-gear of the men-at-arms;
and Sir Hugh and Sir Arthur displayed their pennons as they went.

All this saw the warders on the wall of Utterhay; and they told the
captain of the porte, and he came up on to the wall, and a man with
him; and when he saw this bright company coming forth from the wood,
he bade men to him, two score of them, all weaponed, and he did on
his armour, and rode out-a-gates with them to meet those new-comers;
and this he did, not because he did not see them to be but few, but
because they came forth out of Evilshaw, and then doubted if they
were trustworthy.

So he met them two bowshots from the gate, and rode forward till he
was close to the wayfarers; and when he beheld the loveliness of the
women, and especially of Birdalone, who wore that day the gleaming-
glittering gown which Habundia had given her, he was abashed, and
deemed yet more that he had to do with folk of the Faery. But he
spake courteously, and said, turning to Hugh, who rode the foremost:
Fair sir, would ye tell unto the man whose business it is to
safeguard the good town of Utterhay what folk ye be, and on what
errand ye ride, and how it is that ye come forth from Evilshaw safe,
in good case, with pennons displayed, as if the said wood were your
very own livelihood? For, sooth to say, hitherto we have found this,
that all men dread Evilshaw, and none will enter it uncompelled.

Thereto answered Hugh: I hight Sir Hugh the Green Knight, and am
come from under the Green Mountain; and this is Sir Arthur, called
the Black Squire, but a knight he is verily, and of great kindred and
a warrior most doughty. And he hath been captain of the good town of
Greenford west away through the wood yonder a long way, and hath done
the town and the frank thereof mickle good service in scattering and
destroying the evil companies of the Red Hold, which hold we took by
force of arms from the felons who held it for the torment and plague
of the country-side.

Now as to our errand, we be minded to dwell in your good town of
Utterhay, and take our part with your folk, and we have wealth enow
thereto, so as to be beholden to none; and as time goes on we may
serve you in divers wise, and not least in this maybe, that with a
good will we shall draw sword for your peace and the freedom of them
of Utterhay.

When the captain heard these words, he made obeisance to Sir Hugh,
and said: Fair sir, though we be here a long way from Greenford, yet
have we heard some tale of the deeds of you, and surely the porte and
all the folk shall be fain of your corning. Yet I pray thee be not
wrath; for there is a custom of the good town, that none may enter
its gates coming from out of this Forest of Evilshaw, save he leave
some pledge or caution with me, be it his wealth, or the body of some
friend or fellow, or, if nought else, his very own body. Wherefore
if thou, Sir Green Knight, wilt but give us some sure pledge, then
will I turn about and ride with you back and through the gate into
Utterhay; and doubtless, when the mayor hath seen you and spoken with
you, the said pledge shall be rendered to you again.

Ere Hugh might answer, came Birdalone forth and said: Sir captain,
if I, who am the lady of the Black Squire here, be hostage good
enough, then take me, and if need be, chain me to make surer of me.
And she drew near unto him smiling, and held out her hands as if for
the manacles.

But when the captain saw her thus, all the blood stirred in his body
for joy of her beauty, and he might but just sit his horse for his
wonder and longing; but he said: The saints forbid it, lady, that I
should do thee any hurt or displeasure, or aught save the most
worship I may. But thy hostage I will take, Sir Knight if thou be
content to yield her, whereas in an hour belike she shall be free
again. And now fare we all gateward again.

So then they all rode on together, Birdalone by the captain's left
hand; and as they passed by the poor houses without the wall, she
looked and saw the one which had been her mother's dwelling, so oft
and so closely had she told her all about it.

Thus then they entered Utterhay, and the captain led them straight to
the mote-house whereas the mayor and the porte were sitting; and much
people followed them through the streets, wondering at them, and
praising the loveliness of the women, and the frank and gallant
bearing of the men-at-arms.

So they lighted down at the mote-house and were brought to the mayor,
and when he had spoken them but a little, and had come to himself
again from the fear and abashment that he had of them, he showed
himself full fain of their coming, and bade them welcome to the good
town, and took them into his own house to guesting, until folk might
dight a very goodly house which the porte did give unto them.

But some two hours afterwards, when they were housed in all content,
as they sat in the hall of the mayor, which was great and goodly,
talking and devising with worthies of Utterhay, there entered two
fair and frank-looking young men, who went straight up to Birdalone,
and the first knelt down before her and kissed her hand, and said: O
our lady, and art thou verily come to us! O our happiness and the
joy of this day!

But when she saw him and heard him and felt the touch of his hand,
she bent down to him and kissed him on the forehead, for she knew him
that it was Robert Gerardson.

Then the other man came up to her as if he also would have knelt to
her, but his purpose changed, and he cast his arms about her body and
fell to kissing her face all over, weeping the while, and then he
drew off and stood trembling before her and she, all blushing like a
red rose and laughing a little, and yet with the tears in her eyes,
said: O Giles Gerardson, and thou, Robert, how fain I am to see you
twain; but tell me, is your father well? Yea, verily, our dear lady,
said Robert, and it will be unto him as a fresh draught of youth when
he wotteth that thou art come to dwell amongst us; for so it is, O
lady beloved, is it not? said he. Yea, forsooth, or even so I hope,
said Birdalone. But here be other friends that ye must needs know,
if we come to dwell together here in peace; and then go and fetch me
hither your father.

Therewith she presented them unto Arthur and Hugh and the three
ladies of the Quest, and all they greeted them kindly and in all
honour; and the Gerardsons loved and worshipped them, and especially
the lovely ladies, the she-friends of their lady.

And whiles they were about this, in cometh old Gerard himself, and
when Birdalone saw him at the door, she arose and ran to meet him,
and cast her arms about him as if she were his own daughter; and most
joyful was the meeting betwixt them.



CHAPTER IV. OF THE ABIDING IN UTTERHAY IN LOVE AND CONTENTMENT



Now when seven days were worn, the mayor made a great feast at his
house, and thither were bidden all the men of the porte and other
worthies, and great merchants who had come into their town; and the
said feast was given in honour of these new-comers, and that day they
sat on the dais, and all the guests worshipped them and wondered at
their beauty; and nought was spoken of for many days save the glory
and hope that there was in this lovely folk.

But the next day after the feast were they brought to their house in
all triumph; and it was as fair as might be thought of, and there
they dwelt a while in rest and peace, and great recourse there was
there of Gerard and his sons.

But ere the winter was over, were Hugh and Arthur and Gerard and his
sons taken to the freedom of Utterhay; and thereafter spake the chief
men of the porte and the masters of the crafts unto the two knights
by the mouth of the mayor; and he told them, what already they partly
knew, that the good town had of late gotten many enemies, whereas it
was wealthy and not very strong, and that now two such warriors
having come amongst them, they were minded to strengthen themselves,
if only they two would of their gentleness and meekness become their
war-dukes to lead them against the foemen. But the two friends
answered that it was well their will to dwell there neighbourly, and
do them all the help they might, and that they would not gainsay the
worship they offered them nor the work that should go with it.

With that answer were all men well content and more: and then the
mayor said that the mind of the porte it was to strengthen the walls
and the gates, and to build a good and fair castle, meet for any
earl, joining on to the wall by the face that looked west, that is to
say, on to Evilshaw; and that liked the war-dukes well.

So when spring came it was set about, but it was five years adoing,
and before it was all finished the war-dukes entered into it, and
dwelt there with their wives and their friends in all honour. And a
little thereafter, whether they would or no, the men of Utterhay had
to handle weapons and fare afield to meet the foe with the valiant
men of the crafts, and what of waged men they might get. And well
and valiantly were they led by their dukes, and they came to their
above, and gained both wealth and honour thereby; and from that time
forward began the increase of Utterhay under those two captains, who
were unto them as in old time the consuls had been unto the Roman
folk, save that they changed them not year by year as the Romans were
wont.

So wore the days, and all those friends dwelt together in harmony and
joy; though the wearing of time wrought changes amongst them. For
Robert Gerardson began in no long while to look on Aurea with eyes of
love; and at last he came to Birdalone and craved her leave to woo
the said lady, and she granted it with a good will, and was fain
thereof, whereas she saw that Aurea sorely lacked a mate; and scarce
might she have a better than was Robert; so in process of time they
two were wedded and dwelt together happily.

Forsooth Birdalone had been fainer yet might she have seen Giles
Gerardson and Atra drawn together. But though they were dear friends
and there was much converse betwixt them, this betid not, so far as
we have heard.

The old Gerard dwelt happily amongst them all for fifteen years after
they had come to Utterhay, and then fell asleep, a very old man.

As to the wood of Evilshaw, it was not once a year only that
Birdalone and Arthur sought thither and met the wood-mother, but a
half-score of times or more, might be, in the year's circle; and ever
was she kind and loving with them, and they with her.

But of all those fellows it was Atra that had longest dealings with
the wood-wife; for whiles would she leave Utterhay and her friends
and fare lonesome up into Evilshaw, and find Habundia and abide with
her in all kindness holden for a month or more. And ever a little
before these departures betid would she fall moody and few-spoken,
but she came back ever from the wood calm and kind and well-liking.
Amidst all these comings and goings somewhat wore off the terror of
Evilshaw; yet never was it accounted other than a daring deed to
enter it alone without fellowship; and most had liefer that some man
of religion were of their company therein, or they would bear about
them something holy or blessed to hold the evil things.

Now when all this hath been said, we have no more to tell about this
company of friends, the most of whom had once haunted the lands about
the Water of the Wondrous Isles, save that their love never sundered,
and that they lived without shame and died without fear. So here is
an end.