
Athenagoras of Athens












THE TREATISE OF ATHENAGORAS THE ATHENIAN, PHILOSOPHER AND CHRISTIAN, ON THE 
RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD. 
CHAP. I.--DEFENCE OF THE TRUTH SHOULD PRECEDE DISCUSSIONS REGARDING IT. 
BY the side of every opinion and doctrine which agrees with the truth of 
things, there springs up some falsehood; and it does so, not because it takes 
its rise naturally from some fundamental principle, or from some cause peculiar 
to the matter in hand, but because it is invented on purpose by men who set a 
value on the spurious seed, for its tendency to corrupt the truth. This is 
apparent, in the first place, from those who in former times addicted themselves 
to such inquiries, and their want of agreement with their predecessors and 
contemporaries, and then, not least, from the very confusion which marks the 
discussions that are now going on. For such men have left no truth free from 
their calumnious attacks--not the being of God, not His knowledge, not His 
operations, not those books which follow by a regular and strict sequence from 
these, and delineate for us the doctrines of piety. On the contrary, some of 
them utterly, and once for all, give up in despair the truth concerning these 
things, and some distort it to suit their own views, and some of set purpose 
doubt even of things which are palpably evident. Hence I think that those who 
bestow attention on such subjects should adopt two lines of argument, one in 
defence of the truth, another concerning the truth: that in defence of the 
truth, for disbelievers and doubters; that concerning the truth, for such as are 
candid and receive the truth with readiness. Accordingly it behoves those who 
wish to investigate these matters, to keep in view that which the necessity of 
the case in each instance requires, and to regulate their discussion by this; to 
accommodate the order of their treatment of these subjects to what is suitable 
to the occasion, and not for the sake of appearing always to preserve the same 
method, to disregard fitness and the place which properly belongs to each topic. 
For, so far as proof and the natural order are concerned, dissertations 
concerning the truth always take precedence of those in defence of it; but, for 
the purpose of greater utility, the order must be reversed, and arguments in 
defence of it precede those concerning it. For the farmer could not properly 
cast the seed into the ground, unless he first extirpated the wild wood, and 
whatever would be hurtful to the good seed; nor the physician introduce any 
wholesome medicines into the body that needed his care, if he did not previously 
remove the disease within, or stay that which was approaching. Neither surely 
can he who wishes to teach the truth persuade any one by speaking about it, so 
long as there is a false opinion lurking in the mind of his hearers, and barring 
the entrance of his arguments. And, therefore, from regard to greater utility, I 
myself sometimes place arguments in defence of the truth before those concerning 
the truth; and on the present occasion it appears to me, looking at the 
requirements of the case, not without advantage to follow the same method in 
treating of the resurrection. For in regard to this subject also we find some 
utterly disbelieving, and some others doubting, and even among those who have 
accepted the first principles some who are as much at a loss what to believe as 
those who doubt; the most unaccountable thing of all being, that they are in 
this state of mind without having any ground whatsoever in the matters 
themselves for their disbelief, or finding it possible to assign any reasonable 
cause why they disbelieve or experience any perplexity. 
CHAP. II.--A RESURRECTION IS NOT IMPOSSIBLE. 
Let us, then, consider the subject in the way I have indicated. If all 
disbelief does not arise from levity and inconsideration, but if it springs up 
in some minds on strong grounds and accompanied by the certainty which belongs 
to truth [well and good]; for it then maintains the appearance of being just, 
when the thing itself to which their disbelief relates appears to them unworthy 
of belief; but to disbelieve things which are not deserving of disbelief, is the 
act of men who do not employ a sound judgment about the truth. It behoves, 
therefore, those who disbelieve or doubt concerning the resurrection, to form 
their opinion on the subject, not from any view they have hastily adopted, and 
from what is acceptable to profligate men, but either to assign the origin of 
men to no cause (a notion which is very easily refuted), or, ascribing the cause 
of all things to God, to keep steadily in view the principle involved in this 
article of belief, and from this to demonstrate that the resurrection is utterly 
unworthy of credit. This they will succeed in, if they are able to show that it 
is either impossible for God, or contrary to His will, to unite and gather 
together again bodies that are dead, or even entirely dissolved into their 
elements, so as to constitute the same persons. If they cannot do this, let them 
cease from this godless disbelief, and from this blasphemy against sacred 
things: for, that they do not speak the truth when they say that it is 
impossible, or not in accordance with the divine will, will clearly appear from 
what I am about to say. A thing is in strictness of language considered 
impossible to a person, when it is of such a kind that he either does not know 
what is to be done, or has not sufficient power for the proper doing of the 
thing known, For he who is ignorant of anything that requires to be done, is 
utterly unable either to attempt or to do what he is ignorant of; and he, too, 
who knows ever so well what has to be done, and by what means, and how, but 
either has no power at all to do the thing known, or not power sufficient, will 
not even make the attempt, if he be wise and consider his powers; and if he did 
attempt it without due consideration, he would not accomplish his purpose. But 
it is not possible for God to be ignorant, either of the nature of the bodies 
that are to be raised, as regards both the members entire and the particles of 
which they consist, or whither each of the dissolved particles passes, and what 
part of the elements has received that which is dissolved and has passed into 
that with which it has affinity, although to men it may appear quite impossible 
that what has again combined according to its nature with the universe should be 
separable from it again. For He from whom, antecedently to the peculiar 
formation of each, was not concealed either the nature of the elements of which 
the bodies of men were to consist, or the parts of these from which He was about 
to take what seemed to Him suitable for the formation of the human body, will 
manifestly, after the dissolution of the whole, not be ignorant whither each of 
the particles has passed which He took for the construction of each. For, viewed 
relatively to the order of things now obtaining among us, and the judgment we 
form concerning other matters, it is a greater thing to know beforehand that 
which has not yet come to pass; but, viewed relatively to the majesty and wisdom 
of God, both are according to nature, and it is equally easy to know beforehand 
things that have not yet come into existence, and to know things which have been 
dissolved. 
CHAP. III.--HE WHO COULD CREATE, CAN ALSO RAISE UP THE DEAD. 
Moreover also, that His power is sufficient for the raising of dead bodies, 
is shown by the creation of these same bodies. For if, when they did not exist, 
He made at their first formation the bodies of men, and their original elements, 
He will, when they are dissolved, in whatever manner that may take place, raise 
them again with equal ease: for this, too, is equally possible to Him. And it is 
no damage to the argument, if some suppose the first beginnings to be from 
matter, or the bodies of men at least to be derived from the elements as the 
first materials, or from seed. For that power which could give shape to what is 
regarded by them as shapeless matter, and adorn it, when destitute of form and 
order, with many and diverse forms, and gather into one the several portions of 
the elements, and divide the seed which was one and simple into many, and 
organize that which was unorganized, and give life to that which had no 
life,that same power can reunite what is dissolved, and raise up what is 
prostrate, and restore the dead to life again, and put the corruptible into a 
state of incorruption. And to the same Being it will belong, and to the same 
power and skill, to separate that which has been broken up and distributed among 
a multitude of animals of all kinds which are wont to have recourse to such 
bodies, and glut their appetite upon them,--to separate this, I say, and unite 
it again with the proper members and parts of members, whether it has passed 
into some one of those animals, or into many, or thence into others, or, after 
being dissolved along with these, has been carried back again to the original 
elements, resolved into these according to a natural law--a matter this which 
seems to have exceedingly confounded some, even of those admired for wisdom, 
who, I cannot tell why, think those doubts worthy of serious attention which are 
brought forward by the many. 
CHAP. IV.--OBJECTION FROM THE FACT THAT SOME HUMAN BODIES HAVE BECOME PART OF 
OTHERS. 
These persons, to wit, say that many bodies of those who have come to an 
unhappy death in shipwrecks and rivers have become food for fishes, and many of 
those who perish in war, or who from some other sad cause or state of things are 
deprived of burial, lie exposed to become the food of any animals which may 
chance to light upon them. Since, then, bodies are thus consumed, and the 
members and parts composing them are broken up and distributed among a great 
multitude of animals, and by means of nutrition become incorporated with the 
bodies of those that are nourished by them,--in the first place, they say, their 
separation from these is impossible; and besides this, in the second place, they 
adduce another circumstance more difficult still. When animals of the kind 
suitable for human food, which have fed on the bodies of men, pass through their 
stomach, and become incorporated with the bodies of those who have partaken of 
them, it is an absolute necessity, they say, that the parts of the bodies of men 
which have served as nourishment to the animals which have partaken of them 
should pass into other bodies of men, since the animals which meanwhile have 
been nourished by them convey the nutriment derived from those by whom they were 
nourished into those men of whom they become the nutriment. Then to this they 
tragically add the devouring of offspring perpetrated by people in famine and 
madness, and the children eaten by their own parents through the contrivance of 
enemies, and the celebrated Median feast, and the tragic banquet of Thyestes; 
and they add, moreover, other such like unheard-of occurrences which have taken 
place among Greeks and barbarians: and from these things they establish, as they 
suppose, the impossibility of the resurrection, on the ground that the same 
parts cannot rise again with one set of bodies, and with another as well; for 
that either the bodies of the former possessors cannot be reconstituted, the 
parts which composed them having passed into others, or that, these having been 
restored to the former, the bodies of the last possessors will come short. 
CHAP. V.--REFERENCE TO THE PROCESSES OF DIGESTION AND NUTRITION. 
But it appears to me that such persons, in the first place, are ignorant of 
the power and skill of Him that fashioned and regulates this universe, who has 
adapted to the nature and kind of each animal the nourishment suitable and 
correspondent to it, and has neither ordained that everything in nature shall 
enter into union and combination with every kind of body, nor is at any loss to 
separate what has been so united, but grants to the nature of each several 
created being or thing to do or to suffer what is naturally suited to it, and 
sometimes also hinders and allows or forbids whatever He wishes, and for the 
purpose He wishes; and, moreover, that they have not considered the power and 
nature of each of the creatures that nourish or are nourished. Otherwise they 
would have known that not everything which is taken for food under the pressure 
of outward necessity turns out to be suitable nourishment for the animal, but 
that some things no sooner come into contact with the plicatures of the stomach 
than they are wont to be corrupter, and are vomited or voided, or disposed of in 
some other way, so that not even for a little time do they undergo the first and 
natural digestion, much less become incorporated with that which is to be 
nourished; as also, that not even everything which has been digested in the 
stomach and received the first change actually arrives at the parts to be 
nourished, since some of it loses, its nutritive power even in the stomach, and 
some during the second change, and the digestion that takes place in the liver 
is separated and passes into something else which is destitute of the power to 
nourish; nay, that the change which takes place in the liver does not all issue 
in nourishment to men, but the matter changed is separated as refuse according 
to its natural purpose; and that the nourishment which is left in the members 
and parts themselves that have to be nourished sometimes changes to something 
else, according as that predominates which is present in greater or less, 
abundance, and is apt to corrupt or to turn into itself that which comes near 
it. 
CHAP. VI.--EVERYTHING THAT IS USELESS OR HURTFUL IS REJECTED. 
Since, therefore, great difference of nature obtains in all animals, and the 
very nourishment which is accordant with nature is varied to suit each kind of 
animal, and the body which is nourished; and as in the nourishment of every 
animal there is a threefold cleansing and separation, it follows that whatever 
is alien from the nourishment of the animal must be wholly destroyed and carried 
off to its natural place, or change into something else, since it cannot 
coalesce with it; that the power of the nourishing body must be suitable to the 
nature of the animal to be nourished, and accordant with its powers; and that 
this, when it has passed through the strainers appointed for the purpose, and 
been thoroughly purified by the natural means of purification, must become a 
most genuine addition to the substance,--the only thing, in fact, which any one 
calling things by their right names would call nourishment at all; because it 
rejects everything that is foreign and hurtful to the constitution of the animal 
nourished and that mass of superfluous food introduced merely for filling the 
stomach and gratifying the appetite. This nourishment, no one can doubt, becomes 
incorporated with the body that is nourished, interwoven and blended with all 
the members and parts of members; but that which is different and contrary to 
nature is speedily corrupted if brought into contact with a stronger power, but 
easily destroys that which is overcome by it, and is converted into hurtful 
humours and poisonous qualities, because producing nothing akin or friendly to 
the body which is to be nourished. And it is a very clear proof of this, that in 
many of the animals nourished, pain, or disease, or death follows from these 
things, if, owing to a too keen appetite, they take in mingled with their food 
something poisonous and contrary to nature; which, of course, would tend to the 
utter destruction of the body to be nourished, since that which is nourished is 
nourished by substances akin to it and which accord with its nature, but is 
destroyed by those of a contrary kind. If, therefore, according to the different 
nature of animals, different kinds of food have been provided suitable to their 
nature, and none of that which the animal may have taken, not even an accidental 
part of it, admits of being blended with the body which is nourished, but only 
that part which has been purified by an entire digestion, and undergone a 
complete change for union with a particular body, and adapted to the parts which 
are to receive nourishment,--it is very plain that none of the things contrary 
to nature can be united with those bodies for which it is not a suitable and 
correspondent nourishment, but either passes off by the bowels before it 
produces some other humour, crude and corrupter; or, if it continue for a longer 
time, produces suffering or disease hard to cure, destroying at the same time 
the natural nourishment, or even the flesh itself which needs nourishment. But 
even though it be expelled at length, overcome by certain medicines, or by 
better food, or by the natural forces, it is not got rid of without doing much 
harm, since it bears no peaceful aspect towards what is natural, because it 
cannot coalesce with nature. 
CHAP. VII. --THE RESURRECTION-BODY DIFFERENT FROM THE PRESENT. 
Nay, suppose we were to grant that the nourishment coming from these things 
(let it be so called, as more accordant with the common way of speaking), 
although against nature, is yet separated and changed into some one of the moist 
or dry, or warm or cold, matters which the body contains, our opponents would 
gain nothing by the concession: for the bodies that rise again are reconstituted 
from the parts which properly belong to them, whereas no one of the things 
mentioned is such a part, nor has it the form or place of a part; nay, it does 
not remain always with the parts of the body which are nourished, or rise again 
with the parts that rise, since no longer does blood, or phlegm, or bile, or 
breath, contribute anything to the life. Neither, again, will the bodies 
nourished then require the things they once required, seeing that, along with 
the want and corruption of the bodies nourished, the need also of those things 
by which they were nourished is taken away. To this must be added, that if we 
were to suppose the change arising from such nourishment to reach as far as 
flesh, in that case too there would be no necessity that the flesh recently 
changed by food of that kind, if it became united to the body of some other man, 
should again as a part contribute to the formation of that body, since neither 
the flesh which takes it up always retains what it takes, nor does the flesh so 
incorporated abide and remain with that to which it was added, but is subject to 
a great variety of changes,--at one time being dispersed by toil or care, at 
another time being wasted by grief or trouble or disease, and by the distempers 
arising from being heated or chilled, the humours which are changed with the 
flesh and fat not receiving the nourishment so as to remain what they are. But 
while such are the changes to which the flesh is subject, we should find that 
flesh, nourished by food unsuited to it, suffers them in a much greater degree; 
now swelling out and growing fat by what it has received, and then again 
rejecting it in some way or other, and decreasing in bulk, from one or more of 
the causes already mentioned; and that that alone remains in the parts which is 
adapted to bind together, or cover, or warm the flesh that has been chosen by 
nature, and adheres to those parts by which it sustains the life which is 
according to nature, and fulfils the labours of that life. So that whether the 
investigation in which we have just been engaged be fairly judged of, or the 
objections urged against our position be conceded, in neither case can it be 
shown that what is said by our opponents is true, nor can the bodies of men ever 
combine with those of the same nature, whether at any time, through ignorance 
and being cheated of their perception by some one else, men have partaken of 
such a body, or of their own accord, impelled by want or madness, they have 
defiled themselves with the body of one of like form; for we are very well aware 
that some brutes have human forms, or have a nature compounded of men and 
brutes, such as the more daring of the poets are accustomed to represent. 
CHAP. VIII.--HUMAN FLESH NOT THE PROPER OR NATURAL FOOD OF MEN. 
But what need is there to speak of bodies not allotted to be the food of any 
animal, and destined only for a burial in the earth in honour of nature, since 
the Maker of the world has not alloted any animal whatsoever as food to those of 
the same kind, although some others of a different kind serve for food according 
to nature? If, indeed, they are able to show that the flesh of men was alloted 
to men for food, there will be nothing to hinder its being according to nature 
that they should eat one another, just like anything else that is allowed by 
nature, and nothing to prohibit those who dare to say such things from regaling 
themselves with the bodies of their dearest friends as delicacies, as being 
especially suited to them, and to entertain their living friends with the same 
fare. But if it be unlawful even to speak of this, and if for men to partake of 
the flesh of men is a thing most hateful and abominable, and more detestable 
than any other unlawful and unnatural food or act; and if what is against nature 
can never pass into nourishment for the limbs and parts requiring it, and what 
does not pass into nourishment can never become united with that which it is not 
adapted to nourish,--then can the bodies of men never combine with bodies like 
themselves, to which this nourishment would be against nature, even though it 
were to pass many times through their stomach, owing to some most bitter 
mischance; but, removed from the influence of the nourishing power, and 
scattered to those parts of the universe again from which they obtained their 
first origin, they are united with these for as long a period of time as may be 
the lot of each; and, separated thence again by the skill and power of Him who 
has fixed the nature of every animal, and furnished it with its peculiar powers, 
they are united suitably, each to each, whether they have been burnt up by fire, 
or rotted by water, or consumed by wild beasts, or by any other animals, or 
separated from the entire body and dissolved before the other parts; and, being 
again united with one another, they occupy the same place for the exact 
construction and formation of the same body, and for the resurrection and life 
of that which was dead, or even entirely dissolved. To expatiate further, 
however, on these topics, is not suitable; for all men are agreed in their 
decision respecting them,--those at least who are not half brutes. 
CHAP. IX.--ABSURDITY OF ARGUING FROM MAN'S IMPOTENCY. 
As there are many things of more importance to the inquiry before us, I beg 
to be excused from replying for the present to those who take refuge in the 
works of men, and even the constructors of them, who are unable to make anew 
such of their works as are broken in pieces, or worn out by time, or otherwise 
destroyed, and then from the analogy of potters and carpenters attempt to show 
that God neither can will, nor if He willed would be able, to raise again a body 
that is dead, or has been dissolved,--not considering that by such reasoning 
they offer the grossest insult to God, putting, as they do, on the same level 
the capabilities of things which are altogether different, or rather the natures 
of those who use them, and comparing the works of art with those of nature. To 
bestow any serious attention on such arguments would be not undeserving of 
censure, for it is really foolish to reply to superficial and trifling 
objections. It is surely far more probable, yea, most absolutely true, to say 
that what is impossible with men is possible with God. 
And if by this statement of itself as probable, and by the whole 
investigation in which we have just been engaged reason shows it to be possible, 
it is quite clear that it is not impossible. No, nor is it such a thing as God 
could not will. 
CHAP. X.--IT CANNOT BE SHOWN THAT GOD DOES NOT WILL A RESURRECTION. 
For that which is not accordant with His will is so either as being unjust or 
as unworthy of Him. And again, the injustice regards either him who is to rise 
again, or some other than he. But it is evident that no one of the beings 
exterior to him, and that are reckoned among the things that have existence, is 
injured. Spiritual natures (nohtai fuseis) cannot be injured by 
the resurrection of men, for the resurrection of men is no hindrance to their 
existing, nor is any loss or violence inflicted on them by it; nor, again, would 
the nature of irrational or inanimate beings sustain wrong, for they will have 
no existence after the resurrection, and no wrong can be done to that which is 
not. But even if any one should suppose them to exist for ever, they would not 
suffer wrong by the renewal of human bodies: for if now, in being subservient to 
the nature of men and their necessities while they require them, and subjected 
to the yoke and every kind of drudgery, they suffer no wrong, much more, when 
men have become immortal and free from want, and no longer need their service, 
and when they are themselves liberated from bondage, will they suffer no wrong. 
For if they had the gift of speech, they would not bring against the Creator the 
charge of making them, contrary to justice, inferior to men because they did not 
share in the same resurrection. For to creatures whose nature is not alike the 
Just Being does not assign a like end. And, besides, with creatures that have no 
notion of justice there can be no complaint of injustice. Nor can it be said 
either that there is any injustice done as regards the man to be raised, for he 
consists of soul and body, and he suffers no wrong as to either soul or body. No 
person in his senses will affirm that his soul suffers wrong, because, in 
speaking so, he would at the same time be unawares reflecting on the present 
life also; for if now, while dwelling in a body subject to corruption and 
suffering, it has had no wrong done to it much less will it suffer wrong when 
living in conjunction with a body which is free from corruption and suffering. 
The body, again, suffers no wrong; for if no wrong is done to it now while 
united a corruptible thing with an incorruptible, manifestly will it not be 
wronged when united an incorruptible with an incorruptible. No; nor can any one 
say that it is a work unworthy of God to raise up and bring together again a 
body which has been dissolved: for if the worse was not unworthy of Him, namely, 
to make the body which is subject to corruption and suffering, much more is the 
better not unworthy, to make one not liable to corruption or suffering. 
CHAP. XI.--RECAPITULATION. 
If, then, by means of that which is by nature first and that which follows 
from it, each of the points investigated has been proved, it is very evident 
that the resurrection of dissolved bodies is a work which the Creator can 
perform, and can will, and such as is worthy of Him: for by these considerations 
the falsehood of the contrary opinion has been shown, and the absurdity of the 
position taken by disbelievers. For why should I speak of their correspondence 
each with each, and of their connection with one another? If indeed we ought to 
use the word connection, as though they were separated by some difference of 
nature; and not rather say, that what God can do He can also will, and that what 
God can will it is perfectly possible for Him to do, and that it is accordant 
with the dignity of Him who wills it. That to discourse concerning the truth is 
one thing, and to discourse in defence of it is another, has been sufficiently 
explained in the remarks already made, as also in what respects they differ from 
each other, and when and in dealing with whom. they are severally useful; but 
perhaps there is no reason why, with a view to the general certainty, and 
because of the connection of what has been said with what remains, we should not 
make a fresh beginning from these same points and those which are allied to 
them. To the one kind of argument it naturally pertains to hold the foremost 
place, to the other to attend upon the first, and clear the way, and to remove 
whatever is obstructive or hostile. 
The discourse concerning the truth, as being necessary to all men for 
certainty and safety, holds the first place, whether in nature, or order, or 
usefulness: in nature, as furnishing the knowledge of the subject; in order, as 
being in those things and along with those things which it informs us of; in 
usefulness, as being a guarantee of certainty and safety to those who become 
acquainted with it. The discourse in defence of the truth is inferior in nature 
and force, for the refutation of falsehood is less important than the 
establishment of truth; and second in order, for it employs its strength against 
those who hold false opinions, and false opinions are an aftergrowth from 
another sowing and from degeneration. But, notwithstanding all this, it is often 
placed first, and sometimes is found more useful, because it removes and clears 
away beforehand the disbelief which disquiets some minds, and the doubt or false 
opinion of such as have but recently come over. And yet each of them is 
referrible to the same end, for the refutation of falsehood and the 
establishment of truth both have piety for their object: not, indeed, that they 
are absolutely one and the same, but the one is necessary, as I have said, to 
all who believe, and to those who are concerned about the truth and their own 
salvation; but the other proves to be more useful on some occasions, and to some 
persons, and in dealing with some. Thus much by way of recapitulation, to recall 
what has been already said. We must now pass on to what we proposed, and Show 
the truth of the doctrine concerning the resurrection, both from the cause 
itself, according to which, and on account of which, the first man and his 
posterity were created, although they were not brought into existence in the 
same manner, and from the common nature of all men as men; and further, from the 
judgment of their Maker upon them according to the time each has lived, and 
according to the rules by which each has regulated his behaviour,--a judgment 
which no one can doubt will be just. 
CHAP. XII.--ARGUMENT FOR THE RESURRECTION. FROM THE PURPOSE CONTEMPLATED IN 
MAN'S CREATION. 
The argument from the cause will appear, if we consider whether man was made 
at random and in vain, or for some purpose; and if for some purpose, whether 
simply that he might live and continue in the natural condition in which he was 
created, or for the use of another; and if with a view to use, whether for that 
of the 
Creator Himself, or of some one of the beings who belong to Him, and are by 
Him deemed worthy Of greater care. Now, if we consider this in the most general 
way, we find that a person of sound mind, and who is moved by a rational 
judgment to do anything, does nothing in vain which he does intentionally, but 
either for his own use, or for the use of some other person for whom he cares, 
or for the sake of the work itself, being moved by some natural inclination and 
affection towards its production. For instance (to make use of an illustration, 
that our meaning may be clear), a man makes a house for his own use, but for 
cattle and camels and other animals of which he has need he makes the shelter 
suitable for each of them; not for his own use, if we regard the appearance 
only, though for that, if we look at the end he has in view, but as regards the 
immediate object, from concern for those for whom he cares. He has children, 
too, not for his own use, nor for the sake of anything else belonging to him, 
but that those who spring from him may exist and continue as long as possible, 
thus by the succession of children and grandchildren comforting himself 
respecting the close of his own life, and hoping in this way to immortalize the 
mortal. Such is the procedure of men. But God can neither have made man in vain, 
for He is wise, and no work of wisdom is in vain; nor for His own use, for He is 
in want of nothing. But to a Being absolutely in need of nothing, no one of His 
works can contribute anything to His own use. Neither, again, did He make man 
for the sake of any of the other works which He has made. For nothing that is 
endowed with reason and judgment has been created, or is created, for the use of 
another, whether greater or less than itself, but for the sake of the life and 
continuance of the being itself so created. For reason cannot discover any use 
which might be deemed a cause for the creation of men, since immortals are free 
from want, and in need of no help from men in order to their existence; and 
irrational beings are by nature in a state of subjection, and perform those 
services for men for which each of them was intended, but are not intended in 
their turn to make use of men: for it neither was nor is right to lower that 
which rules and takes the lead to the use of the inferior, or to subject the 
rational to the irrational, which is not suited to rule. Therefore, if man has 
been created neither without cause and in vain (for none of God's works is in 
vain, so far at least as the purpose of their Maker is concerned), nor for the 
use of the Maker Himself, or of any of the works which have proceeded from Him, 
it is quite clear that although, according to the first and more general view of 
the subject, God made man for Himself, and in pursuance of the goodness and 
wisdom which are conspicuous throughout the creation, yet, according to the view 
which more nearly touches the beings created, He made him for the sake of the 
life of those created, which is not kindled for a little while and then 
extinguished. For to creeping things, I suppose, and birds, and fishes, or, to 
speak more generally, all irrational creatures, God has assigned such a life as 
that; but to those who bear upon them the image of the Creator Himself, and are 
endowed with understanding, and blessed with a rational judgment, the Creator 
has assigned perpetual duration, in order that, recognising their own Maker, and 
His power and skill, and obeying law and justice, they may pass their whole 
existence free from suffering, in the possession of those qualifies with which 
they have bravely borne their preceding life, although they lived in corruptible 
and earthly bodies. For whatever has been created for the sake of something 
else, when that has ceased to be for the sake of which it was created, will 
itself also fitly cease to be, and will not continue to exist in vain, since, 
among the works of God, that which is useless can have no place; but that which 
was created for the very purpose of existing and living a life naturally suited 
to it, since the cause itself is bound up with its nature, and is recognised 
only in connection with existence itself, can never admit of any cause which 
shall utterly annihilate its existence. But since this cause is seen to lie in 
perpetual existence, the being so created must be preserved for ever, doing and 
experiencing what is suitable to its nature, each of the two parts of which it 
consists contributing what belongs to it, so that the soul may exist and remain 
without change in the nature in which it was made, and discharge its appropriate 
functions (such as presiding over the impulses of the body, and judging of and 
measuring that which occurs from time to time by the proper standards and 
measures), and the body be moved according to its nature towards its appropriate 
objects, and undergo the changes allotted to it, and, among the rest (relating 
to age, or appearance, or size), the resurrection. For the resurrection is a 
species of change, and the last of all, and a change for the better of what 
still remains in existence at that time. 
CHAP. XIII.--CONTINUATION OF THE ARGUMENT. 
Confident of these things, no less than of those which have already come to 
pass, and reflecting on our own nature, we are content with a life associated 
with neediness and corruption, as suited to our present state of existence, and 
we stedfastly hope for a continuance of being in immortality; and this we do not 
take without foundation from the inventions of men, feeding ourselves on false 
hopes, but our belief rests on a most infallible guarantee--the purpose of Him 
who fashioned us, according to which He made man of an immortal soul and a body, 
and furnished him with understanding and an innate law for the preservation and 
safeguard of the things given by Him as suitable to an intelligent existence and 
a rational life: for we know well that He would not have fashioned such a being, 
and furnished him with everything belonging to perpetuity, had He not intended 
that what was so created should continue in perpetuity. If, therefore, the Maker 
of this universe made man with a view to his partaking of an intelligent life, 
and that, having become a spectator of His grandeur, and of the wisdom which is 
manifest in all things, he might continue always in the contemplation of these; 
then, according to the purpose of his Author, and the nature which he has 
received, the cause of his creation is a pledge of his continuance for ever, and 
this continuance is a pledge of the resurrection, without which man could not 
continue. So that, from what has been said, it is quite clear that the 
resurrection is plainly proved by the cause of man's creation, and the purpose 
of Him who made him. Such being the nature of the cause for which man has been 
brought into this world, the next thing will be to consider that which 
immediately follows, naturally or in the order proposed; and in our 
investigation the cause of their creation is followed by the nature of the men 
so created, and the nature of those created by the just judgment of their Maker 
upon them, and all these by the end of their existence. Having investigated 
therefore the point placed first in order, we must now go on to consider the 
nature of men. 
CHAP. XIV.--THE RESURRECTION DOES NOT REST SOLELY ON THE FACT OF A FUTURE 
JUDGMENT. 
The proof of the several doctrines of which the truth consists, or of any 
marten whatsoever proposed for examination, if it is to produce an unwavering 
confidence in what is said, must begin, not from anything without, nor from what 
certain persons think or have thought, but from the common and natural notion of 
the matter, or from the connection of secondary troths with primary ones. For 
the question relates either to primary beliefs, and then all that is necessary 
is reminiscence, so as to stir up the natural notion; or to things which 
naturally follow from the first and to their natural sequence. And in these 
things we must observe order, showing what strictly follows from the first 
truths, or from those which are placed first, so as neither to be unmindful of 
the truth, or of our certainty respecting it, nor to confound the things 
arranged by nature and distinguished from each other, or break up the natural 
order. Hence I think it behoves those who desire to handle the subject with 
fairness, and who wish to form an intelligent judgment whether there is a 
resurrection or not, first to consider attentively the force of the arguments 
contributing to the proof of this, and what place each of them holds--which is 
first, which second, which third, and which last. And in the arrangement of 
these they should place tint the cause of the creation of men,--namely, the 
purpose of the Creator in making man; and then connect with this, as is 
suitable, the nature of the men so created; not as being second in order, but 
because we are unable to pass our judgment on both at the same time, although 
they have the closest natural connection with each other, and are of equal force 
in reference to the subject before us. But while from these proofs as the 
primary ones, and as being derived from the work of creation, the resurrection 
is clearly demonstrated, none the less can we gain conviction respecting it from 
the arguments taken from providence,--I mean from the reward or punishment due 
to each man in accordance with just judgment, and from the end of human 
existence. For many, in discussing the subject of the resurrection, have rested 
the whole cause on the third argument alone, deeming that the cause of the 
resurrection is the judgment. But the fallacy of this is very clearly shown, 
from the fact that, although all human beings who die rise again, yet not all 
who rise again are to be judged: for if only a just judgment were the cause of 
the resurrection, it would of course follow that those who had done neither evil 
nor good--namely, very young children --would not rise again; but seeing that 
all are to rise again, those who have died in infancy as well as others, they 
too justify our conclusion that the resurrection takes place not for the sake of 
the judgment as the primary reason, but in consequence of the purpose of God in 
forming men, and the nature of the beings so formed. 
CHAP. XV.--ARGUMENT FOR THE RESURRECTION FROM THE NATURE OF MAN. 
But while the cause discoverable in the creation of men is of itself 
sufficient to prove that the resurrection follows by natural sequence on the 
dissolution of bodies, yet it is perhaps right not to shrink from adducing 
either of the proposed arguments, but, agreeably to what has been said, to point 
out to those who are not able of themselves to discern them, the arguments from 
each of the truths evolved from the primary; and first and foremost, the nature 
of the men created, which conducts us to the same notion, and has the same force 
as evidence of the resurrection. For if the whole nature of men in general is 
composed of an immortal soul and a body which was fitted to it in the creation, 
and if neither to the nature of the soul by itself, nor to the nature of the 
body separately, has God assigned such a creation or such a life and entire 
course of existence as this, but to men compounded of the two, in order that 
they may, when they have passed through their present existence, arrive at one 
common end, with the same elements of which they are composed at their birth and 
during life, it unavoidably follows, since one living-being is formed from the 
two, experiencing whatever the soul experiences and whatever the body 
experiences, doing and performing whatever requires the judgment of the senses 
or of the reason, that the whole series of these things must be referred to some 
one end, in order that they all, and by means of all,namely, man's creation, 
man's nature, man's life, man's doings and sufferings, his course of existence, 
and the end suitable to his nature,--may concur in one harmony and the same 
common experience. But if there is some one harmony and community of experience 
belonging to the whole being, whether of the things which spring from the soul 
or of those which are accomplished by means of the body, the end for all these 
must also be one. And the end will be in strictness one, if the being whose end 
that end is remains the same in its constitution; and the being-will be exactly 
the same, if all those things of which the being consists as parts are the same. 
And they will be the same in respect of their peculiar union, if the parts 
dissolved are again united for the constitution of the being. And the 
constitution of the same men of necessity proves that a resurrection will follow 
of the dead and dissolved bodies; for without this, neither could the same parts 
be united according to nature with one another, nor could the nature of the same 
men be reconstituted. And if both understanding and reason have been given to 
men for the discernment of things which are perceived by the understanding, and 
not of existences only, but also of the goodness and wisdom and rectitude of 
their Giver, it necessarily follows that, since those things continue for the 
sake of which the rational judgment is given, the judgment given for these 
things should also continue. But it is impossible for this to continue, unless 
the nature which has received it, and in which it adheres, continues. But that 
which has received both understanding and reason is man, not the soul by itself. 
Man, therefore, who consists of the two parts, must continue for ever. But it is 
impossible for him to continue unless he rise again. For if no resurrection were 
to take place, the nature of men as men would not continue. And if the nature of 
men does not continue, in vain has the soul been fitted to the need of the body 
and to its experiences; in vain has the body been lettered so that it cannot 
obtain what it longs for, obedient to the reins of the soul, and guided by it as 
with a bridle; in vain is the understanding, in vain is wisdom, and the 
observance of rectitude, or even the practice of every virtue, and the enactment 
and enforcement of laws,--to say all in a word, whatever is noble in men or for 
men's sake, or rather the very creation and nature of men. But if vanity is 
utterly excluded from all the works of God, and from all the gifts bestowed by 
Him, the conclusion is unavoidable, that, along with the interminable duration 
of the soul, there will be a perpetual continuance of the body according to its 
proper nature. 
CHAP. XVI--ANALOGY OF DEATH AND SLEEP, AND CONSEQUENT ARGUMENT FOR THE 
RESURRECTION. 
And let no one think it strange that we call by the name of life a 
continuance of being which is interrupted by death and corruption; but let him 
consider rather that this word has not one meaning only, nor is there only one 
measure of continuance, because the nature also of the things that continue is 
not one. For if each of the things that continue has its continuance according 
to its peculiar nature, neither in the case of those who are wholly 
incorruptible and immortal shall we find the continuance like ours, because the 
natures of superior beings do not take the level of such as are inferior; nor in 
men is it proper to look for a continuance invariable and unchangeable; inasmuch 
as the former are from the first created immortal, and continue to exist without 
end by the simple will of their Maker, and men, in respect of the soul, have 
from their first origin an unchangeable continuance, but in respect of the body 
obtain immortality by means of change. This is what is meant by the doctrine of 
the resurrection; and, looking to this, we both await the dissolution of the 
body, as the sequel to a life of want and corruption, and after this we hope for 
a continuance with immortality, not putting either our death on a level with the 
death of the irrational animals, or the continuance of man with the continuance 
of immortals, lest we should unawares in this way put human nature and life on a 
level with things with which it is not proper to compare them. It ought not, 
therefore, to excite dissatisfaction, if some inequality appears to exist in 
regard to the duration of men; nor, because the separation of the soul from the 
members of the body and the dissolution of its parts interrupts the continuity 
of life, must we therefore despair of the resurrection. For although the 
relaxation of the senses and of the physical powers, which naturally takes place 
in sleep, seems to interrupt the sensational life when men sleep at equal 
intervals of time, and, as it were, come back to life again, yet we do not 
refuse to call it life; and for this reason, I suppose, some call sleep the 
brother of death, not as deriving their origin from the same ancestors and 
fathers, but because those who are dead and those who sleep are subject to 
similar states, as regards at least the stillness and the absence of all sense 
of the present or the past, or rather of existence itself and their own life. 
If, therefore, we do not refuse to call by the name of life the life of men full 
of such inequality from birth to dissolution, and interrupted by all those 
things which we have before mentioned, neither ought we to despair of the life 
succeeding to dissolution, such as involves the resurrection, although for a 
time it is interrupted by the separation of the soul from the body. 
CHAP. XVII.--THE SERIES OF CHANGES WE CAN NOW TRACE IN MAN RENDERS A 
RESURRECTION PROBABLE. 
For this nature of men, which has inequality allotted to it from the first, 
and according to the purpose of its Maker, has an unequal life and continuance, 
interrupted sometimes by sleep, at another time by death, and by the changes 
incident to each period of life, whilst those which follow the first are not 
clearly seen beforehand. Would any one have believed, unless taught by 
experience, that in the soft seed alike in all its parts there was deposited 
such a variety and number of great powers, or of masses, which in this way arise 
and become consolidated--I mean of bones, and nerves, and cartilages, of muscles 
too, and flesh, and intestines, and the other parts of the body? For neither in 
the yet moist seed is anything of this kind to be seen, nor even in infants do 
any of those things make their appearance which pertain to adults, or in the 
adult period what belongs to those who are past their prime, or in these what 
belongs to such as have grown old. But although some of the things I have said 
exhibit not at all, and others but faintly, the natural sequence and the changes 
that come upon the nature of men, yet all who are not blinded in their judgment 
of these matters by vice or sloth, know that there must be first the depositing 
of the seed, and that when this is completely organized in respect of every 
member and part and the progeny comes forth to the light, there comes the growth 
belonging to the first period of life, and the maturity which attends growth, 
and after the maturity the slackening of the physical powers till old age, and 
then, when the body is worn out, its dissolution. As, therefore, in this matter, 
though neither the seed has inscribed upon it the life or form of men, nor the 
life the dissolution into the primary elements; the succession of natural 
occurrences makes things credible which have no credibility from the phenomena 
themselves, much more does reason, tracing out the truth from the natural 
sequence, afford ground for believing in the resurrection, since it is safer and 
stronger than experience for establishing the truth. 
CHAP. XVIII.--JUDGMENT MUST HAVE REFERENCE BOTH TO SOUL AND BODY: THERE WILL 
THEREFORE BE A RESURRECTION. 
The arguments I just now proposed for examination, as establishing the truth 
of the resurrection, are all of the same kind, since they all start from the 
same point; for their starting: point is the origin of the first men by 
creation. But while some of them derive their strength from the starting-point 
itself from which they take their rise, others, consequent upon the nature and 
the life of men, acquire their credibility from the superintendence of God over 
us; for the cause according to which, and on account of which, men have come 
into being, being closely connected with the nature of men, derives its force 
from creation; but the argument from rectitude, which represents God as judging 
men according as they have lived well or ill, derives its force from the end of 
their existence: they come into being on the former ground, but their state 
depends more on God's superintendence. And now that the matters which come first 
have been demonstrated by me to the best of my ability, it will be well to prove 
our proposition by those also which come after--I mean by the reward or 
punishment due to each man in accordance with righteous judgment, and by the 
final cause of human existence; and of these I put foremost that which takes the 
lead by nature, and inquire first into the argument relating to the judgment: 
premising only one thing, from concern for the principle which appertains to the 
matters before us, and for order--namely, that it is incumbent on those who 
admit God to be the Maker of this universe, to ascribe to His wisdom and 
rectitude the preservation and care of all that has been created if they wish to 
keep to their own principles; and with such views to hold that nothing either in 
earth or in heaven is without guardianship or providence, but that; on the 
contrary, to everything, invisible and visible alike, small and great, the 
attention of the Creator reaches; for all created things require the attention 
of the Creator, and each one in particular, according to its nature and the end 
for which it was made: though I think it would be a useless expenditure of 
trouble to go through the list now, or distinguish between the several cases, or 
mention in detail what is suitable to each nature. Man, at all events, of whom 
it is now our business to speak, as being in want, requires food; as being 
mortal, posterity; as being rational, a process of judgment. But if each of 
these things belongs to man by nature, and he requires food for his life, and 
requires posterity for the continuance of the race, and requires a judgment in 
order that food and posterity may be according to law, it of course follows, 
since food and posterity refer to both together, that the judgment must be 
referred to them too (by both together I mean man, consisting of soul and body), 
and that such man becomes accountable for all his actions, and receives for them 
either reward or punishment. Now, if the righteous judgment awards to both 
together its retribution for the deeds wrought; and if it is not proper that 
either the soul alone should receive the wages of the deeds wrought in union 
with the body (for this of itself has no inclination to the faults which are 
committed in connection with the pleasure or food and culture of the body), or 
that the body alone should (for this of itself is incapable of distinguishing 
law and justice), but man, composed of these, is subjected to trial for each of 
the deeds wrought by him; and if reason does not find this happening either in 
this life (for the award according to merit finds no place in the present 
existence, since many atheists and persons who practise every iniquity and 
wickedness live on to the last, unvisited by calamity, whilst, on the contrary, 
those who have manifestly lived an exemplary life in respect of every Virtue, 
live in pain, in insult, in calumny and outrage, and suffering of all kinds) or 
after death (for both together no longer exist, the soul being separated from 
the body, and the body itself being resolved again into the materials out of 
which it was composed, and no longer retaining anything of its former structure 
or form, much less the remembrance of its actions): the result of all this is 
very plain to every one,--namely, that, in the language of the apostle, "this 
corruptible (and dissoluble) must put on incorruption," in order that those who 
were dead, having been made alive by the resurrection, and the parts that were 
separated and entirely dissolved having been again united, each one may, in 
accordance with justice, receive what he has done by the body, whether it be 
good or bad. 
CHAP. XIX.--MAN WOULD BE MORE UNFAVOURABLY SITUATED THAN THE BEASTS IF THERE 
WERE NO RESURRECTION. 
In replying, then, to those who acknowledge a divine superintendence, and 
admit the same principles as we do, yet somehow depart from their own 
admissions, one may use such arguments as those which have been adduced, and 
many more than these, should he be disposed to amplify what has been said only 
concisely and in a cursory manner. But in dealing with those who differ from us 
concerning primary truths, it will perhaps be well to lay down another principle 
antecedent to these, joining with them in doubting of the things to which their 
opinions relate, and examining the matter along with them in this 
manner--whether the life of men, and their entire course of existence, is 
overlooked, and a sort of dense darkness is poured down upon the earth, hiding 
in ignorance and silence both the men themselves and their actions; or whether 
it is much safer to be of opinion that the Maker presides over the things which 
He Himself has made, inspecting all things whatsoever which exist, or come into 
existence, Judge of both deeds and purposes. For if no judgment whatever were to 
be passed on the actions of men, men would have no advantage over the irrational 
creatures, but rather would fare worse than these do, inasmuch as they keep in 
subjection their passions, and concern themselves about piety, and 
righteousness, and the other virtues; and a life after the manner of brutes 
would be the best, virtue would be absurd, the threat of judgment a matter for 
broad laughter, indulgence in every kind of pleasure the highest good, and the 
common resolve of all these and their one law would be that maxim, so dear to 
the intemperate and lewd, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die." For the 
termination of such a life is not even pleasure, as some suppose, but utter 
insensibility. But if the Maker of men takes any concern about His own works, 
and the distinction is anywhere to be found between those who have lived well 
and ill, it must be either in the present life, while men are still living who 
have conducted themselves virtuously or vicious ly, or after death, when men are 
in a state of separation and dissolution. But according to neither of these 
suppositions can we find a just judgment taking place; for neither do the good 
in the present life obtain the rewards of virtue, nor yet do the bad receive the 
wages of vice. I pass over the fact, that so long as the nature we at present 
possess is preserved, the moral nature is not able to bear a punishment 
commensurate with the more numerous or more serious faults. For the robber, or 
ruler, or tyrant, who has unjustly put to death myriads on myriads, could not by 
one death make restitution for these deeds; and the man who holds no true 
opinion concerning God, but lives in all outrage and blasphemy, despises divine 
things, breaks the laws, commits outrage against boys and women alike, razes 
cities unjustly, burns houses with their inhabitants, and devastates a country, 
and at the same time destroys inhabitants of cities and peoples, and even an 
entire nation--how in a mortal body could he endure a penalty adequate to these 
crimes, since death prevents the deserved punishment, and the mortal nature does 
not suffice for any single one of his deeds? It is proved, therefore, that 
neither in the present life is there a judgment according to men's deserts, nor 
after death. 
CHAP. XX.--MAN MUST BE POSSESSED BOTH OF A BODY AND SOUL HEREAFTER, THAT THE 
JUDGMENT PASSED UPON HIM MAY BE JUST. 
For either death is the entire extinction of life, the soul being dissolved 
and corrupted along with the body, or the soul remains by itself, incapable of 
dissolution, of dispersion, of corruption, whilst the body is corrupted and 
dissolved, retaining no longer any remembrance of past actions, nor sense of 
what it experienced in connection with the soul. If the life of men is to be 
utterly extinguished, it is manifest there will be no care for men who are not 
living, no judgment respecting those who have lived in virtue or in vice; but 
there will rush in again upon us whatever belongs to a lawless life, and the 
swarm of absurdities which follow from it, and that which is the summit of this 
lawlessness--atheism. But if the body were to be corrupted, and each of the 
dissolved particles to pass to its kindred element, yet the soul to remain by 
itself as immortal, neither on this supposition would any judgment on the soul 
take place, since there would be an absence of equity: for it is unlawful to 
suspect that any judgment can proceed out of God and from God which is wanting 
in equity. Yet equity is wanting to the judgment, if the being is not preserved 
in existence who practised righteousness or lawlessness: for that which 
practised each of the things in life on which the judgment is passed was man, 
not soul by itself. To sum up all in a word, this view will in no case consist 
with equity. 
CHAP. XXI.--CONTINUATION OF THE ARGUMENT. 
For if good deeds are rewarded, the body will clearly be wronged, inasmuch as 
it has shared with the soul in the toils connected with well-doing, but does not 
share in the reward of the good deeds, and because, though the soul is often 
excused for certain faults on the ground of the body's neediness and want, the 
body itself is deprived of all share in the good deeds done, the toils on behalf 
of which it helped to bear during life. Nor, again, if faults are judged, is the 
soul dealt fairly with, supposing it alone to pay the penalty for the faults it 
committed through being solicited by the body and drawn away by it to its own 
appetites and motions, at one time being seized upon and carried off, at another 
attracted in some very violent manner, and sometimes concurring with it by way 
of kindness and attention to its preservation. How can it possibly be other than 
unjust for the soul to be judged by itself in respect of things towards which in 
its own nature it feels no appetite, no motion, no impulse, such as 
licentiousness, violence, covetousness, injustice, and the unjust acts arising 
out of these? For if the majority of such evils come from men's not having the 
mastery of the passions which solicit them, and they are solicited by the 
neediness and want of the body, and the care and attention required by it (for 
these are the motives for every acquisition of property, and especially for the 
using of it, and moreover for marriage and all the actions of life, in which 
things, and in connection with which, is seen what is faulty and what is not 
so), how can it be just for the soul alone to be judged in respect of those 
things which the body is the first to be sensible of, and in which it draws the 
soul away to sympathy and participation in actions with a view to things Which 
it wants; and that the appetites and pleasures, and moreover the fears and 
sorrows, in which whatever exceeds the proper bounds is amenable to judgment, 
should be set in motion by the body, and yet that the sins arising from these, 
and the punishments for the sins committed, should fall upon the soul alone, 
which neither needs anything of this sort, nor desires nor fears or suffers of 
itself any such thing as man is wont to suffer? But even if we hold that these 
affections do not pertain to the body alone, but to man, in saying which we 
should speak correctly, because the life of man is one, though composed of the 
two, yet surely we shall not assert that these things belong to the soul, if we 
only look simply at its peculiar nature. For if it is absolutely without need of 
food, it can never desire those things which it does not in the least require 
for its subsistence; nor can it feel any impulse towards any of those things 
which it is not at all fitted to use; nor, again, can it be grieved at the want 
of money or other property, since these are not suited to it. And if, too, it is 
superior to corruption, it fears nothing whatever as destructive of itself: it 
has no dread of famine, or disease, or mutilation, or blemish, or fire, or 
sword, since it cannot suffer from any of these any hurt or pain, because 
neither bodies nor bodily powers touch it at all. But if it is absurd to attach 
the passions to the soul as belonging specially to it, it is in the highest 
degree unjust and unworthy of the judgment of God to lay upon the soul alone the 
sins which spring from them, and the consequent punishments. 
CHAP. XXII.--CONTINUATION OF THE ARGUMENT. 
In addition to what has been said, is it not absurd that, while we cannot 
even have the notion of virtue and vice as existing separately in the soul (for 
we recognise the virtues as man's virtues, even as in like manner vice, their 
opposite, as not belonging to the soul in separation from the body, and existing 
by itself), yet that the reward or punishment for these should be assigned to 
the soul alone? How can any one have even the notion of courage or fortitude as 
existing in the soul alone, when it has no fear of death, or wounds, or maiming, 
or loss, or maltreatment, or of the pain connected with these, or the suffering 
resulting from them? And what shall we say of self-control and temperance, when 
there is no desire drawing it to food or sexual intercourse, or other pleasures 
and enjoyments, nor any other thing soliciting it from within or exciting it 
from without? And what of practical wisdom, when things are not proposed to it 
which may or may not be done, nor things to be chosen or avoided, or rather when 
there is in it no motion at all or natural impulse towards the doing of 
anything? And how in any sense can equity be an attribute of souls, either in 
reference to one another or to anything else, whether of the same or of a 
different kind, when they are not able from any source, or by any means, or in 
any way, to bestow that which is equal according to merit or according to 
analogy, with the exception of the honour rendered to God, and, moreover, have 
no impulse or motion towards the use of their own things, or abstinence from 
those of others, since the use of those things which are according to nature, or 
the abstinence from them, is considered in reference to those who are so 
constituted as to use them, whereas the soul neither wants anything, nor is so 
constituted as to use any things or any single thing, and therefore what is 
called the independent action of the parts cannot be found in the soul so 
constituted? 
CHAP. XXIII.--CONTINUATION OF THE ARGUMENT. 
But the most irrational thing of all is this: to impose properly sanctioned 
laws on men, and then to assign to their souls alone the recompense of their 
lawful or unlawful deeds. For if he who receives the laws would also justly 
receive the recompense of the transgression of the laws, and if it was man that 
received the laws, and not the soul by itself, man must also bear the recompense 
for the sins committed, and not the soul by itself, since God has not enjoined 
on souls to abstain from things which have no relation to them, such as 
adultery, murder, theft, rapine, dishonour to parents, and every desire in 
general that tends to the injury and loss of our neighbours. For neither the 
command, "Honour thy father and thy mother," is adapted to souls alone, since 
such names are not applicable to them, for souls do not produce souls, so as to 
appropriate the appellation of father or mother, but men produce men; nor could 
the command, "Thou shalt not commit adultery," ever be properly addressed to 
souls, or even thought of in such a connection, since the difference of male and 
female does not exist in them, nor any aptitude for sexual intercourse, nor 
appetite for it; and where there is no appetite, there can be no intercourse; 
and where there is no intercourse at all, there can be no legitimate 
intercourse, namely marriage; and where there is no lawful intercourse, neither 
can there be unlawful desire of, or intercourse with, another man's wife, namely 
adultery. Nor, again, is the prohibition of theft, or of the desire of having 
more, applicable to souls, for they do not need those things, through the need 
of which, by reason of natural indigence or want, men are accustomed to steal or 
to rob, such as gold, or silver, or an animal, or something else adapted for 
food, or shelter, or use; for to an immortal nature everything which is desired 
by the needy as useful is useless. 
But let the fuller discussion of these matters be left to those who wish to 
investigate each point more exactly, or to contend more earnestly with 
opponents. But, since what has just been said, and that which concurs with this 
to guarantee the resurrection, suffices for us, it would not be seasonable to 
dwell any longer upon them; for we have not made it our aim to omit nothing that 
might be said, but to point out in a summary manner to those who have assembled 
what ought to be thought concerning the resurrection, and to adapt to the 
capacity of those present the arguments bearing on this question. 
CHAP. XXIV.--ARGUMENT FOR THE RESURRECTION FROM THE CHIEF END OF MAN. 
The points proposed for consideration having been to some extent 
investigated, it remains to examine the argument from the end or final cause, 
which indeed has already emerged m what has been said, and only requires just so 
much attention and further discussion as may enable us to avoid the appearance 
of leaving unmentioned any of the matters briefly referred to by us, and thus 
indirectly damaging the subject or the division of topics made at the outset. 
For the sake of those present, therefore, and of others who may pay attention to 
this subject, it may be well just to signify that each of those things which are 
constituted by nature, and of those which are made by art, must have an end 
peculiar to itself, as indeed is taught us by the common sense of all men, and 
testified by the things that pass before our eyes. For do we not see that 
husbandmen have one end, and physicians another; and again, the things which 
spring out of the earth another, and the animals nourished upon it, and produced 
according to a certain natural series, another? If this is evident, and natural 
and artificial powers, and the actions arising from these, must by all means be 
accompanied by an end in accordance with nature, it is absolutely necessary that 
the end of men, since it is that of a peculiar nature, should be separated from 
community with the rest; for it is not lawful to suppose the same end for beings 
destitute of rational judgment, and of those whose actions are regulated by the 
innate law and reason, and who live an intelligent life and observe justice. 
Freedom from pain, therefore, cannot be the proper end for the latter, for this 
they would have in common with beings utterly devoid of sensibility: nor can it 
consist in the enjoyment of things which nourish or delight the body, or in an 
abundance of pleasures; else a life like that of the brutes must hold the first 
place, while that regulated by virtue is without a final cause. For such an end 
as this, I suppose, belongs to beasts and cattle, not to men possessed of an 
immortal soul and rational judgment. 
CHAP. XXV.--ARGUMENT CONTINUED AND CONCLUDED. 
Nor again is it the happiness of soul separated from body: for we are not 
inquiring about the life or final cause of either of the parts of which man 
consists, but of the being who is composed of both; for such is every man who 
has a share in this present existence, and there must be some appropriate end 
proposed for this life. But if it is the end of both parts together, and this 
can be discovered neither while they are still living in the present state of 
existence through the numerous causes already mentioned, nor yet when the soul 
is in a state of separation, because the man cannot be said to exist when the 
body is dissolved, and indeed entirely scattered abroad, even though the soul 
continue by itself--it is absolutely necessary that the end of a man's being 
should appear in some reconstitution of the two together, and of the same living 
being. And as this follows of necessity, there must by all means be a 
resurrection of the bodies which are dead, or even entirely dissolved, and the 
same men must be formed anew, since the law of nature ordains the end not 
absolutely, nor as the end of any men whatsoever, but of the same men who passed 
through the previous life; but it is impossible for the same men to be 
reconstituted unless the same bodies are restored to the same souls. But that 
the same soul should obtain the same body is impossible in any other way, and 
possible only by the resurrection; for if this takes place, an end befitting the 
nature of men follows also. And we shall make no mistake in saying, that the 
final cause of an intelligent life and rational judgment, is to be occupied 
uninterruptedly with those objects to which the natural reason is chiefly and 
primaily adapted, and to delight unceasingly in the contemplation of Him who is, 
and of His decrees, notwithstanding that the majority of men, because they are 
affected too passionately and too violently by things below, pass through life 
without attaining this object. For the large number of those who fail of the end 
that belongs to them does not make void the common lot, since the examination 
relates to individuals, and the reward or punishment of lives ill or well spent 
is proportioned to the merit of each. 

