
Clement of Alexandria












The Stromata, or Miscellanies
Book II
CHAPTER I -- INTRODUCTORY. 
As Scripture has called the Greeks pilferers of the Barbarian philosophy, it 
will next have to be considered how this may be briefly demonstrated. For we 
shall not only show that they have imitated and copied the marvels recorded in 
our books; but we shall prove, besides, that they have plagiarized and falsified 
(our writings being, as we have shown, older) the chief dogmas they hold, both 
on faith and knowledge and science, and hope and love, and also on repentance 
and temperance and the fear of God, -- a whole swarm, verily, of the virtues of 
truth. 
Whatever the explication necessary on the point in hand shall demand, shall 
be embraced, and especially what is occult in the barbarian philosophy, the 
department of symbol and enigma; which those who have subjected the teaching of 
the ancients to systematic philosophic study have affected, as being in the 
highest degree serviceable, nay, absolutely necessary to the knowledge of truth. 
In addition, it will in my opinion form an appropriate sequel to defend those 
tenets, on account of which the Greeks assail us, making use of a few 
Scriptures, if perchance the Jew also may listen and be able quietly to turn 
from what he has believed to Him on whom he has not believed. The ingenuous 
among the philosophers will then with propriety be taken up in a friendly 
exposure both of their life and of the discovery of new dogmas, not in the way 
of our avenging ourselves on our detractors (for that is far from being the case 
with those who have learned to bless those who curse, even though they 
needlessly discharge on us words of blasphemy), but with a view to their 
conversion; if by any means these adepts in wisdom may feel ashamed, being 
brought to their senses by barbarian demonstration; so as to be able, although 
late, to see clearly of what sort are the intellectual acquisitions for which 
they make pilgrimages over the seas. Those they have stolen are to be pointed 
out, that we may thereby pull down their conceit; and of those on the discovery 
of which through investigation they plume themselves, the refutation will be 
furnished. By consequence, also we must treat of what is called the curriculum 
of study -- how far it is serviceable; and of astrology, and mathematics, and 
magic, and sorcery. For all the Greeks boast of these as the highest sciences. 
"He who reproves boldly is a peacemaker." We lave often said already that we 
have neither practised nor do we study the expressing ourselves in pure Greek; 
for this suits those who seduce the multitude from the truth. But true 
philosophic demonstration will contribute to the profit not of the listeners' 
tongues, but of their minds. And, in my opinion, he who is solicitous about 
truth ought not to frame his language with artfulness and care, but only to try 
to express his meaning as he best can. For those who are particular about words, 
and devote their time to them, miss the things. It is a feat fit for the 
gardener to pluck without injury the rose that is growing among the thorns; and 
for the craftsman to find out the pearl buried in the oyster's flesh. And they 
say that fowls have flesh of the most agreeable quality, when, through not being 
supplied with abundance of food, they pick their sustenance with difficulty, 
scraping with their feet. If any one, then, speculating on what is similar, 
wants to arrive at the truth [that is] in the numerous Greek plausibilities, 
like the real face beneath masks, he will hunt it out with much pains. For the 
power that appeared in the vision to Hermas said, "Whatever may be revealed to 
you, shall be revealed." 
CHAPTER II -- THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD CAN BE ATTAINED ONLY THROUGH FAITH. 
"Be not elated on account of thy wisdom," say the Proverbs. "In all thy ways 
acknowledge her, that she may direct thy ways, and that thy foot may not 
stumble." By these remarks he means to show that our deeds ought to be 
conformable to reason, and to manifest further that we ought to select and 
possess what is useful out of all culture. Now the ways of wisdom are various 
that lead right to the way of truth. Faith is the way. "Thy foot shall not 
stumble" is said with reference to some who seem to oppose the one divine 
administration of Providence. Whence it is added, "Be not wise in thine own 
eyes," according to the impious ideas which revolt against the administration of 
God. "But fear God," who alone is powerful. Whence it follows as a consequence 
that we are not to oppose God. The sequel especially teaches clearly, that "the 
fear of God is departure from evil;" for it is said, "and depart from all evil." 
Such is the discipline of wisdom ("for whom the Lord loveth He chastens" ), 
causing pain in order to produce understanding, and restoring to peace and 
immortality. Accordingly, the Barbarian philosophy, which we follow, is in 
reality perfect and true. And so it is said in the book of Wisdom: "For He hath 
given me the unerring knowledge of things that exist, to know the constitution 
of the word," and so forth, down to "and the virtues of roots." Among all these 
he comprehends natural science, which treats of all the phenomena in the world 
of sense. And in continuation, he alludes also to intellectual objects in what 
he subjoins: "And what is hidden or manifest I know; for Wisdom, the artificer 
of all things, taught me." You have, in brief, the professed aim of our 
philosophy; and the learning of these branches, when pursued with right course 
of conduct, leads through Wisdom, the artificer of all things, to the Ruler of 
all, -- a Being difficult to grasp and apprehend, ever receding and withdrawing 
from him who pursues. But He who is far off has -- oh ineffable marvel! -- come 
very near. "I am a God: that draws near," says the Lord. He is in essence 
remote; "for how is it that what is begotten can have approached the 
Unbegotten?" But He is very near in virtue of that power which holds all things 
in its embrace. "Shall one do aught in secret, and I see him not?" For the power 
of God is always present, in contact with us, in the exercise of inspection, of 
beneficence, of instruction. Whence Moses, persuaded that God is not to be known 
by human wisdom, said, "Show me Thy glory;" and into the thick darkness where 
God's voice was, pressed to enter -- that is, into the inaccessible and 
invisible ideas respecting Existence. For God is not in darkness or in place, 
but above both space and time, and qualities of objects. Wherefore neither is He 
at any time in a part, either as containing or as contained, either by 
limitation or by section. "For what house will ye build to Me?" saith the Lord? 
Nay, He has not even built one for Himself, since He cannot be contained. And 
though heaven be called His throne, not even thus is He contained, but He rests 
delighted in the creation. 
It is clear, then, that the truth has been hidden from us; and if that has 
been already shown by one example, we shall establish it a little after by 
several more. How entirely worthy of approbation are they who are both willing 
to learn, and able, according to Solomon, "to know wisdom and instruction, and 
to perceive the words of wisdom, to receive knotty words, and to perceive true 
righteousness," there being another [righteousness as well], not according to 
the truth, taught by the Greek laws, and by the rest of the philosophers. "And 
to direct judgments," it is said -- not those of the bench, but he means that we 
must preserve sound and free of error the judicial faculty which is within us -- 
"That I may give subtlety to the simple, to the young man sense and 
understanding." "For the wise man," who has been persuaded to obey the 
commandments, "having heard these things, will become wiser" by knowledge; and 
"the intelligent man will acquire rule, and will understand a parable and a dark 
word, the sayings and enigmas of the wise." For it is not spurious words which 
those inspired by God and those who are gained over by them adduce, nor is it 
snares in which the most of the sophists entangle the young, spending their time 
on nought true. But those who possess the Holy Spirit "search the deep things of 
God," -- that is, grasp the secret that is in the prophecies. "To impart of holy 
things to the dogs" is forbidden, so long as they remain beasts. For never ought 
those who are envious and perturbed, and still infidel in conduct, shameless in 
barking at inves tigation, to dip in the divine and clear stream of the living 
water. "Let not the waters of thy fountain overflow, and let thy waters spread 
over thine own streets." For it is not many who understand such things as they 
fall in with; or know them even after learning them, though they think they do, 
according to the worthy Heraclitus. Does not even he seem to thee to censure 
those who believe not? "Now my just one shall live by faith," the prophet said. 
And another prophet also says, "Except ye believe, neither shall ye understand." 
For how ever could the soul admit the transcendental contemplation of such 
themes, while unbelief respecting what was to be learned struggled within? But 
faith, which the Greeks disparage, deeming it futile and barbarous, is a 
voluntary preconception the assent of piety -- " the subject of things hoped 
for, the evidence of things not seen," according to the divine apostle. "For 
hereby," pre-eminently, "the elders obtained a good report. But without faith it 
is impossible to please God." Others have defined faith to be a uniting assent 
to an unseen object, as certainly the proof of an unknown thing is an evident 
assent. If then it be choice, being desirous of something, the desire is in this 
instance intellectual. And since choice is the beginning of action, faith is 
discovered to be the beginning of action, being the foundation of rational 
choice in the case of any one who exhibits to himself the previous demonstration 
through faith. Voluntarily to follow what is useful, is the first principle of 
understanding. Unswerving choice, then, gives considerable momentum in the 
direction of knowledge. The exercise of faith directly becomes knowledge, 
reposing on a sure foundation. Knowledge, accordingly, is defined by the sons of 
the philosophers as a habit, which cannot be overthrown by reason. Is there any 
other true condition such as this, except piety, of which alone the Word is 
teacher? I think not. 
Theophrastus says that sensation is the root of faith. For from it the 
rudimentary principles extend to the reason that is in us, and the 
understanding. He who believeth then the divine Scriptures with sure judgment, 
receives in the voice of God, who bestowed the Scripture, a demonstration that 
cannot be impugned. Faith, then, is not established by demonstration. "Blessed 
therefore those who, not having seen, yet have believed." The Siren's songs, 
exhibiting a power above human, fascinated those that came near, conciliating 
them, almost against their will, to the reception of what was said. 
CHAPTER III -- FAITH NOT A PRODUCT OF NATURE. 
Now the followers of Basilides regard faith as natural, as they also refer it 
to choice, [representing it] as finding ideas by intellectual comprehension 
without demonstration; while the followers of Valentinus assign faith to us, the 
simple, but will have it that knowledge springs up in their own selves (who are 
saved by nature) through the advantage of a germ of superior excellence, saying 
that it is as far removed from faith as s the spiritual is from the animal. 
Further, the followers of Basilides say that faith as well as choice is proper 
according to every interval; and that in consequence of the supramundane 
selection mundane faith accompanies all nature, and that the free gift of faith 
is comformable to the hope of each. Faith, then, is no longer the direct result 
of free choice, if it is a natural advantage. 
Nor will he who has not believed, not being the author [of his unbelief], 
meet with a due recompense; and he that has believed is not the cause [of his 
belief]. And the entire peculiarity and difference of belief and unbelief will 
not fall under either praise or censure, if we reflect rightly, since there 
attaches to it the antecedent natural necessity proceeding from the Almighty. 
And if we are pulled like inanimate things by the puppet-strings of natural 
powers, willingness and unwillingness, and impulse, which is the antecedent of 
both, are mere redundancies. And for my part, I am utterly incapable of 
conceiving such an animal as has its appetencies, which are moved by external 
causes, under the dominion of necessity. And what place is there any longer for 
the repentance of him who was once an unbeliever, through which comes 
forgiveness of sins? So that neither is baptism rational, nor the blessed seal, 
nor the Son, nor the Father. But God, as I think, turns out to be the 
distribution to men of natural powers, which has not as the foundation of 
salvation voluntary faith. 
CHAPTER IV -- FAITH THE FOUNDATION OF ALL KNOWLEDGE. 
But we, who have heard by the Scriptures that self-determining choice and 
refusal have been given by the Lord to men, rest in the infallible criterion of 
faith, manifesting a willing spirit, since we have chosen life and believe God 
through His voice. And he who has believed the Word knows the matter to be true; 
for the Word is truth. But he who has disbelieved Him that speaks, has 
disbelieved God. 
"By faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so 
that what is seen was not made of things which appear," says the apostle. "By 
faith Abel offered to God a fuller sacrifice than Cain, by which he received 
testimony that he was righteous, God giving testimony to him respecting his 
gifts; and by it he, being dead, yet speaketh," and so forth, down to "than 
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season." Faith having, therefore, justified 
these before the law, made them heirs of the divine promise. Why then should I 
review and adduce any further testimonies of faith from the history in our 
hands? "For the time would fail me were I to tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, 
Jephtha, David, and Samuel, and the prophets," and what follows. Now, inasmuch 
as there are four things in which the truth resides -- Sensation, Understanding, 
Knowledge, Opinion, -- intellectual apprehension is first in the order of 
nature; but in our case, and in relation to ourselves, Sensation is first, and 
of Sensation and Understanding the essence of Knowledge is formed; and evidence 
is common to Understanding and Sensation. Well Sensation is the ladder to 
Knowledge; while Faith, advancing over the pathway of the objects of sense, 
leaves Opinion behind, and speeds to things free of deception, and reposes in 
the truth. 
Should one say that Knowledge is founded on demonstration by a process of 
reasoning, let him hear that first principles are incapable of demonstration; 
for they are known neither by art nor sagacity. For the latter is conversant 
about objects that are susceptible of change, while the former is practical 
solely, and not theoretical. Hence it is thought that the first cause of the 
universe can be apprehended by faith alone. For all knowledge is capable of 
being taught; and what is capable of being taught is rounded on what is known 
before. But the first cause of the universe was not previously known to the 
Greeks; neither, accordingly, to Thales, who came to the conclusion that water 
was the first i cause; nor to the other natural philosophers who succeeded him, 
since it was Anaxagoras who was the first who assigned to Mind the supremacy 
over material things. But not even he preserved the dignity suited to the 
efficient cause, describing as he did certain silly vortices, together with the 
inertia and even foolishness of Mind. Wherefore also the Word says, "Call no man 
master on earth." For knowledge is a state of mind that results from 
demonstration; but faith is a grace which from what is indemonstrable conducts 
to what is universal and simple, what is neither with matter, nor matter, nor 
under matter. But those who believe not, as to be expected, drag all down from 
heaven, and the region of the invisible, to earth, "absolutely grasping with 
their hands rocks and oaks," according to Plato. For, clinging to all such 
things, they asseverate that that alone exists which can be touched and handled, 
defining body and essence to be identical: disputing against themselves, they 
very piously defend the existence of certain intellectual and bodiless forms 
descending somewhere from above from the invisible world, vehemently maintaining 
that there is a true essence. "Lo, I make new things," saith the Word, "which 
eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man." 
With a new eye, a new ear, a new heart, whatever can be seen and heard is to be 
apprehended, by the faith and understanding of the disciples of the Lord, who 
speak, hear, and act spiritually. For there is genuine coin, and other that is 
spurious; which no less deceives unprofessionals, that it does not the 
money-changers; who know through having learned how to separate and distinguish 
what has a false stamp from what is genuine. So the money-changer only says to 
the unprofessional man that the coin is counterfeit. But the reason why, only 
the banker's apprentice, and he that is trained to this department, learns. 
Now Aristotle says that the judgment which follows knowledge is in truth 
faith. Accordingly, faith is something superior to knowledge, and is its 
criterion. Conjecture, which is only a feeble supposition, counterfeits faith; 
as the flatterer counterfeits a friend, and the wolf the dog. And as the workman 
sees that by learning certain things he becomes an artificer, and the helmsman 
by being instructed in the art will be able to steer; he does not regard the 
mere wishing to become excellent and good enough, but he must learn it by the 
exercise of obedience. But to obey the Word, whom we call Instructor, is to 
believe Him, going against Him in nothing. For how can we take up a position of 
hostility to God? Knowledge, accordingly, is characterized by faith; and faith, 
by a kind of divine mutual and reciprocal correspondence, becomes characterized 
by knowledge. 
Epicurus, too, who very greatly preferred pleasure to truth, supposes faith 
to be a preconception of the mind; and defines preconception to be a grasping at 
something evident, and at the clear understanding of the thing; and asserts 
that, without preconception, no one can either inquire, or doubt, or judge, or 
even argue. How can one, without a preconceived idea of what he is aiming after, 
learn about that which is the subject of his investigation? He, again, who has 
learned has already turned his preconception into comprehension. And if he who 
learns, learns not without a preconceived idea which takes. in what is 
expressed, that man has ears to hear the truth. And happy is the man that speaks 
to the ears of those who hear; as happy certainly also is he who is a child of 
obedience. Now to hear is to understand. If, then, faith is nothing else than a 
preconception of the mind in regard to what is the subject of discourse, and 
obedience is so called, and understanding and persuasion; no one shall learn 
aught without faith, since no one [learns aught] without preconception. 
Consequently there is a more ample demonstration of the complete truth of what 
was spoken by the prophet, "Unless ye believe, neither will ye understand." 
Paraphrasing this oracle, Heraclitus of Ephesus says, "If a man hope not, he 
will not find that which is not hoped for, seeing it is inscrutable and 
inaccessible." Plato the philosopher, also, in The Laws, says, "that he who 
would be blessed and happy, must be straight from the beginning a partaker of 
the truth, so as to live true for as long a period as possible; for he is a man 
of faith. But the unbeliever is one to whom voluntary falsehood is agreeable; 
and the man to whom involuntary falsehood is agreeable is senseless; neither of 
which is desirable. For he who is devoid of friendliness, is faithless and 
ignorant." And does he not enigmatically say in Euthydemus, that this is "the 
regal wisdom"? In The Statesman he says expressly, "So that the knowledge of the 
true king is kingly; and he who possesses it, whether a prince or private 
person, shall by all means, in consequence of this act, be rightly styled 
royal." Now those who have believed in Christ both are and are called Chrestoi 
(good), as those who are cared for by the true king are kingly. For as the wise 
are wise by their wisdom, and those observant of law are so by the law; so also 
those who belong to Christ the King are kings, and those that are Christ's 
Christians. Then, in continuation, he adds clearly, "What is right will turn out 
to be lawful, law being in its nature right reason, and not found in writings or 
elsewhere." And the stranger of Elea pronounces the kingly and statesmanlike man 
"a living law." Such is he who fulfils the law, "doing the will of the Father," 
inscribed on a lofty pillar, and set as an example of divine virtue to all who 
possess the power of seeing. The Greeks are acquainted with the staves of the 
Ephori at Lacedaemon, inscribed with the law on wood. But my law, as was said 
above, is both royal and living; and it is right reason. "Law, which is king of 
all -- of mortals and immortals," as the Boeotian Pindar sings. For Speusippus, 
in the first book against Cleophon, seems to write like Plato on this wise: "For 
if royalty be a good thing, and the wise man the only king and ruler, the law, 
which is fight reason, is good;" which is the case. The Stoics teach what is in 
conformity with this, assigning kinghood, priesthood, prophecy, legislation, 
riches, true beauty, noble birth, freedom, to the wise man alone. But that he is 
exceedingly difficult to find, is confessed even by them. 
CHAPTER V -- HE PROVES BY SEVERAL EXAMPLES THAT THE GREEKS DREW FROM THE 
SACRED WRITERS. 
Accordingly all those above-mentioned dogmas appear to have been transmitted 
from Moses the great to the Greeks. That all things belong to the wise man, is 
taught in these words: "And because God hath showed me mercy, I have all 
things." And that he is beloved of God, God intimates when He says, "The God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob." For the first is found to have 
been expressly called "friend;" and the second is shown to have received a new 
name, signifying "he that sees God;" while Isaac, God in a figure selected for 
Himself as a consecrated sacrifice, to be a type to us of the economy of 
salvation. 
Now among the Greeks, Minos the king of nine years' reign, and familiar 
friend of Zeus, is celebrated in song; they having heard how once God conversed 
with Moses, "as one speaking with his friend." Moses, then, was a sage, king, 
legislator. But our Saviour surpasses all human nature." He is so lovely, as to 
be alone loved by us, whose hearts are set on the true beauty, for "He was the 
true light." He is shown to be a King, as such hailed by unsophisticated 
children and by the unbelieving and ignorant Jews, and heralded by the prophets. 
So rich is He, that He despised the whole earth, and the gold above and beneath 
it, with all glory, when given to Him by the adversary. What need is there to 
say that He is the only High Priest, who alone possesses the knowledge of the 
worship of God? He is Melchizedek, "King of peace," the most fit of all to head 
the race of men. A legislator too, inasmuch as He gave the law by the mouth of 
the prophets, enjoining and teaching most distinctly what things are to be done, 
and what not. Who of nobler lineage than He whose only Father is God? Come, 
then, let us produce Plato assenting to those very dogmas. The wise man he calls 
rich in the Phoedrus, when he says, "O dear Pan, and whatever other gods are 
here, grant me to become fair within; and whatever external things I have, let 
them be agreeable to what is within. I would reckon the wise man rich." And the 
Athenian stranger, finding fault with those who think that those who have many 
possessions are rich, speaks thus: "For the very rich to be also good is 
impossible -- those, I mean, whom the multitude count rich. Those they call 
rich, who, among a few men, are owners of the possessions worth most money; 
which any bad man may possess." "The whole world of wealth belongs to the 
believer," Solomon says, "but not a penny to the unbeliever." Much more, then, 
is the Scripture to be believed which says, "It is easier for a camel to go 
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man " to lead a philosophic life. 
But, on the other hand, it blesses "the poor;" as Plato understood when he said, 
"It is not the diminishing of one's resources, but the augmenting of 
insatiableness, that is to be considered poverty; for it is not slender means 
that ever constitutes poverty, but insatiableness, from which the good man being 
free, will also be rich." And in Alcibiades he calls vice a servile thing, and 
virtue the attribute of freemen. "Take away from you the heavy yoke, and take up 
the easy one," says the Scripture; as also the poets call [vice] a slavish yoke. 
And the expression, "Ye have sold yourselves to your sins," agrees with what is 
said above: "Every one, then, who committeth sin is a slave; and the slave 
abideth not in the house for ever. But if the Son shall make you free, then 
shall ye be free, and the truth shall make you free." 
And again, that the wise man is beautiful, the Athenian stranger asserts, in 
the same way as if one were to affirm that certain persons were just, even 
should they happen to be ugly in their persons. And in speaking thus with 
respect to eminent rectitude of character, no one who should assert them to be 
on this account beautiful would be thought to speak extravagantly. And "His 
appearance was inferior to all the Sons of men," prophecy predicted. 
Plato, moreover, has called the wise man a king, in The Statesman. The remark 
is quoted above. 
These points being demonstrated, let us recur again to our discourse on 
faith. Well, with the fullest demonstration, Plato proves, that there is need of 
faith everywhere, celebrating peace at the same time: "For no man will ever be 
trusty and sound in seditions without entire virtue. There are numbers of 
mercenaries full of fight, and willing to die in war; but, with a very few 
exceptions, the most of them are desperadoes and villains, insolent and 
senseless." If these observations are right, "every legislator who is even of 
slight use, will, in making his laws, have an eye to the greatest virtue. Such 
is fidelity, which we need at all times, both in peace and in war, and in all 
the rest of our life, for it appears to embrace the other virtues. "But the best 
thing is neither war nor sedition, for the necessity of these is to be 
deprecated. But peace with one another and kindly feeling are what is best." 
From these remarks the greatest prayer evidently is to have peace, according 
to Plato. And faith is the greatest mother of the I virtues. Accordingly it is 
rightly said in Solomon, "Wisdom is in the mouth of the faithful." Since also 
Xenocrates, in his book on "Intelligence," says "that wisdom is the knowledge of 
first causes and of intellectual essence." He considers intelligence as twofold, 
practical and theoretical, which latter is human wisdom. Consequently wisdom is 
intelligence, but all intelligence is not wisdom. And it has been shown, that 
the knowledge of the first cause of the universe is of faith, but is not 
demonstration. For it were strange that the followers of the Samian Pythagoras, 
rejecting demonstrations of subjects of question, should regard the bare ipse 
dixit as ground of belief; and that this expression alone sufficed for the 
confirmation of what they heard, while those devoted to the contemplation of the 
truth, presuming to disbelieve the trustworthy Teacher, God the only Saviour, 
should demand of Him tests of His utterances. But He says, "He that hath ears to 
hear, let him hear." And who is he? Let Epicharmus say: "Mind sees, mind hears; 
all besides is deaf and blind." 
Rating some as unbelievers, Heraclitus says, "Not knowing how to hear or to 
speak;" aided doubtless by Solomon, who says, "If thou lovest to hear, thou 
shalt comprehend; and if thou incline thine ear, thou shalt be wise. 
CHAPTER VI -- THE EXCELLENCE AND UTILITY OF FAITH. 
"Lord, who hath believed our report?" Isaiah says. For "faith cometh by 
hearing, and hearing by the word of God," saith the apostle. "How then shall 
they call on Him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe on 
Him whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? And 
how shall they preach except they be sent? As it is written, How beautiful are 
the feet of those that publish glad tidings of good things! "3 You see how he 
brings faith by hearing, and the preaching of the apostles, up to the word of 
the Lord, and to the Son of God. We do not yet understand the word of the Lord 
to be demonstration. 
As, then, playing at ball not only depends on one throwing the ball 
skilfully, but it requires besides one to catch it dexterously, that the game 
may be gone through according to the rules for ball; so also is it the case that 
teaching is reliable when faith on the part of those who hear, being, so to 
speak, a sort of natural art, contributes to the process of learning. So also 
the earth co-operates, through its productive power, being fit for the sowing of 
the seed. For there is no good of the very best instruction without the exercise 
of the receptive faculty on the part of the learner, not even of prophecy, when 
there is the absence of docility on the part of those who hear. For dry twigs, 
being ready to receive the power of fire, are kindled with great ease; and the 
far-famed stone attracts steel through affinity, as the amber tear-drop drags to 
itself twigs, and the lump sets chaff in motion. And the substances attracted 
obey them, influenced by a subtle spirit, not as a cause, but as a concurring 
cause. 
There being then a twofold species of vice -- that characterized by craft and 
stealth, and that which leads and drives with violence -- the divine Word cries, 
calling all together; knowing perfectly well those that will not obey; 
notwithstanding then since to obey or not is in our own power, provided we have 
not the excuse of ignorance to adduce. He makes a just call, and demands of each 
according to his strength. For some are able as well as willing, having reached 
this point through practice and being purified; while others, if they are not 
yet able, already have the will. Now to will is the act of the soul, but to do 
is not without the body. Nor are actions estimated by their issue alone; but 
they are judged also according to the element of free choice in each, -- if he 
chose easily, if he repented of his sins, if he reflected on his failures and 
repented (metegnw), which is (meta tauta egnw ) "afterwards 
knew." For repentance is a tardy knowledge, and primitive innocence is 
knowledge. Repentance, then, is an effect of faith. For unless a man believe 
that to which he was addicted to be sin, he will not abandon it; and if he do 
not believe punishment to be impending over the transgressor, and salvation to 
be the portion of him who lives according to the commandments, he will not 
reform. 
Hope, too, is based on faith. Accordingly the followers of Basilides define 
faith to be, the assent of the soul to any of those things, that do not affect 
the senses through not being present. And hope is the expectation of the 
possession of good. Necessarily, then, is expectation founded on faith. Now he 
is faithful who keeps inviolably what is entrusted to him; and we are entrusted 
with the utterances respecting God and the divine words, the commands along with 
the execution of the injunctions. This is the faithful servant, who is praised 
by the Lord. And when it is said, "God is faithful," it is intimated that He is 
worthy to be believed when declaring aught. Now His Word declares; and "God" 
Himself is "faithful." How, then, if to believe is to suppose, do the 
philosophers think that what proceeds from themselves is sure? For the voluntary 
assent to a preceding demonstration is not supposition, but it is assent to 
something sure. Who is more powerful than God? Now unbelief is the feeble 
negative supposition of one opposed to Him: as incredulity is a condition which 
admits faith with difficulty. Faith is the voluntary supposition and 
anticipation of pre-comprehension. Expectation is an opinion about the future, 
and expectation about other things is opinion about uncertainty. Confidence is a 
strong judgment about a thing. Wherefore we believe Him in whom we have 
confidence unto divine glory and salvation. And we confide in Him, who is God 
alone, whom we know, that those things nobly [promised to us, and for this end 
benevolently created and bestowed by Him on us, will not fail. 
Benevolence is the wishing of good things to another for his sake. For He 
needs nothing; and the beneficence and benignity which flow from the Lord 
terminate in us, being divine benevolence, and benevolence resulting in 
beneficence. And if to Abraham on his believing it was counted for 
righteousness; and if we are the seed of Abraham, then we must also believe 
through heating. For we are Israelites, who are convinced not by signs, but by 
hearing. Wherefore it is said, "Rejoice, O barren, that barest not; break forth 
and cry, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of 
the desolate than of her who hath an husband." "Thou hast lived for the fence of 
the people, thy children were blessed in the tents of their fathers." And if the 
same mansions are promised by prophecy to us and to the patriarchs, the God of 
both the covenants is shown to be one. 
Accordingly it is added more clearly, "Thou hast inherited the covenant of 
Israel," speaking to those called from among the nations that were once barren, 
being formerly destitute of this husband, who is the Word, -- desolate formerly, 
-- of the bridegroom. "Now the just shall live by faith," which is according to 
the covenant and the commandments; since these, which are two in name and time, 
given in accordance with the [divine] economy -- being in power one -- the old 
and the new, are dispensed through the Son by one God. As the apostle also says 
in the Epistle to the Romans, "For therein is the righteousness of God revealed 
from faith to faith," teaching the one salvation which from prophecy to the 
Gospel is perfected by one and the same Lord. "This charge," he says, "I commit 
to thee, son Timothy, according to the prophecies which went before on thee, 
that thou by them mightest war the good warfare; holding faith, and a good 
conscience; which some having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck," 
because they defiled by unbelief the conscience that comes from God. 
Accordingly, faith may not, any more, with reason, be disparaged in an offhand 
way, as simple and vulgar, appertaining to anybody. 
For, if it were a mere human habit, as the Greeks supposed, it would have 
been extinguished. But if it grow, and there be no place where it is not; then I 
affirm, that faith, whether founded in love, or in fear, as its disparagers 
assert, is something divine; which is neither rent asunder by other mundane 
friendship, nor dissolved by the presence of fear. For love, on account of its 
friendly alliance with faith, makes men believers; and faith, which is the 
foundation of love, in its turn introduces the doing of good; since also fear, 
the paedagogue of the law, is believed to be fear by those, by whom it is 
believed. For, if its existence is shown in its working, it is yet believed when 
about to do and threatening, and when not working and present; and being 
believed to exist, it does not itself generate faith, but is by faith tested and 
proved trustworthy. Such a change, then, from unbelief to faith -- and to trust 
in hope and fear, is divine. And, in truth, faith is discovered, by us, to be 
the first movement towards salvation; after which fear, and hope, and 
repentance, advancing in company with temperance and patience, lead us to love 
and knowledge. Rightly, therefore, the Apostle Barnabas says, "From the portion 
I have received I have done my diligence to send by little and little to you; 
that along with your faith you may also have perfect knowledge. 
Fear and patience are then helpers of your faith; and our allies are 
long-suffering and temperance. These, then," he says, "in what respects the 
Lord, continuing in purity, there rejoice along with them, wisdom, 
understanding, intelligence, knowledge." The fore-mentioned virtues being, then, 
the elements of knowledge; the result is that faith is more elementary, being as 
necessary to the Gnostic, as respiration to him that lives in this world is to 
life. And as without the four elements it is not possible to live, so neither 
can knowledge be attained without faith. It is then the support of truth. 
CHAPTER VII -- THE UTILITY OF FEAR. OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 
Those, who denounce fear, assail the law; and if the law, plainly also God, 
who gave the law. For these three elements are of necessity presented in the 
subject on hand: the ruler, his administration, and the ruled. If, then, 
according to hypothesis, they abolish the law; then, by necessary consequence, 
each one who is led by lust, courting pleasure, must neglect what is right and 
despise the Deity, and fearlessly indulge in impiety and injustice together, 
having dashed away from the truth. 
Yea, say they, fear is an irrational aberration and perturbation of mind. 
What sayest thou? And how can this definition be any longer maintained, seeing 
the commandment is given me by the Word? But the commandment forbids, hanging 
fear over the head of those who have incurred admonition for their discipline. 
Fear is not then irrational. It is therefore rational. How could it be 
otherwise, exhorting as it does, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit 
adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Than shalt not bear false witness? But if they 
will quibble about the names, let the philosophers term the fear of the law, 
cautious fear, (eulabeia) which is a shunning (ekklisis) agreeable 
to reason. Such Critolaus of Phasela not inaptly called fighters about names 
(onomatomakoi). The commandment, then, has already appeared fair and 
lovely even in the highest degree, when conceived under a change of name. 
Cautious fear (eulabeia) is therefore shown to be reasonable being the 
shunning of what hurts; from which arises repentance for previous sins. "For the 
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; good understanding is to all that 
do it." He calls wisdom a doing, which is the fear of the Lord paving the way 
for wisdom. But if the law produces fear, the knowledge of the law is the 
beginning of wisdom; and a man is not wise without law. Therefore those who 
reject the law are unwise; and in consequence they are reckoned godless 
(aqeoi). Now instruction is the beginning of wisdom. "But the ungodly 
despise wisdom and instruction," saith the Scripture. 
Let us see what terrors the law announces. If it is the things which hold an 
intermediate place between virtue and vice, such as poverty, disease, obscurity, 
and humble birth, and the like, these things civil laws hold forth, and are: 
praised for so doing. And those of the Peripatetic school, who introduce three 
kinds of good things, and think that their opposites are evil, this opinion 
suits. But the law given to us enjoins us to shun what are in reality bad things 
-- adultery, uncleanness, paederasty, ignorance, wickedness, soul-disease, death 
(not that which severs the soul from the body, but that which severs the soul 
from truth). For these are vices in reality, and the workings that proceed from 
them are dreadful and terrible. "For not unjustly," say the divine oracles, "are 
the nets spread for birds; for they who are accomplices in blood treasure up 
evils to themselves." How, then, is the law still said to be not good by certain 
heresies that clamorously appeal to the apostle, who says, "For by the law is 
the knowledge of sin?" To whom we say, The law did not cause, but showed sin. 
For, enjoining what is to be done, it reprehended what ought not to be done. And 
it is the part of the good to teach what is salutary, and to point out what is 
deleterious; and to counsel the practice of the one, and to command to shun the 
other. Now the apostle, whom they do not comprehend, said that by the law the 
knowledge of sin was manifested, not that from it it derived its existence. And 
how can the law be not good, which trains, which is given as the instructor 
(paidagwgos) to Christ, s that being corrected by fear, in the way of 
discipline, in order to the attainment of the perfection which is by Christ? "I 
will not," it is said, "the death of the sinner, as his repentance." Now the 
commandment works repentance; inasmuch as it deters from what ought not to be 
done, and enjoins good deeds. By ignorance he means, in my opinion, death. "And 
he that is near the Lord is full of stripes." Plainly, he, that draws near to 
knowledge, has the benefit Of perils, fears, troubles, afflictions, by reason of 
his desire for the truth. "For the son who is instructed turns out wise, and an 
intelligent son is saved from burning. And an intelligent son will receive the 
commandments." And Barnabas the apostle having said, "Woe to those who are wise 
in their own conceits, clever in their own eyes," added, "Let us become 
spiritual, a perfect temple to God; let us, as far as in us lies, practise the 
fear of God, and strive to keep His commands, that we may rejoice in His 
judgments." Whence "the fear of God" is divinely said to be the beginning of 
wisdom. 
CHAPTER VIII -- THE VAGARIES OF BASILIDES AND VALENTINUS AS TO FEAR BEING THE 
CAUSE OF THINGS. 
Here the followers of Basilides, interpreting this expression, say, "that the 
Prince, having heard the speech of the Spirit, who was being ministered to, was 
struck with amazement both with the voice and the vision, having had glad 
tidings beyond his hopes announced to him; and that his amazement was called 
fear, which became the origin of wisdom, which distinguishes classes, and 
discriminates, and perfects, and restores. For not the world alone, but also the 
election, He that is over all has set apart and sent forth." 
And Valentinus appears also in an epistle to have adopted such views. For he 
writes in these very words: "And as terror fell on the angels at this creature, 
because he uttered things greater than proceeded from his formation, by reason 
of the being in him who had invisibly communicated a germ of the supernal 
essence, and who spoke with free utterance; so also among the tribes of men in 
the world, the works of men became terrors to those who made them, -- as, for 
example, images and statues. And the hands of all fashion things to bear the 
name of God: for Adam formed into the name of man inspired the dread attaching 
to the pre-existent man, as having his being in him; and they were 
terror-stricken, and speedily marred the work." 
But there being but one First Cause, as will be shown afterwards, these men 
will be shown to be inventors of chatterings and chirpings. But since God deemed 
it advantageous, that from the law and the prophets, men should receive a 
preparatory discipline by the Lord, the fear of the Lord was called the 
beginning of wisdom, being given by the Lord, through Moses, to the disobedient 
and hard of heart. For those whom reason convinces not, fear tames; which also 
the Instructing Word, foreseeing from the first, and purifying by each of these 
methods, adapted the instrument suitably for piety. Consternation is, then, fear 
at a strange apparition, or at an unlooked-for representation -- such as, for 
example, a message; while fear is an excessive wonderment on account of 
something which arises or is. They do not then perceive that they represent by 
means of amazement the God who is highest and is extolled by them, as subject to 
perturbation and antecedent to amazement as having been in ignorance. If indeed 
ignorance preceded amazement; and if this amazement and fear, which is the 
beginning of wisdom, is the fear of God, then in all likelihood ignorance as 
cause preceded both the wisdom of God and all creative work, and not only these, 
but restoration and even election itself. Whether, then, was it ignorance of 
what was good or what was evil? 
Well, if of good, why does it cease through amazement? And minister and 
preaching and baptism are [in that case] superfluous to them. And if of evil, 
how can what is bad be the cause of what is best? For had not ignorance 
preceded, the minister would not have come down, nor would have amazement seized 
on "the Prince," as they say; nor would he have attained to a beginning of 
wisdom from fear, in order to discrimination between the elect and those that 
are mundane. And if the fear of the pre-existent man made the angels conspire 
against their own handiwork, under the idea that an invisible germ of the 
supernal essence was lodged within that creation, or through unfounded suspicion 
excited envy, which is incredible, the angels became murderers of the creature 
which had been entrusted to them, as a child might be, they being thus convicted 
of the grossest ignorance. Or suppose they were influenced by being involved in 
foreknowledge. But they would not have conspired against what they foreknew in 
the assault they made; nor would they have been terror-struck at their own work, 
in consequence of foreknowledge, on their perceiving the supernal germ. Or, 
finally, suppose, trusting to their knowledge, they dared (but this also were 
impossible for them), on learning the excellence that is in the Pleroma, to 
conspire against man. Furthermore also they laid hands on that which was 
according to the image, in which also is the archetype, and which, along with 
the knowledge that remains, is indestructible. 
To these, then, and certain others, especially the Marcionites, the Scripture 
cries, though they listen not, "He that heareth Me shall rest with confidence in 
peace, and shall be tranquil, fearless of all evil." 
What, then, will they have the law to be? They will not call it evil, but 
just; distinguishing what is good from what is just. But the Lord, when He 
enjoins us to dread evil, does not exchange one evil for another, but abolishes 
what is opposite by its opposite. Now evil is the opposite of good, as what is 
just is of what is unjust. If, then, that absence of fear, which the fear of the 
Lord produces, is called the beginning of what is good, fear is a good thing. 
And the fear which proceeds from the law is not only just, but good, as it takes 
away evil. But introducing absence of fear by means of fear, it does not produce 
apathy by means of mental perturbation, but moderation of feeling by discipline. 
When, then, we hear, "Honour the Lord, and be strong: but fear not another 
besides Him," we understand it to be meant fearing to sin, and following the 
commandments given by God, which is the honour that cometh from God. For the 
fear of God is Deos [in Greek]. But if fear is perturbation of mind, as 
some will have it that fear is perturbation of mind, yet all fear is not 
perturbation. Superstition is indeed perturbation of mind; being the fear of 
demons, that produce and are subject to the excitement of passion. On the other 
hand, consequently, the fear of God, who is not subject to perturbation, is free 
of perturbation. For it is not God, but failing away from God, that the man is 
terrified for. And he who fears this -- that is, falling into evils -- fears and 
dreads those evils. And he who fears a fall, wishes himself to be free of 
corruption and perturbation. "The wise man, fearing, avoids evil: but the 
foolish, trusting, mixes himself with it," says the Scripture; and again it 
says, "In the fear of the Lord is the hope of strength." 
CHAPTER IX -- THE CONNECTION OF THE CHRISTIAN VIRTUES. 
Such a fear, accordingly, leads to repentance and hope. Now hope is the 
expectation of good things, or an expectation sanguine of ab sent good; and 
favourable circumstances are assumed in order to good hope, which we have 
learned leads on to love. Now love turns out to be consent in what pertains to 
reason, life, and manners, or in brief, fellowship in life, or it is the 
intensity of friendship and of affection, with fight reason, in the enjoyment of 
associates. And an associate (etairos) is another self; just as we call 
those, brethren, who are regenerated by the same word. And akin to love is 
hospitality, being a congenial an devoted to the treatment of strangers. And 
those are strangers, to whom the things of the world are strange. For we regard 
as worldly those, who hope in the earth and carnal lusts. "Be not conformed," 
says the apostle, "to this world: but be ye transformed in the renewal of the 
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of 
God." 
Hospitality, therefore, is occupied in what is useful for strangers; and 
guests (epixenoi) are strangers (xenoi); and friends are guests; 
and brethren are friends. "Dear brother," says Homer. 
Philanthropy, in order to which also, is natural affection, being a loving 
treatment of men, and natural affection, which is a congenial habit exercised in 
the love of friends or domestics, follow in the train of love. And if the real 
man within us is the spiritual, philanthropy is brotherly love to those who 
participate, in the same spirit. Natural affection, on the other hand, the 
preservation of good-will, or of affection; and affection is its perfect 
demonstration; and to be beloved is to please in behaviour, by drawing and 
attracting. And persons are brought to sameness by consent, which is the 
knowledge of the good things that are enjoyed in common. For community of 
sentiment (omognwmosunh) is harmony of opinions (sumfwnia gnwmpn). 
"Let your love be without dissimulation," it is said; "and abhorring what is 
evil, let us become attached to what is good, to brotherly love," and so on, 
down to "If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, living peaceably with all 
men." Then "be not overcome of evil," it is said, "but overcome evil with good." 
And the same apostle owns that he bears witness to the Jews, "that they have a 
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For, being ignorant of God's 
righteousness, and seeking to establish their own, they have not submitted 
themselves to the righteousness of God." For they did not know and do the will 
of the law; but what they supposed, that they thought the law wished. And they 
did not believe the law as prophesying, but the bare word; and they followed 
through fear, not through disposition and faith. "For Christ is the end of the 
law for righteousness," who was prophesied by the law to every one that 
believeth. Whence it was said to them by Moses, "I will provoke you to jealousy 
by them that are not a people; and I will anger you by a foolish nation, that 
is, by one that has become disposed to obedience." And by Isaiah it is said, "I 
was found of them that sought Me not; I was made manifest to them that inquired 
not after Me," -- manifestly previous to the coming of the Lord; after which to 
lsrael, the things prophesied, are now appropriately spoken: "I have stretched 
out My hands all the day long to a disobedient and gainsaying people." Do you 
see the cause of the calling from among the nations, clearly declared, by the 
prophet, to be the disobedience and gainsaying of the people? Then the goodness 
of God is shown also in their case. For the apostle says, "But through their 
transgression salvation is come to the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy," 
and to willingness to repent. And the Shepherd, speaking plainly of those who 
had fallen asleep, recognises certain righteous among Gentiles and Jews, not 
only before the appearance of Christ, but before the law, in virtue of 
acceptance before God, -- as Abel, as Noah, as any other righteous man. He says 
accordingly, "that the apostles and teachers, who had preached the name of the 
Son of God, and had fallen asleep, in power and by faith, preached to those that 
had fallen asleep before." Then he subjoins: "And they gave them the seal of 
preaching. 
They descended, therefore, with them into the water, and again ascended. But 
these descended alive, and again ascended alive. But those, who had fallen 
asleep before, descended dead, but ascended alive. By these, therefore, they 
were made alive, and knew the name of the Son of God. Wherefore also they 
ascended with them, and fitted into the structure of the tower, and unhewn were 
built up together; they fell asleep in righteousness and in great purity, but 
wanted only this seal." "For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by 
nature the things of the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto 
themselves," according to the apostle. 
As, then, the virtues follow one another, why need I say what has been 
demonstrated already, that faith hopes through repentance, and fear through 
faith; and patience and practice in these along with learning terminate in love, 
which is perfected by knowledge? But that is necessarily to be noticed, that the 
Divine alone is to be regarded as naturally wise. Therefore also wisdom, which 
has taught the truth, is the power of God; and in it the perfection of knowledge 
is embraced. The philosopher loves and likes the truth, being now considered as 
a friend, on account of his love, from his being a true servant. The beginning 
of knowledge is wondering at objects, as Plato says is in his Theoetetus; and 
Matthew exhorting in the Traditions, says, "Wonder at what is before you;" 
laying this down first as the foundation of further knowledge. So also in the 
Gospel to the Hebrews it is written, "He that wonders shall reign, and he that 
has reigned shall rest. It is impossible, therefore, for an ignorant man, while 
he remains ignorant, to philosophize, not having apprehended the idea of wisdom; 
since philosophy is an effort to grasp that which truly is, and the studies that 
conduce thereto. And it is not the rendering of one accomplished in good habits 
of conduct, but the knowing how we are to use and act and labour, according as 
one is assimilated to God. I mean God the Saviour, by serving the God of the 
universe through the High Priest, the Word, by whom what is in truth good and 
right is beheld. Piety is conduct suitable and corresponding to God. 
CHAPTER X -- TO WHAT THE PHILOSOPHER APPLIES HIMSELF. 
These three things, therefore, our philosopher attaches himself to: first, 
speculation; second, the performance of the precepts; third, the forming of good 
men; -- which, concurring, form the Gnostic. Whichever of these is wanting, the 
elements of knowledge limp. Whence the Scripture divinely says, "And the Lord 
spake to Moses, saying, Speak to the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to 
them, I am the Lord your God. According to the customs of the land of Egypt, in 
which ye have dwelt, ye shall not do; and according to the customs of Canaan, 
into which I bring you, ye shall not do; and in their usages ye shall not walk. 
Ye shall perform My judgments, and keep My precepts, and walk in them: I am the 
Lord your God. And ye shall keep all My commandments, and do them. He that doeth 
them shall live in them. I am the Lord your God." Whether, then, Egypt and the 
land of Canaan be the symbol of the world and of deceit, or of sufferings and 
afflictions; the oracle shows us what must be abstained from, and what, being 
divine and not worldly, must be observed. And when it is said, "The man that 
doeth them shall live in them," it declares both the correction of the Hebrews 
themselves, and the training and advancement of us who are nigh: it declares at 
once their life and ours. For "those who were dead in sins are quickened 
together with Christ," by our covenant. For Scripture, by the frequent 
reiteration of the expression, "I am the Lord your God," shames in such a way as 
most powerfully to dissuade, by teaching us to follow God who gave the 
commandments, and gently admonishes us to seek God and endeavour to know Him as 
far as possible; which is the highest speculation, that which scans the greatest 
mysteries, the real knowledge, that which becomes irrefragable by reason. This 
alone is the knowledge of wisdom, from which rectitude of conduct is never 
disjoined. 
CHAPTER XI -- THE KNOWLEDGE WHICH COMES THROUGH FAITH THE SUREST OF ALL. 
But the knowledge of those who think themselves wise, whether the barbarian 
sects or the philosophers among the Greeks, according to the apostle, " puffeth 
up." But that knowledge, which is the scientific demonstration of what is 
delivered according to the true philosophy, is rounded on faith. Now, we may say 
that it is that process of reason which, from what is admitted, procures faith 
in what is disputed. Now, faith being twofold -- the faith of knowledge and that 
of opinion -- nothing prevents us from calling demonstration twofold, the one 
resting on knowledge, the other on opinion; since also knowledge and 
foreknowledge are designated as twofold, that which is essentially accurate, 
that which is defective. And is not the demonstration, which we possess, that 
alone which is true, as being supplied out of the divine Scriptures, the sacred 
writings, and out of the "God-taught wisdom," according to the apostle? 
Learning, then, is also obedience to the commandments, which is faith in God. 
And faith is a power of God, being the strength of the truth. For example, it is 
said, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard, ye shall remove the mountain." 
And again, "According to thy faith let it be to thee." And one is cured, 
receiving healing by faith; and the dead is raised up in consequence of the 
power of one believing that he would be raised. The demonstration, however, 
which rests on opinion is human, and is the result of rhetorical arguments or 
dialectic syllogisms. For the highest demonstration, to which we have alluded, 
produces intelligent faith by the adducing and opening up of the Scrip tures to 
the souls of those who desire to learn; the result of which is knowledge 
(gnosis). For if what is adduced in order to prove the point at issue is assumed 
to be true, as being divine and prophetic, manifestly the conclusion arrived at 
by inference from it will consequently he inferred truly; and the legitimate 
result of the demonstration will be knowledge. When, then, the memorial of the 
celestial and divine food was commanded to be consecrated in the golden pot, it 
was said, "The omer was the tenth of the three measures." For in ourselves, by 
the three measures are indicated three criteria; sensation of objects of sense, 
speech, -- of spoken names and words, and the mind, -- of intellectual objects. 
The Gnostic, therefore, will abstain from errors in speech, and thought, and 
sensation, and action, having heard "that he that looks so as to lust hath 
committed adultery;" and reflecting that "blessed are the pure in heart, for 
they shall see God;" and knowing this, "that not what enters into the mouth 
defileth, but that it is what cometh forth by the mouth that defileth the man. 
For out of the heart proceed thoughts." This, as I think, is the true and just 
measure according to God, by which things capable of measurement are measured, 
the decad which is comprehensive of man; which summarily the three 
above-mentioned measures pointed out. There are body and soul, the five senses, 
speech, the power of reproduction -- the intellectual or the spiritual faculty, 
or whatever you choose to call it. And we must, in a word, ascending above all 
the others, stop at the mind; as also certainly in the universe overleaping the 
nine divisions, the first consisting of the four elements put in one place for 
equal interchange: and then the seven wandering stars and the one that wanders 
not, the ninth, to the perfect number, which is above the nine, and the tenth 
division, we must reach to the knowledge of God, to speak briefly, desiring the 
Maker after the creation. Wherefore the tithes both of the ephah and of the 
sacrifices were presented to God; and the paschal feast began with the tenth 
day, being the transition from all trouble, and from all objects of sense. 
The Gnostic is therefore fixed by faith; but the man who thinks himself wise 
touches not what pertains to the truth, moved as he is by unstable and wavering 
impulses. It is therefore reasonably written, "Cain went forth from the face of 
God, and dwelt in the land of Naid, over against Eden." Now Naid is interpreted 
commotion, and Eden delight; and Faith, and Knowledge, and Peace are delight, 
from which he that has disobeyed is cast out. But he that is wise in his own 
eyes will not so much as listen to the beginning of the divine commandments; 
but, as if his own teacher, throwing off the reins, plunges voluntarily into a 
billowy commotion, sinking down to mortal and created things from the uncreated 
knowledge, holding various opinions at various times. "Those who have no 
guidance fall like leaves." 
Reason, the governing principle, remaining unmoved and guiding the soul, is 
called its pilot. For access to the Immutable is obtained by a truly immutable 
means. Thus Abraham was stationed before the Lord, and approaching spoke. And to 
Moses it is said, "But do thou stand there with Me." And the followers of Simon 
wish be assimilated in manners to the standing form which they adore. Faith, 
therefore, and the knowledge of the truth, render the soul, which makes them its 
choice, always uniform and equable. For congenial to the man of falsehood is 
shifting, and change, and turning away, as to the Gnostic are calmness, and 
rest, and peace. As, then, philosophy has been brought into evil repute by pride 
and self-conceit, so also ghosts by false ghosts called by the same name; of 
which the apostle writing says, "O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy 
trust, avoiding the profane and vain babblings and oppositions of science 
(gnosis) falsely so called; which some professing, have erred concerning the 
faith." 
Convicted by this utterance, the heretics reject the Epistles. to Timothy. 
Well, then, if the Lord is the truth, and wisdom, and power of God, as in truth 
He is, it is shown that the real Gnostic is he that knows Him, and His Father by 
Him. For his sentiments are the same with him who said, "The lips of the 
righteous know high things." 
CHAPTER XII -- TWOFOLD FAITH. 
Faith as also Time being double, we shall find virtues in pairs both dwelling 
together. For memory is related to past time, hope to future. We believe that 
what is past did, and that what is future will take place. And, on the other I 
hand, we love, persuaded by faith that the past was as it was, and by hope 
expecting the future. For in everything love attends the Gnostic, who knows one 
God. "And, behold, all things which He created were very good." He both knows 
and admires. Godliness adds length of life; and the fear of the Lord adds days. 
As, then, the days are a portion of life in its progress, so also fear is the 
beginning of love, becoming by development faith, then love. But it is not as I 
fear and hate a wild beast (since fear is twofold) that I fear the father, whom 
I fear and love at once. Again, fearing lest I be punished, I love myself in 
assuming fear. He who fears to offend his father, loves himself. Blessed then is 
he who is found possessed of faith, being, as he is, composed of love and fear. 
And faith is power in order to salvation, and strength to eternal life. Again, 
prophecy is foreknowledge; and knowledge the understanding of prophecy; being 
the knowledge of those things known before by the Lord who reveals all things. 
The knowledge, then, of those things which have been predicted shows a 
threefold result -- either one that has happened long ago, or exists now, or 
about to be. Then the extremes either of what is accomplished or of what is 
hoped for fall under faith; and the present action furnishes persuasive 
arguments of the confirmation of both the extremes. For if, prophecy being one, 
one part is accomplishing and another is fulfilled; hence the truth, both what 
is hoped for and what is passed is confirmed. For it was first present; then it 
became past to us; so that the belief of what is past is the apprehension of a 
past event, and a hope which is future the apprehension of a future event. 
And not only the Platonists, but the Stoics, say that assent is in our own 
power. All opinion then, and judgment, and supposition, and knowledge, by which 
we live and have perpetual intercourse with the human race, is an assent; which 
is nothing else than faith. And unbelief being defection from faith, shows both 
assent and faith to be possessed of power; for non-existence cannot be called 
privation. And if you consider the truth, you will find man naturally misled so 
as to give assent to what is false, though possessing the resources necessary 
for belief in the truth. "The virtue, then, that encloses the Church in its 
grasp," as the Shepherd says, "is Faith, by which the elect of God are saved; 
and that which acts the man is Self-restraint. And these are followed by 
Simplicity, Knowledge, Innocence, Decorum, Love," and all these are the 
daughters of Faith. And again, "Faith leads the way, fear upbuilds, and love 
perfects." Accordingly he says, the Lord is to be feared in order to 
edification, but not the devil to destruction. And again, the works of the Lord 
-- that is, His commandments -- are to be loved and done; but the works of the 
devil are to be dreaded and not done. For the fear of God trains and restores to 
love; but the fear of the works of the devil has hatred dwelling along with it. 
The same also says" that repentance is high intelligence. For he that repents of 
what he did, no longer does or says as he did. But by torturing himself for his 
sins, he benefits his soul. Forgiveness of sins is therefore different from 
repentance; but both show what is in our power." 
CHAPTER XIII -- ON FIRST AND SECOND REPENTANCE. 
He, then, who has received the forgiveness of sins ought to sin no more. For, 
in addition to the first and only repentance from sins (this is from the 
previous sins in the first and heathen life -- I mean that in ignorance), there 
is forthwith proposed to those who have been called, the repentance which 
cleanses the seat of the soul from transgressions, that faith may be 
established. And the Lord, knowing the heart, and foreknowing the future, 
foresaw both the fickleness of man and the craft and subtlety of the devil from 
the first, from the beginning; how that, envying man for the forgiveness of 
sins, he would present to the servants of God certain causes of sins; skilfully 
working mischief, that they might fall together with himself. Accordingly, being 
very merciful, He has vouch-safed, in the case of those who, though in faith, 
fall into any transgression, a second repentance; so that should any one be 
tempted after his calling, overcome by force and fraud, he may receive still a 
repentance not to be repented of. "For if we sin wilfully after that we have 
received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, 
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shah 
devour the adversaries." But continual and successive repentings for sins differ 
nothing from the case of those who have not believed at all, except only in 
their consciousness that they do sin. And I know not which of the two is worst, 
whether the case of a man who sins knowingly, or of one who, after having 
repented of his sins, transgresses again. For in the process of proof sin 
appears on each side, -- the sin which in its commission is condemned by the 
worker of the iniquity, and that of the man who, foreseeing what is about to be 
done, yet puts his hand to it as a wickedness. And he who perchance gratifies 
himself in anger and pleasure, gratifies himself in he knows what; and he who, 
repenting of that in which he gratified himself, by rushing again into pleasure, 
is near neighbour to him who has sinned wilfully at first. For one, who does 
again that of which he has repented, and condemning what he does, performs it 
willingly. 
He, then, who from among the Gentiles and from that old life has betaken 
himself to faith, has obtained forgiveness of sins once. But he who has sinned 
after this, on his repentance, though he obtain pardon, ought to fear, as one no 
longer washed to the forgiveness of sins. For not only must the idols which he 
formerly held as gods, but the works also of his former life, be abandoned by 
him who has been "born again, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh," but 
in the Spirit; which consists in repenting by not giving way to the same fault. 
For frequent repentance and readiness to change easily from want of training, is 
the practice of sin again. The frequent asking of forgiveness, then, for those 
things in which we often transgress, is the semblance of repentance, not 
repentance itself. "But the righteousness of the blameless cuts straight paths," 
says the Scripture. And again, "The righteousness of the innocent will make his 
way right." Nay, "as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them 
that fear Him." David writes, "They who sow," then, "in tears, shall reap in 
joy; " those, namely, who confess in penitence. "For blessed are all those that 
fear the Lord." You see the corresponding blessing in the Gospel. "Fear not," it 
is said, "when a man is enriched, and when the glory of his house is increased: 
because when he dieth he shall leave all, and his glory shall not descend after 
him." "But I in Thy I mercy will enter into Thy house. I will worship I toward 
Thy holy temple, in Thy fear: Lord, lead me in Thy righteousness." Appetite is 
then the movement of the mind to or from something. Passion is an excessive 
appetite exceeding the measures of reason, or appetite unbridled and disobedient 
to the word. Passions, then, are a perturbation of the soul contrary to nature, 
in disobedience to reason. But revolt and distraction and disobedience are in 
our own power, as obedience is in our power. Wherefore voluntary actions are 
judged. But should one examine each one of the passions, he will find them 
irrational impulses. 
CHAPTER XIV -- HOW A THING MAY BE INVOLUNTARY. 
What is involuntary is not matter for judgment. But this is twofold, -- what 
is done in ignorance, and what is done through necessity. For how will you judge 
concerning those who are said to sin in involuntary modes? For either one knew 
not himself, as Cleomenes and Athamas, who were mad; or the thing which he does, 
as Aeschylus, who divulged the mysteries on the stage, who, being tried in the 
Areopagus, was absolved on his showing that he had not been initiated. Or one 
knows not what is done, as he who has let off his antagonist, and slain his 
domestic instead of his enemy; or that by which it is done, as he who, in 
exercising with spears having buttons on them, has killed some one in 
consequence of the spear throwing off the button; or knows not the manner how, 
as he who has killed his antagonist in the stadium, for it was not for his death 
but for victory that he contended; or knows not the reason why it is done, as 
the physician gave a salutary antidote and killed, for it was not for this 
purpose that he gave it, but to save. The law at that time punished him who had 
killed involuntarily, as e.g., him who was subject involuntarily to gonorrhoea, 
but not equally with him who did so voluntarily. 
Although he also shall be punished as for a voluntary action, if one transfer 
the affection to the truth. For, in reality, he that cannot contain the 
generative word is to be punished; for this is an irrational passion of the soul 
approaching garrulity. "The faithful man chooses to conceal things in his 
spirit." Things, then, that depend on choice are subjects for judgment. "For the 
Lord searcheth the hearts and reins." "And he that looketh so as to lust" is 
judged. Wherefore it is said, "Thou shalt not lust." And "this people honoureth 
Me with their lips," it is said, "but their heart is far from Me." For God has 
respect to the very thought, since Lot's wife, who had merely voluntarily turned 
towards worldly wickedness, He left a senseless mass, rendering her a pillar of 
salt, and fixed her so that she advanced no further, not as a stupid and useless 
image, but to season and salt him who has the power of spiritual perception. 
CHAPTER XV -- ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF VOLUNTARY ACTIONS, AND THE SINS 
THENCE PROCEEDING. 
What is voluntary is either what is by desire, or what is by choice, or what 
is of intention. Closely allied to each other are these things -- sin, mistake, 
crime. It is sin, for example, to live luxuriously and licentiously; a 
misfortune, to wound one's friend in ignorance, taking him for an enemy; and 
crime, to violate graves or commit sacrilege. Sinning arises from being unable 
to determine what ought to be done, or being unable to do it; as doubtless one 
falls into a ditch either through not knowing, or through inability to leap 
across through feebleness of body. But application to the training of ourselves, 
and subjection to the commandments, is in our own power; with which if we will 
have nothing to do, by abandoning ourselves wholly to lust, we shall sin, nay 
rather, wrong our own soul. For the noted Laius says in the tragedy: "None of 
these things of which you admonish me have escaped me; But notwithstanding that 
I am in my senses, Nature compels me;" i.e., his abandoning himself to passion. 
Medea, too, herself cries on the stage: "And I am aware what evils I am to 
perpetrate, But passion is stronger than my resolutions." 
Further, not even Ajax is silent; but, when about to kill himself, cries: - 
"No pain gnaws the soul of a free man like dishonour. 
Thus do I suffer; and the deep stain of calamity Ever stirs me from the 
depths, agitated By the bitter stings of rage." 
Anger made these the subjects of tragedy, and lust made ten thousand others 
-- Phaedra, Anthia, Eriphyle,- "Who took the precious gold for her dear 
husband." 
For another play represents Thrasonides of the comic drama as saying: "A 
worthless wench made me her slave." 
Mistake is a sin contrary to calculation; and voluntary sin is crime 
(adikia); and crime is voluntary wickedness. Sin, then, is on my part 
voluntary. Wherefore says the apostle, "Sin shall not have dominion over you; 
for ye are not under the law, but under grace." Addressing those who have 
believed, he says, "For by His stripes we were healed." Mistake is the 
involuntary action of another towards me, while a crime (adikia) alone is 
voluntary, whether my act or another's. These differences of sins are alluded to 
by the Psalmist, when he calls those blessed whose iniquities (anomias) 
God hath blotted out, and whose sins (amartias) He hath covered. Others 
He does not impute, and the rest He forgives. For it is written, "Blessed are 
they whose iniquities are forgiven, whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man 
to whom the Lord will not impute sin, and in whose mouth there is no fraud." 
This blessedness came on those who had been chosen by Cod through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. For "love hides the multitude of sins." And they are blotted out by 
Him "who desireth the repentance rather than the death of a sinner." And those 
are not reckoned that are not the effect of choice; "for he who has lusted has 
already committed adultery," it is said. And the illuminating Word forgives 
sins: "And in that time, saith the Lord, they shall seek for the iniquity of 
Israel, and it shall not exist; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be 
found." "For who is like Me? and who shall stand before My face? You see the one 
God declared good, rendering according to desert, and forgiving sins. John, too, 
manifestly teaches the differences of sins, in his larger Epistle, in these 
words: "If any man see his brother sin a sin that is not unto death, he shall 
ask, and he shall give him life: for these that sin not unto death," he says. 
For "there is a sin unto death: I do not say that one is to pray for it. All 
unrighteousness is sin; and there is a sin not unto death." 
David, too, and Moses before David, show the knowledge of the three precepts 
in the following words: "Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the 
ungodly;" as the fishes go down to the depths in darkness; for those which have 
not scales, which Moses prohibits touching, feed at the bottom of the sea. "Nor 
standeth in the way of sinners," as those who, while appearing to fear the Lord, 
commit sin, like the sow, for when hungry it cries, and when full knows not its 
owner. "Nor sitteth in the chair of pestilences," as birds ready for prey. And 
Moses enjoined not to eat the sow, nor the eagle, nor the hawk, nor the raven, 
nor any fish without scales. So far Barnabas. And I heard one skilled in such 
matters say that "the counsel of the ungodly" was the heathen, and "the way of 
sinners" the Jewish persuasion, and explain "the chair of pestilence" of 
heresies. And another said, with more propriety, that the first blessing was 
assigned to those who had not followed wicked sentiments which revolt from God; 
the second to those who do not remain in the wide and broad road, whether they 
be those who have been brought up in the law, or Gentiles who have repented. And 
"the chair of pestilences" will be the theatres and tribunals, or rather the 
compliance with wicked and deadly powers, and complicity with their deeds. "But 
his delight is in the law of the Lord." Peter in his Preach ing called the Lord, 
Law and Logos. The legislator seems to teach differently the interpretation of 
the three forms of sin -- understanding by the mute fishes sins of word, for 
there are times in which silence is better than speech, far silence has a safe 
recompense; sins of deed, by the rapacious and carnivorous birds. The sow 
delights in dirt and dung; and we ought not to have "a conscience" that is 
"defiled." 
Justly, therefore, the prophet says, "The ungodly are not so: but as the 
chaff which the wind driveth away from the face of the earth. Wherefore the 
ungodly shall not stand in the judgment" (being already condemned, for "he that 
believeth not is condemned already" ), "nor sinners in the counsel of the 
righteous," inasmuch as they are already condemned, so as not to be united to 
those that have lived without stumbling. "For the Lord knoweth the way of the 
righteous; and the way of the ungodly shall perish." 
Again, the Lord clearly shows sins and transgressions to be in our own power, 
by prescribing modes of cure corresponding to the maladies; showing His wish 
that we should be Corrected by the shepherds, in Ezekiel; blaming, I am of 
opinion, some of them for not keeping the commandments. "That which was 
enfeebled ye have not strengthened," and so forth, down to, "and there was none 
to search out or turn away." 
For "great is the joy before the Father when one sinner is saved," saith the 
Lord. So Abraham was much to be praised, because "he walked as the Lord spake to 
him." Drawing from this instance, one of the wise men among the Greeks uttered 
the maxim, "Follow God." "The godly," says Esaias, "framed wise counsels." Now 
counsel is seeking for the right way of acting in present circumstances, and 
good counsel is wisdom in our counsels. And what? 
Does not God, after the pardon bestowed on Cain, suitably not long after 
introduce Enoch, who had repented? showing that it is the nature of repentance 
to produce pardon; but pardon does not consist in remission, but in remedy. An 
instance of the same is the making of the calf by the people before Aaron. 
Thence one of the wise men among the Greeks uttered the maxim, "Pardon is better 
than punishment;" as also, "Become surety, and mischief is at hand," is derived 
from the utterance of Solomon which says, "My son, if thou become surety for thy 
friend, thou wilt give thine hand to thy enemy; for a man's own lips are a 
strong snare to him, and he is taken in the words of his own mouth." And the 
saying, "Know thyself," has been taken rather more mystically from this, "Thou 
hast seen thy brother, thou hast seen thy God." Thus also, "Thou shalt love the 
Load thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself;" for it is said, 
"On these commandments the law and the prophets hang and are suspended." With 
these also agree the following: "These things have I spoken to you, that My joy 
might be fulfilled: and this is My commandment, That ye love one another, as I 
have loved you." "For the Lord is merciful and pitiful; and gracious is the Lord 
to all." "Know thyself" is more clearly and often expressed by Moses, when he 
enjoins, "Take heed to thyself." "By alms then, and acts of faith, sins are 
purged." "And by the fear of the Lord each one departs from evil." "And the fear 
of the Lord is instruction and wisdom." 
CHAPTER XVI -- HOW WE ARE TO EXPLAIN THE PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE WHICH ASCRIBE 
TO GOD HUMAN AFFECTIONS. 
Here again arise the cavaliers, who say that joy and pain are passions of the 
soul: for they define joy as a rational elevation and exultation, as rejoicing 
on account of what is good; and pity as pain for one who suffers undeservedly; 
and that such affections are moods and passions of the soul. But we, as would 
appear, do not cease in such matters to understand the Scriptures carnally; and 
starting from our own affections, interpret the will of the impassible Deity 
similarly to our perturbations; and as we are capable of hearing; so, supposing 
the same to be the case with the Omnipotent, err impiously. For the Divine Being 
cannot be declared as it exists: but as we who are lettered in the flesh were 
able to listen, so the prophets spake to us; the Lord savingly accommodating 
Himself to the weakness of men. Since, then, it is the will of God that he, who 
is obedient to the commands and repents of his sins should be saved, and we 
rejoice on account of our salvation, the Lord, speaking by the prophets, 
appropriated our joy to Himself; as speaking lovingly in the Gospel He says, "I 
was hungry, and ye gave Me to eat: I was thirsty, and ye gave Me to drink. For 
inasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of these, ye did it to Me." As, then, 
He is nourished, though not personally, by the nourishing of one whom He wishes 
nourished; so He rejoices, without suffering change, by reason of him who has 
repented being in joy, as He wished. And since God pities richly, being good, 
and giving commands by the law and the prophets, and more nearly still by the 
appearance of his Son, saving and pitying, as was said, those who have found 
mercy; and properly the greater pities the less; and a man cannot be greater 
than man, being by nature man; but God in everything is greater than man; if, 
then, the greater pities the less, it is God alone that will pity us. For a man 
is made to communicate by righteousness, and bestows what he received from God, 
in consequence of his natural benevolence and relation, and the commands which 
he obeys. But God has no natural relation to us, as the authors of the heresies 
will have it; neither on the supposition of His having made us of nothing, nor 
on that of having formed us from matter; since the former did not exist at all, 
and the latter is totally distinct from God unless we shall dare to say that we 
are a part of Him, and of the same essence as God. And I know not how one, who 
knows God, can bear to hear this when he looks to our life, and sees in what 
evils we are involved. For thus it would turn out, which it were impiety to 
utter, that God sinned in [certain] portions, if the portions are parts of the 
whole and complementary of the whole; and if not complementary, neither can they 
be parts. But God being by nature rich in pity, in consequence of His own 
goodness, cares for us, though neither portions of Himself, nor by nature His 
children. And this is the greatest proof of the goodness of God: that such being 
our relation to Him, and being by nature wholly estranged, He nevertheless cares 
for us. For the affection in animals to their progeny is natural, and the 
friendship of kindred minds is the result of intimacy. But the mercy of God is 
rich toward us, who are in no respect related to Him; I say either in our 
essence or nature, or in the peculiar energy of our essence, but only in our 
being the work of His will. And him who willingly, with discipline and teaching, 
accepts the knowledge of the truth, He calls to adoption, which is the greatest 
advancement of all. "Transgressions catch a man; and in the cords of his own 
sins each one is bound." And God is without blame. And in reality, "blessed is 
the man who feareth alway through piety." 
CHAPTER XVII -- ON THE VARIOUS KINDS OF KNOWLEDGE. 
As, then, Knowledge (episthmh) is an intellectual state, from which 
results the act of knowing, and becomes apprehension irrefragable by reason; so 
also ignorance is a receding impression, which can be dislodged by reason. And 
that which is overthrown as well as that which is elaborated by reason, is in 
our power. Akin to Knowledge is experience, cognition (eidhsis), 
Comprehension (sunesis), perception, and Science. Cognition 
(eidhsis) is the knowledge of universals by species; and Experience is 
comprehensive knowledge, which investigates the nature of each thing. Perception 
(nohsis) is the knowledge of intellectual objects; and Comprehension 
(sunesis) is the knolwedge of what is compared, or a comparison that 
cannot be annulled, or the faculty of comparing the objects with which Judgment 
and Knowledge are occupied, both of one and each and all that goes to make up 
one reason. And Science (gnwsis) is the knowledge of the thing in itself, 
or the knowledge which harmonizes with what takes place. Truth is the knowledge 
of the true; and the mental habit of truth is the knowledge of the things which 
are true. Now knowledge is constituted by the reason, and cannot be overthrown 
by another reason. What we do not, we do not either from not being able, or not 
being willing -- or both. Accordingly we don't fly, since we neither can nor 
wish; we do not swim at present, for example, since we can indeed, but do not 
choose; and we are not as the Lord, since we wish, but cannot be: "for no 
disciple is above his master, and it is sufficient if we be as the master:" not 
m essence (for it is impossible for that, which is by adoption, to be equal in 
substance to that, which is by nature); but [we are as Him] only in our having 
been made immortal, and our being conversant with the contemplation of 
realities, and beholding the Father through what belongs to Him. 
Therefore volition takes the precedence of all; for the intellectual powers 
are ministers of the Will. "Will," it is said, "and thou shalt be able." And in 
the Gnostic, Will, Judgment, and Exertion are identical. For if the 
determinations are the same, the opinions and judgments will be the same too; so 
that both his words, and life, and conduct, are conformable to rule. "And a 
right heart seeketh knowl edge, and heareth it." "God taught me wisdom, and I 
knew the knowledge of the holy." 
CHAPTER XVIII -- THE MOSAIC LAW THE FOUNTAIN OF ALL ETHICS, AND THE SOURCE 
FROM WHICH THE GREEKS DREW THEIRS. 
It is then clear also that all the other virtues, delineated in Moses, 
supplied the Greeks with the rudiments of the whole department of morals. I mean 
valour, and temperance, and wisdom, and justice, and endurance, and patience, 
and decorum, and self-restraint; and in addition to these, piety. 
But it is clear to every one that piety, which teaches to worship and honour, 
is the highest and oldest cause; and the law itself exhibits justice, and 
teaches wisdom, by abstinence from sensible images, and by inviting to the Maker 
and Father of the universe. And from this sentiment, as from a fountain, all 
intelligence increases. "For the sacrifices of the wicked are abomination to the 
Lord; but the prayers of the upright are acceptable before Him," since 
"righteousness is more acceptable before God than sacrifice." Such also as the 
following we find in Isaiah: "To what purpose to me is the multitude of your 
sacrifices? saith the Lord;" and the whole section. "Break every bond of 
wickedness; for this is the sacrifice that is acceptable to the Lord, a contrite 
heart that seeks its Maker." "Deceitful balances are abomination before God; but 
a just balance is acceptable to Him." Thence Pythagoras exhorts "not to step 
over the balance;" and the profession of heresies is called deceitful 
righteousness; and "the tongue of the unjust shall be destroyed, but the mouth 
of the righteous droppeth wisdom." "For they call the wise and prudent 
worthless." But it were tedious to adduce testimonies respecting these virtues, 
since the whole Scripture celebrates them. Since, then, they define manliness to 
be knowledge of things formidable, and not formidable, and what is intermediate; 
and temperance to be a state of mind which by choosing and avoiding preserves 
the judgments of wisdom; and conjoined with manliness is patience, which is 
called endurance, the knowledge of what is bearable and what is unbearable; and 
magnanimity is the knowledge which rises superior to circumstances. With 
temperance also is conjoined caution, which is avoidance in accordance with 
reason. And observance of the commandments, which is the innoxious keeping of 
them, is the attainment of a secure life. And there is no endurance without 
manliness, nor the exercise of self-restraint without temperance. And these 
virtues follow one another; and with whom are the sequences of the virtues, with 
him is also salvation, which is the keeping of the state of well-being. Rightly, 
therefore, in treating of these virtues, we shall inquire into them all; for he 
that has one virtue gnostically, by reason of their accompanying each other, has 
them all. Self-restraint is that quality which does not overstep what appears in 
accordance with right reason. He exercises self-restraint, who curbs the 
impulses that are contrary to right reason, or curbs himself so as not to 
indulge in desires contrary to right reason. Temperance, too, is not without 
manliness; since from the commandments spring both wisdom, which follows God who 
enjoins, and that which imitates the divine character, namely righteousness; in 
virtue of which, in the exercise of self-restraint, we address ourselves in 
purity to piety and the course of conduct thence resulting, in conformity with 
God; being assimilated to the Lord as far as is possible for us beings mortal in 
nature. And this is being just and holy with wisdom; for the Divinity needs 
nothing and suffers nothing; whence it is not, strictly speaking, capable of 
self-restraint, for it is never subjected to perturbation, over which to 
exercise control; while our nature, being capable of perturbation, needs 
self-constraint, by which disciplining itself to the need of little, it 
endeavours to approximate in character to the divine nature. For the good man, 
standing as the boundary between an immortal and a mortal nature, has few needs; 
having wants in consequence of his body, and his birth itself, but taught by 
rational self-control to want few things. 
What reason is there in the law's prohibiting a man from "wearing woman's 
clothing "? Is it not that it would have us to be manly, and not to be 
effeminate neither in person and actions, nor in thought and word? For it would 
have the man, that devotes himself to the truth, to be masculine both in acts of 
endurance and patience, in life, conduct, word, and discipline by night and by 
day; even if the necessity were to occur, of witnessing by the shedding of his 
blood. Again, it is said, "If any one who has newly built a house, and has not 
previously inhabited it; or cultivated a newly-planted vine, and not yet 
partaken of the fruit; or betrothed a virgin, and not yet married her;" -- such 
the humane law orders to be relieved from military service: from military 
reasons in the first place, lest, bent on their desires, they turn out sluggish 
in war; for it is those who are untrammelled by passion that boldly encounter 
perils; and from motives of humanity, since, in view of the uncertainties of 
war, the law reckoned it not right that one should not enjoy his own labours, 
and another should without bestowing pains, receive what belonged to those who 
had laboured. The law seems also to point out manliness of soul, by enacting 
that he who had planted should reap the fruit, and he that built should inhabit, 
and he that had betrothed should marry: for it is not vain hopes which it 
provides for those who labour; according to the gnostic word: "For the hope of a 
good man dead or living does not perish," says Wisdom; "I love them that love 
me; and they who seek me shall find peace," and so forth. What then? Did not the 
women of the Midianites, by their beauty, seduce from wisdom into impiety, 
through licentiousness, the Hebrews when making war against them? For, having 
seduced them from a grave mode of life, and by their beauty ensnared them in 
wanton delights, they made them insane upon idol sacrifices and strange women; 
and overcome by women and by pleasure at once, they revolted from God, and 
revolted from the law. And the whole people was within a little of falling under 
the power of the enemy through female stratagem, until, when they were in peril, 
fear by its admonitions pulled them back. Then the survivors, valiantly 
undertaking the struggle for piety, got the upper hand of their foes. "The 
beginning, then, of wisdom is piety, and the knowledge of holy things is 
understanding; and to know the law is the characteristic of a good 
understanding." Those, then, who suppose the law to be productive of agitating 
fear, are neither good at understanding the law, nor have they in reality 
comprehended it; for "the fear of the Lord causes life, but he who errs shall be 
afflicted with pangs which knowledge views not." Accordingly, Barnabas says 
mystically, "May God who rules the universe vouchsafe also to you wisdom, and 
understanding, and science, and knowledge of His statutes, and patience. Be 
therefore God-taught, seeking what the Lord seeks from you, that He may find you 
in the day of judgment lying in wait for these things." 
"Children of love and peace," he called them gnostically. 
Respecting imparting and communicating, though much might be said, let it 
suffice to remark that the law prohibits a brother from taking usury: 
designating as a brother not only him who is born of the same parents, but also 
one of the same race and sentiments, and a participator in the same word; 
deeming it right not to take usury for money, but with open hands and heart to 
bestow on those who need. For God, the author and the dispenser of such grace, 
takes as suitable usury the most precious things to be found among men -- 
mildness, gentleness, magnanimity, reputation, renown. Do you not regard this 
command as marked by philanthropy? As also the following, "To pay the wages of 
the poor daily," teaches to discharge without delay the wages due for service; 
for, as I think, the alacrity of the poor with reference to the future is 
paralyzed when he has suffered want. Further, it is said, "Let not the creditor 
enter the debtor's house to take the pledge with violence." But let the former 
ask it to be brought out, and let not the latter, if he have it, hesitate. And 
in the harvest the owners are prohibited from appropriating what falls from the 
handfuls; as also in reaping [the law] enjoins a part to be left unreaped; 
signally thereby training those who possess to sharing and to large-heartedness, 
by foregoing of their own to those who are in want, and thus providing means of 
subsistence for the poor? You see how the law proclaims at once the 
righteousness and goodness of God, who dispenses food to all ungrudgingly. And 
in the vintage it prohibited the grape-gatherers from going back again on what 
had been left, and from gathering the fallen grapes; and the same injunctions 
are given to the olive-gatherers. Besides, the tithes of the fruits and of the 
flocks taught both piety towards the Deity, and not covetously to grasp 
everything, but to communicate gifts of kindness to one's neighbours. For it was 
from these, I reckon, and from the first-fruits that the priests were 
maintained. We now therefore understand that we are instructed in piety, and in 
liberality, and in justice, and in humanity by the law. For does it not command 
the land to be left fallow in the seventh year, and bids the poor fearlessly use 
the fruits that grow by divine agency, nature cultivating the ground for behoof 
of all and sundry? How, then, can it be maintained that the law is not humane, 
and the teacher of righteousness? Again, in the fiftieth year, it ordered the 
same things to be performed as in the seventh; besides restoring to each one his 
own land, if from any circumstance he had parted with it in the meantime; 
setting bounds to the desires of those who covet possession, by measuring the 
period of enjoyment, and choosing that those who have paid the penalty of 
protracted penury should not suffer a life-long punishment. "But alms and acts 
of faith are royal guards, and blessing is on the head of him who bestows; and 
he who pities the poor shall be blessed." For he shows love to one like himself, 
because of his love to the Creator of the human race. The above-mentioned 
particulars have other explanations more natural, both respecting rest and the 
recovery of the inheritance; but they are not discussed at present. 
Now love is conceived in many ways, in the form of meekness, of mildness, of 
patience, of liberality, of freedom from envy, of absence of hatred, of 
forgetfulness of injuries. In all it is incapable of being divided or 
distinguished: its nature is to communicate. Again, it is said, "If you See the 
beast of your relatives, or friends, or, in general, of anybody you know, 
wandering in the wilderness, take it back and restore it; and if the owner be 
far away, keep it among your own till he return, and restore it." It teaches a 
natural communication, that what is found is to be regarded as a deposit, and 
that we are not to bear malice to an enemy. "The command of the Lord being a 
fountain of life" truly, "causeth to turn away from the snare of death." And 
what? Does it not command us "to love strangers not only as friends and 
relatives, but as ourselves, both in body and soul?" Nay more, it honoured the 
nations, and bears no grudge against those who have done ill. Accordingly it is 
expressly said, "Thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian, for thou wast a sojourner in 
Egypt;" designating by the term Egyptian either one of that race, or any one in 
the world. And enemies, although drawn up before the walls attempting to take 
the city, are not to be regarded as enemies till they are by the voice of the 
herald summoned to peace. 
Further, it forbids intercourse with a female captive so as to dishonour her. 
"But allow her," it says, "thirty days to mourn according to her wish, and 
changing her clothes, associate with her as your lawful wife." s For it regards 
it not right that this should take place either in wantonness or for hire like 
harlots, but only for the birth of children. Do you see humanity combined with 
continence? The master who has fallen in love with his captive maid it does not 
allow to gratify his pleasure, but puts a check on his lust by specifying an 
interval of time; and further, it cuts off the captive's hair, in order to shame 
disgraceful love: for if it is reason that induces him to marry, he will cleave 
to her even after she has become disfigured. Then if one, after his lust, does 
not care to consort any longer with the captive, it ordains that it shall not be 
lawful to sell her, or to have her any longer as a servant, but desires her to 
be freed and released from service, lest on the introduction of another wife she 
bear any of the intolerable miseries caused through jealousy. 
What more? The Lord enjoins to ease and raise up the beasts of enemies when 
labouring beneath their burdens; remotely teaching us not to indulge in joy at 
our neighbour's ills, or exult over our enemies; in order to teach those who are 
trained in these things to pray for their enemies. For He does not allow us 
either to grieve at our neighbour's good, or to reap joy at our neighbour's ill. 
And if you find any enemy's beast straying, you are to pass over the incentives 
of difference, and take it back and restore it. For oblivion of injuries is 
followed by goodness, and the latter by dissolution of enmity. From this we are 
fitted for agreement, and this conducts to felicity. And should you suppose one 
habitually hostile, and discover him to be unreasonably mistaken either through 
lust or anger, turn him to goodness. Does the law then which conducts to Christ 
appear humane and mild? And does not the same God, good, while characterized by 
righteousness from the beginning to the end, employ each kind suitably in order 
to salvation? "Be merciful," says the Lord, "that you may receive mercy; 
forgive, that you may be forgiven. As ye do, so shall it be done to you; as ye 
give, so shall it be given to you; as ye judge, so shall ye be judged; as ye 
show kindness, so shall kindness be shown to you: with what measure ye mete, it 
shall be measured to you again." Furthermore, [the law] prohibits those, who are 
in servitude for their subsistence, to be branded with disgrace; and to those, 
who have been reduced to slavery through money borrowed, it gives a complete 
release in the seventh year. Further, it prohibits suppliants from being given 
up to punishment. True above all, then, is that oracle. "As gold and silver are 
tried in the furnace, so the Lord chooseth men's hearts. The merciful man is 
long-suffering; and in every one who shows solicitude there is wisdom. For on a 
wise man solicitude will fall; and exercising thought, he will seek life; and he 
who seeketh God shall find knowledge with righteousness. And they who have 
sought Him rightly have found peace." And Pythagoras seems to me, to have 
derived his mildness towards irrational creatures from the law. For instance, he 
interdicted the immediate use of the young in the flocks of sheep, and goats, 
and herds of cattle, on the instant of their birth; not even on the pretext of 
sacrifice allowing it, both on account of the young ones and of the mothers; 
training man to gentleness by what is beneath him, by means of the irrational 
creatures. "Resign accordingly," he says, "the young one to its dam for even the 
first seven days." For if nothing takes place without a cause, and milk comes in 
a shower to animals in parturition for the sustenance of the progeny, he that 
tears that, which has been brought forth, away from the supply of the milk, 
dishonours nature. Let the Greeks, then, feel ashamed, and whoever else inveighs 
against the law; since it shows mildness in the case of the irrational 
creatures, while they expose the offspring of men though long ago and 
prophetically, the law, in the above-mentioned commandment, threw a check in the 
way of their cruelty. For if it prohibits the progeny of the irrational 
creatures to be separated from the dam before sucking, much more in the case of 
men does it provide beforehand a cure for cruelty and savageness of disposition; 
so that even if they despise nature, they may not despise teaching. For they are 
permitted to satiate themselves with kids and lambs, and perhaps there might be 
some excuse for separating the progeny from its dam. But what cause is there for 
the exposure of a child? For the man who did not desire to beget children had no 
right to marry at first; certainly not to have become, through licentious 
indulgence, the murderer of his children. Again, the humane law forbids slaying 
the offspring and the dam together on the same day. Thence also the Romans, in 
the case of a pregnant woman being condemned to death, do not allow her to 
undergo punishment till she is delivered. The law too, expressly prohibits the 
slaying of such animals as are pregnant till they have brought forth, remotely 
restraining the proneness of man to do wrong to man. Thus also it has extended 
its clemency to the irrational creatures; that from the exercise of humanity in 
the case of creatures of different species, we might practise among those of the 
same species a large abundance of it. Those, too, that kick the bellies of 
certain animals before parturition, in order to feast on flesh mixed with milk, 
make the womb created for the birth of the foetus its grave, though the law 
expressly commands, "But neither shalt thou seethe a lamb in its mother's milk." 
For the nourishment of the living animal, it is meant, may not become sauce for 
that which has been deprived of life; and that, which is the cause of life, may 
not co-operate in the consumption of the body. And the same law commands "not to 
muzzle the ox which treadeth out the corn: for the labourer must be reckoned 
worthy of his food." 
And it prohibits an ox and ass to be yoked in the plough together; pointing 
perhaps to the want of agreement in the case of the animals; and at the same 
time teaching not to wrong any one belonging to another race, and bring him 
under the yoke, when there is no other cause to allege than difference of race, 
which is no cause at all, being neither wickedness nor the effect of wickedness. 
To me the allegory also seems to signify that the husbandry of the Word is not 
to be assigned equally to the clean and the unclean, the believer and the 
unbeliever; for the ox is clean, but the ass has been reckoned among the unclean 
animals. But the benignant Word, abounding in humanity, teaches that neither is 
it right to cut down cultivated trees, or to cut down the grain before the 
harvest, for mischiefs sake; nor that cultivated fruit is to be destroyed at all 
-- either the fruit of the soil or that of the soul: for it does not permit the 
enemy's country to be laid waste. 
Further, husbandmen derived advantage from the law in such things. For it 
orders newly planted trees to be nourished three years in succession, and the 
superfluous growths to be cut off, to prevent them being loaded and pressed 
down; and to prevent their strength being exhausted from want, by the nutriment 
being frittered away, enjoins tilling and digging round them, so that [the tree] 
may not, by sending out suckers, hinder its growth. And it does not allow 
imperfect fruit to be plucked from immature trees, but after three years, in the 
fourth year; dedicating the first-fruits to God after the tree has attained 
maturity. 
This type of husbandry may serve as a mode of instruction, teaching that we 
must cut the growths of sins, and the useless weeds of the mind that spring up 
round the vital fruit, till the shoot of faith is perfected and becomes strong. 
For in the fourth year, since there is need of time to him that is being solidly 
catechized, the four virtues are consecrated to God, the third alone being 
already joined to the fourth, the person of the Lord. And a sacrifice of praise 
is above holocausts: "for He," it is said, "giveth strength to get power." And 
if your affairs are in the sunshine of prosperity, get and keep strength, and 
acquire power in knowledge. For by these instances it is shown that both good 
things and gifts are supplied by God; and that we, becoming ministers of the 
divine grace, ought to sow the benefits of God, and make those who approach us 
noble and good; so that, as far as possible, the temperate man may make others 
continent, he that is manly may make them noble, he that is wise may make them 
intelligent, and the just may make them just. 
CHAPTER XIX -- THE TRUE GNOSTIC IS AN IMITATOR OF GOD, ESPECIALLY IN 
BENEFICENCE. 
He is the Gnostic, who is after the image and likeness of God, who imitates 
God as far as possible, deficient in none of the things which contribute to the 
likeness as far as compatible, practising self-restraint and endurance, living 
righteously, reigning over the passions, bestowing of what he has as far as 
possible, and doing good both by word and deed. "He is the greatest," it is 
said, "in the kingdom who shall do and teach;" imitating God in conferring like 
benefits. For God's gifts are for the common good. "Whoever shall attempt to do 
aught with presumption, provokes God," it is said. For haughtiness is a vice of 
the soul, of which, as of other sins, He commands us to repent; by adjusting our 
lives from their state of derangement to the change for the better in these 
three things -- mouth, heart, hands. These are signs -- the hands of action, the 
heart of volition, the mouth of speech. Beautifully, therefore, has this oracle 
been spoken with respect to penitents: "Thou hast chosen God this day to be thy 
God; and God hath chosen thee this day to be His people." For him who hastes to 
serve the self-existent One, being a suppliant, God adopts to Himself; and 
though he be only one in number, he is honoured equally with the people. For 
being a part of the people, he becomes complementary of it, being restored from 
what he was; and the whole is named from a part. 
But nobility is itself exhibited in choosing and practising what is best. For 
what benefit to Adam was such a nobility as he had? No mortal was his father; 
for he himself was father of men that are born. What is base he readily chose, 
following his wife, and neglected what is true and good; on which account he 
exchanged his immortal life for a mortal life, but not for ever. And Noah, whose 
origin was not the same as Adam's, was saved by divine care, For he took and 
consecrated himself to God. And Abraham, who had children by three wives, not 
for the indulgence of pleasure, but in the hope, as I think, of multiplying the 
race at the first, was succeeded by one alone, who was heir of his father's 
blessings, while the rest were separated from the family; and of the twins who 
sprang from him, the younger having won his father's favour and received his 
prayers, became heir, and the eider served him. For it is the greatest boon to a 
bad man not to be master of himself. 
And this arrangement was prophetical and typical. And that all things belong 
to the wise, Scripture clearly indicates when it is said, "Because God hath had 
mercy on me, I have all things." For it teaches that we are to desire one thing, 
by which are all things, and what is promised is assigned to the worthy. 
Accordingly, the good man who has become heir of the kingdom, it registers also 
as fellow-citizen, through divine wisdom, with the righteous of the olden time, 
who under the law and before the law lived according to law, whose deeds have 
become laws to us; and again, teaching that the wise man is king, introduces 
people of a different race, saying to him, "Thou art a king before God among 
us;" those who were governed obeying the good man of their own accord, from 
admiration of his virtue. 
Now Plato the philosopher, defining the end of happiness, says that it is 
likeness to God as far as possible; whether concurring with the precept of the 
law (for great natures that are free of passions somehow hit the mark respecting 
the truth, as the Pythagorean Philo says in relating the history of Moses), or 
whether instructed by certain oracles of the time, thirsting as he always was 
for instruction. For the law says, "Walk after the Lord your God, and keep my 
commandments." For the law calls assimilation following; and such a following to 
the utmost of its power assimilates. "Be," says the Lord, "merciful and pitiful, 
as your heavenly Father is pitiful." Thence also the Stoics have laid down the 
doctrine, that living agreeably to nature is the end, fitly altering the name of 
God into nature; since also nature extends to plants, to seeds, to trees, and to 
stones. It is therefore plainly said, "Bad men do not understand the law; but 
they who love the law fortify themselves with a wall." "For the wisdom of the 
clever knows its ways; but the folly of the foolish is in error." "For on whom 
will I look, but on him who is mild and gentle, and trembleth at my words?" says 
the prophecy. 
We are taught that there are three kinds of friendship: and that of these the 
first and the best is that which results from virtue, for the love that is 
founded on reason is firm; that the second and intermediate is by way of 
recompense, and is social, liberal, and useful for life; for the friendship 
which is the result of favour is mutual. 
And the third and last we assert to be that which is founded on intimacy; 
others, again, that it is that variable and changeable form which rests on 
pleasure. And Hipppodamus the Pythagorean seems to me to describe friendships 
most admirably: "That founded on knowledge of the gods, that founded on the 
gifts of men, and that on the pleasures of animals." There is the friendship of 
a philosopher, -- that of a man and that of an animal. For the image of God is 
really the man who does good, in which also he gets good: as the pilot at once 
saves, and is saved. Wherefore, when one obtains his request, he does not say to 
the giver, Thou hast given well, but, Thou hast received well. So he receives 
who gives, and he gives who receives. "But the righteous pity and show mercy." 
"But the mild shall be inhabitants of the earth, and the innocent shall be left 
in it. But the transgressors shall be extirpated from it." And Homer seems to me 
to have said prophetically of the faithful, "Give to thy friend." And an enemy 
must be aided, that he may not continue an enemy. For by help good feeling is 
compacted, and enmity dissolved. "But if there be present readiness of mind, 
according to what a man hath it is acceptable, and not according to what he hath 
not: for it is not that there be ease to others, but tribulation to you, but of 
equality at the present time," and so forth. "He hath dispersed, he hath given 
to the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever," the Scripture says. For 
conformity with the image and likeness is not meant of the body (for it were 
wrong for what is mortal to be made like what is immortal), but in mind and 
reason, on which fitly the Lord impresses the seal of likeness, both in respect 
of doing good and of exercising rule. For governments are directed not by 
corporeal qualities, but by judgments of the mind. For by the counsels of holy 
men states are managed well, and the household also. 
CHAPTER XX -- THE TRUE GNOSTIC EXERCISES PATIENCE AND SELF-RESTRAINT. 
Endurance also itself forces its way to the divine likeness, reaping as its 
fruit impassibility. through patience, if what is related of Ananias be kept in 
mind; who belonged to a number, of whom Daniel the prophet, filled with divine 
faith, was one. Daniel dwelt at Babylon, as Lot at Sodom, and Abraham, who a 
little after became the friend of God, in the land of Chaldea. The king of the 
Babylonians let Daniel down into a pit full of wild beasts; the King of all, the 
faithful Lord, took him up unharmed. Such patience will the Gnostic, as a 
Gnostic, possess. He will bless when under trial, like the noble Job; like 
Jonas, when swallowed up by the whale, he will pray, and faith will restore him 
to prophesy to the Ninevites; and though shut up with lions, he will tame the 
wild beasts; though cast into the fire, he will be besprinkled with dew, but not 
consumed. He will give his testimony by night; he will testify by day; by word, 
by life, by conduct, he will testify. Dwelling with the Lord? he will continue 
his familiar friend, sharing the same hearth according to the Spirit; pure in 
the flesh, pure in heart, sanctified in word. "The world," it is said, "is 
crucified to him, and he to the world." He, bearing about the cross of the 
Saviour, will follow the Lord's footsteps, as God, having become holy of holies. 

The divine law, then, while keeping in mind all virtue, trains man especially 
to self-restraint, laying this as the foundation of the virtues; and disciplines 
us beforehand to the attainment of self-restraint by forbidding us to partake of 
such things as are by nature fat, as the breed of swine, which is full-fleshed. 
For such a use is assigned to epicures. It is accordingly said that one of the 
philosophers, giving the etymology of us (sow), said that it was 
qus, as being fit only for slaughter (qusin) and killing; for life 
was given to this animal for no other purpose than that it might swell in flesh. 
Similarly, repressing our desires, it forbade partaking of fishes which have 
neither fins nor scales; for these surpass other fishes in fleshiness and 
fatness. From-this it was, in my opinion, that the mysteries not only prohibited 
touching certain animals, but also withdrew certain parts of those slain in 
sacrifice, for reasons which are known to the initiated. If, then, we are to 
exercise control over the belly, and what is below the belly, it is clear that 
we have of old heard from the Lord that we are to check lust by the law. 
And this will be completely effected, if we unfeignedly condemn what is the 
fuel of lust: I mean pleasure. Now they say that the idea of it is a gentle and 
bland excitement, accompanied with some sensation. Enthralled by this, Menelaus, 
they say, after the capture of Troy, having rushed to put Helen to death, as 
having been the cause of such calamities, was nevertheless not able to effect 
it, being subdued by her beauty, which made him think of pleasure. Whence the 
tragedians, jeering, exclaimed insultingly against him: "But thou, when on her 
breast thou lookedst, thy sword Didst cast away, and with a kiss the traitress, 
Ever-beauteous wretch, thou didst embrace." 
And again: Was the sword then by beauty blunted?" 
And I agree with Antisthenes when he says, "Could I catch Aphrodite, I would 
shoot her; for she has destroyed many of our beautiful and good women." And he 
says that "Love is a vice of nature, and the wretches who fall under its power 
call the disease a deity." For in these words it is shown that stupid people are 
overcome from ignorance of pleasure, to which we ought to give no admittance, 
even though it be called a god, that is, though it be given by God for the 
necessity of procreation. And Xenophon, expressly calling pleasure a vice, says: 
"Wretch, what good dost thou know, or what honourable aim hast thou? which does 
not even wait for the appetite for sweet things, eating before being hungry, 
drinking before being thirsty; and that thou mayest eat pleasantly, seeking out 
fine cooks; and that thou mayest drink pleasantly, procuring costly wines; and 
in summer runnest about seeking snow; and that thou mayest sleep pleasantly, not 
only providest soft beds, but also supports to the couches." Whence, as Aristo 
said, "against the whole tetrachord of pleasure, pain, fear, and lust, there is 
need of much exercise and struggle." 
"For it is these, it is these that go through our bowels, And throw into 
disorder men's hearts." 
"For the minds of those even who are deemed grave, pleasure makes waxen," 
according to Plato; since "each pleasure and pain nails to the body the soul" of 
the man, that does not sever and crucify himself from the passions. "He that 
loses his life," says the Lord, "shall save it;" either giving it up by exposing 
it to danger for the Lord's sake, as He did for us, or loosing it from 
fellowship with its habitual life. For if you would loose, and withdraw, and 
separate (for this is what the cross means) your soul from the delight and 
pleasure that is in this life, you will possess it, found and resting in the 
looked-for hope. And this would be the exercise of death, if we would be content 
with those desires which are measured according to nature alone, which do not 
pass the limit of those which are in accordance with nature -- by going to 
excess, or going against nature -- in which the possibility of sinning arises. 
"We must therefore put on the panoply of God, that we may be able to stand 
against the wiles of the devil; since the weapons of our war fire are not 
carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds, casting down 
reasonings, and every lofty thing which exalteth itself against the knowledge of 
God, and bringing every thought into captivity unto the obedience of Christ," 
says the divine apostle. There is need of a man who shall use in a praiseworthy 
and discriminating manner the things from which passions take their rise, as 
riches and poverty, honour and dishonour, health and sickness, life and death, 
toil and pleasure. For, in order that we may treat things, that are different, 
indifferently, there is need of a great difference in us, as having been 
previously afflicted with much feebleness, and in the distortion of a bad 
training and nurture ignorantly indulged ourselves. The simple word, then, of 
our philosophy declares the passions to be impressions on the soul that is soft 
and yielding, and, as it were, the signatures of the spiritual powers with whom 
we have to straggle. For it is the business, in my opinion, of the malificent 
powers to endeavour to produce somewhat of their own constitution in everything, 
so as to overcome and make their own those who have renounced them. And it 
follows, as might be expected, that some are worsted; but in the case of those 
who engage in the contest with more athletic energy, the powers mentioned above, 
after carrying on the conflict in all forms, and advancing even as far as the 
crown wading in gore, decline the battle, and admire the victors. 
For of objects that are moved, some are moved by impulse and appearance, as 
animals; and some by transposition, as inanimate objects. And of things without 
life, plants, they say, are moved by transposition in order to growth, if we 
will concede to them that plants are without life. To stones, then, belongs a 
permanent state. Plants have a nature; and the irrational animals possess 
impulse and perception, and likewise the two characteristics already specified. 
But the reasoning faculty, being peculiar to the human soul, ought not to be 
impelled similarly with the irrational animals, but ought to discriminate 
appearances, and not to be carried away by them. The powers, then, of which we 
have spoken hold out beautiful sights, and honours, and adulteries, and 
pleasures, and such like alluring phantasies before facile spirits; as those who 
drive away cattle hold, out branches to them. Then, having beguiled those 
incapable of distinguishing the true from the false pleasure, and the fading and 
meretricious from the holy beauty, they lead them into slavery. And each deceit, 
by pressing constantly on the spirit, impresses its image on it; and the soul 
unwittingly carries about the image of the passion, which takes its rise from 
the bait and our consent. 
The adherents of Basilides are in the habit of calling the passions 
appendages: saying that these are in essence certain spirits attached to the 
rational soul, through some original perturbation and confusion; and that, 
again, other bastard and heterogeneous natures of spirits grow on to them, like 
that of the wolf, the ape, the lion, the goat, whose properties showing 
themselves around the soul, they say, assimilate the lusts of the soul to the 
likeness of the animals. For they imitate the actions of those whose properties 
they bear. And not only are they associated with the impulses and perceptions of 
the irrational animals, but they affect the motions and the beauties of plants, 
on account of their bearing also the properties of plants attached to them. They 
have also the properties of a particular state, as the hardness of steel. But 
against this dogma we shall argue subsequently, when we treat of the soul. At 
present this only needs to be pointed out, that man, according to Basilides, 
preserves the appearance of a wooden horse, according to the poetic myth, 
embracing as he does in one body a host of such different spirits. Accordingly, 
Basilides' son himself, Isidorus, in his book, About the Soul attached to us, 
while agreeing in the dogma, as if condemning himself, writes in these words: 
"For if I persuade any one that the soul is undivided, and that the passions of 
the wicked are occasioned by the violence of the appendages, the worthless among 
men will have no slight pretence for saying,' I was compelled, I was carried 
away, I did it against my will, I acted unwillingly;' though he himself led the 
desire of evil things, and did not fight against the assaults of the appendages. 
But we must, by acquiring superiority in the rational part, show ourselves 
masters of the inferior creation in us." For he too lays down the hypothesis of 
two souls in us, like the Pythagoreans, at whom we shall glance afterwards. 
Valentinus too, in a letter to certain people, writes in these very words 
respecting the appendages: "There is one good, by whose presence is the 
manifestation, which is by the Son, and by Him alone can the heart become pure, 
by the expulsion of every evil spirit from the heart: for the multitude of 
spirits dwelling in it do not suffer it to be pure; but each of them performs 
his own deeds, insulting it oft with unseemly lusts. And the heart seems to be 
treated somewhat like a caravanserai. For the latter has holes and ruts made in 
it, and is often filled with dung; men living filthily in it, and taking no care 
for the place as belonging to others. So fares it with the heart as long as 
there is no thought taken for it, being unclean, and the abode of many demons. 
But when the only good Father visits it, it is sanctified, and gleams with 
light. And he who possesses such a heart is so blessed, that "he shall see God." 

What, then, let them tell us, is the cause of such a soul not being cared for 
from the beginning? Either that it is not worthy (and somehow a care for it 
comes to it as from repentance), or it is a saved nature, as he would have it; 
and this, of necessity, from the beginning, being cared for by reason of its 
affinity, afforded no entrance to the impure spirits, unless by being forced and 
found feeble. For were he to grant that on repentance it preferred what was 
better, he will say this unwillingly, being what the truth we hold teaches; 
namely, that salvation is from a change due to obedience, but not from nature. 
For as the exhalations which arise from the earth, and from marshes, gather into 
mists and cloudy masses; so the vapours of fleshly lusts bring on the soul an 
evil condition, scattering about the idols of pleasure before the soul. 
Accordingly they spread darkness over the light of intelligence, the spirit 
attracting the exhalations that arise from lust, and thickening the masses of 
the passions by persistency in pleasures. Gold is not taken from the earth in 
the lump, but is purified by smelting; then, when made pure. it is called gold, 
the earth being purified. For "Ask, and it shall be given you," it is said to 
those who are able of themselves to choose what is best. And how we say that the 
powers of the devil, and the unclean spirits, sow into the sinner's soul, 
requires no more words from me, on adducing as a witness the apostolic Barnabas 
(and he was one of the seventy? and a fellow-worker of Paul), who speaks in 
these words: "Before we believed in God, the dwelling-place of our heart was 
unstable, truly a temple built with hands. 
For it was full of idolatry, and was a house of demons, through doing what 
was opposed to God." 
He says, then, that sinners exercise activities appropriate to demons; but he 
does not say that the spirits themselves dwell in the soul of the unbeliever. 
Wherefore he also adds, "See that the temple of the Lord be gloriously built. 
Learn, having received remission of sins; and having set our hope on the Name, 
let us become new, created again from the beginning." For what he says is not 
that demons are driven out of us, but that the sins which like them we commit 
before believing are remitted. Rightly thus he puts in opposition what follows: 
"Wherefore God truly dwells in our home. He dwells in us. How? The word of His 
faith, the calling of His promise, the wisdom of His statutes, the commandments 
of His communication, [dwell in us]." 
"I know that I have come upon a heresy; and its chief was wont to say that he 
fought with pleasure by pleasure, this worthy Gnostic advancing on pleasure in 
reigned combat, for he said he was a Gnostic; since he said it was no great 
thing for a man that had not tried pleasure to abstain from it, but for one who 
had mixed in it not to be overcome [was something]; and that therefore by means 
of it he trained himself in it. The wretched man knew not that he was deceiving 
himself by the artfulness of voluptuousness. To this opinion, then, manifestly 
Aristippus the Cyrenian adhered -- that of the sophist who boasted of the truth. 
Accordingly, when reproached for continually cohabiting with the Corinthian 
courtezan, he said, "I possess Lais, and am not possessed by her." 
Such also are those (who say that they follow Nicolaus, quoting an adage of 
the man, which they pervert, "that the flesh must be abused." But the worthy man 
showed that it was necessary to check pleasures and lusts, and by such training 
to waste away the impulses and propensities of the flesh. But they, abandoning 
themselves to pleasure like goats, as if insulting the body, lead a life of 
self-indulgence; not knowing that the body is wasted, being by nature subject to 
dissolution; while their soul is buffed in the mire of vice; following as they 
do the teaching of pleasure itself, not of the apostolic man. For in what do 
they differ from Sardanapalus, whose life is shown in the epigram: "I have what 
I ate -- what I enjoyed wantonly; And the pleasures I felt in love. But those 
Many objects of happiness are left, For I too am dust, who ruled great Ninus." 
For the feeling of pleasure is not at all a necessity, but the accompaniment 
of certain natural needs -- hunger, thirst, cold, marriage. If, then, it were 
possible to drink without it, or take food, or beget children, no other need of 
it could be shown. For pleasure is neither a function, nor a state, nor any part 
of us; but has been introduced into life as an auxiliary, as they say salt was 
to season food. But when it casts off restraint and rules the house, it 
generates first concupiscence, which is an irrational propension and impulse 
towards that which gratifies it; and it induced Epicurus to lay down pleasure as 
the aim of the philosopher. Accordingly he deifies a sound condition of body, 
and the certain hope respecting it. For what else is luxury than the voluptuous 
gluttony and the superfluous abundance of those who are abandoned to 
self-indulgence? Diogenes writes significantly in a tragedy: "Who to the 
pleasures of effeminate And filthy luxury attached in heart, Wish not to undergo 
the slightest toil." 
And what follows, expressed indeed in foul language, but in a manner worthy 
of the voluptuaries. 
Wherefore the divine law appears to me necessarily to menace with fear, that, 
by caution and attention, the philosopher may acquire and retain absence of 
anxiety, continuing without fall and without sin in all things. For peace and 
freedom are not otherwise won, than by ceaseless and unyielding struggles with 
our lusts. For these stout and Olympic antagonists are keener than wasps, so to 
speak; and Pleasure especially, not by day only, but by night, is in dreams with 
witchcraft ensnaringly plotting and biting. How, then, can the Greeks any more 
be right in running down the law, when they themselves teach that Pleasure is 
the slave of fear? Socrates accordingly bids "people guard against enticements 
to eat when they are not hungry, and to drink when not thirsty, and the glances 
and kisses of the fair, as fitted to inject a deadlier poison than that of 
scorpions and spiders." And Antisthenes chose rather "to be demented than 
delighted." And the Theban Crates says: "Master these, exulting in the 
disposition of the soul, Vanquished neither by gold nor by languishing love, Nor 
are they any longer attendants to the wanton." 
And at length infers: "Those, unenslaved and unbended by servile Pleasure, 
Love the immortal kingdom and freedom." 
He writes expressly, in other words, "that the stop to the unbridled 
propensity to amorousness is hunger or a halter." 
And the comic poets attest, while they depreciate the teaching of Zeno the 
Stoic, to be to the following effect: "For he philosophizes a vain philosophy: 
He teaches to want food, and gets pupils One loaf, and for seasoning a dry 
fig, and to drink water." 
All these, then, are not ashamed clearly to confess the advantage which 
accrues from caution. And the wisdom which is trite and not contrary to reason, 
trusting not in mere words and oracular utterances, but in invulnerable armour 
of defence and energetic mysteries, and devoting itself to divine commands, and 
exercise, and practice, receives a divine power according to its inspiration 
from the Word. 
Already, then, the aegis of the poetic Jove is described as "Dreadful, 
crowned all around by Terror, And on it Strife and Prowess, and chilling Rout; 
On it, too, the Gorgon's head, dread monster, Terrible, dire, the sign of 
Ægis-bearing Jove." 
But to those, who are able rightly to understand salvation, I know not what 
will appear dearer than the gravity of the Law, and Reverence, which is its 
daughter. For when one is said to pitch too high, as also the Lord says, with 
reference to certain; so that some of those whose desires are towards Him may 
not sing out of pitch and tune, I do not understand it as pitching too high in 
reality, but only as spoken with reference to such as will not take up the 
divine yoke. For to those, who are unstrung and feeble, what is medium seems too 
high; and to those, who are unrighteous, what befalls them seems severe justice. 
For those, who, on account of the favour they entertain for sins, are prone to 
pardon, suppose truth to be harshness, and severity to be savageness, and him 
who does not sin with them, and is not dragged with them, to be pitiless. 
Tragedy writes therefore well of Pluto: "And to what sort of a deity wilt thou 
come, dost thou ask, Who knows neither clemency nor favour, But loves bare 
justice alone." 
For although you are not yet able to do the things enjoined by the Law, yet, 
considering that the noblest examples are set before us in it, we are able to 
nourish and increase the love of liberty; and so we shall profit more eagerly as 
far as we can, inviting some things, imitating some things, and fearing others. 
For thus the righteous of the olden time, who lived according to the law, "were 
not from a storied oak, or from a rock;" because they wish to philosophize 
truly, took and devoted themselves entirely to God, and were classified under 
faith. Zeno said well of the Indians, that he would rather have seen one Indian 
roasted, than have learned the whole of the arguments about bearing pain. But we 
have exhibited before our eyes every day abundant sources of martyrs that are 
burnt, impaled, beheaded. All these the fear inspired by the law, -- leading as 
a paedagogue to Christ, trained so as to manifest their piety by their blood. 
"God stood in the congregation of the gods; He judgeth in the midst of the 
gods." Who are they? Those that are superior to Pleasure, who rise above the 
passions, who know what they do -- the Gnostics, who are greater than the world. 
"I said, Ye are Gods; and all sons of the Highest." To whom speaks the Lord? To 
those who reject as far as possible all that is of man. And the apostle says, 
"For ye are not any longer in the flesh, but in the Spirit." And again he says, 
"Though in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh." "For flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither doth corruption inherit 
incorruption." "Lo, ye shall die like men," the Spirit has said, confuting us. 
We must then exercise ourselves in taking care about those things which fall 
under the power of the passions, fleeing like those who are truly philosophers 
such articles of food as excite lust, and dissolute licentiousness in chambering 
and luxury; and the sensations that tend to luxury, which are a solid reward to 
others, must no longer be so to us. For God's greatest gift is self-restraint. 
For He Himself has said, "I will neyer leave thee, nor forsake thee," as having 
judged thee worthy according to the true election. Thus, then, while we attempt 
piously to advance, we shall have put on us the mild yoke of the Lord from faith 
to faith, one charioteer driving each of us onward to salvation, that the meet 
fruit of beatitude may be won. "Exercise is" according to Hippocrates of Cos, 
"not only the health of the body, but of the soul -- fearlessness of labours -- 
a ravenous appetite for food." 
CHAPTER XXI -- OPINIONS OF VARIOUS PHILOSOPHERS ON THE CHIEF GOOD. 
Epicurus, in placing happiness in not being hungry, or thirsty, or cold, 
uttered that godlike word, saying impiously that he would tight in these points 
even with Father Jove; teaching, as if it were the case of pigs that live in 
filth and not that of rational philosophers, that happiness was victory. For of 
those that are ruled by pleasure are the Cyrenaics and Epicurus; for these 
expressly said that to live pleasantly was the chief end, and that pleasure was 
the only perfect good. Epicurus also says that the removal of pain is pleasure; 
and says that that is to be preferred, which first attracts from itself to 
itself, being, that is, wholly in motion. Dinomachus and Callipho said that the 
chief end was for one to do what he could for the attainment and enjoyment of 
pleasure; and Hieronymus the Peripatetic said the great end was to live 
unmolested, and that the only final good was happiness; and Diodorus likewise, 
who belonged to the same sect, pronounces the end to be to live undisturbed and 
well. Epicurus indeed, and the Cyrenaics, say that pleasure is the first duty; 
for it is for the sake of pleasure, they say, that virtue was introduced, and 
produced pleasure. According to the followers of Calliphon, virtue was 
introduced for the sake of pleasure, but that subsequently, on seeing its own 
beauty, it made itself equally prized with the first principle, that is, 
pleasure. 
But the Aristotelians lay it down, that to live in accordance with virtue is 
the end, but that neither happiness nor the end is reached by every one who has 
virtue. For the wise man, vexed and involved in involuntary mischances, and 
wishing gladly on these accounts to flee from life, is neither fortunate nor 
happy. For virtue needs time; for that is not acquired in one day which exists 
[only] in the perfect man since, as they say, a child is never happy. But human 
life is a perfect time, and therefore happiness is completed by the three kinds 
of good things. Neither, then, the poor, nor the mean nor even the diseased, nor 
the slave, can be one of them. 
Again, on the other hand, Zeno the Stoic thinks the end to be living 
according to virtue; and, Cleanthes, living agreeably to nature in the fight 
exercise of reason, which he held to consist of the selection of things 
according to nature. And Antipatrus, his friend, supposes the end to consist in 
choosing continually and unswervingly the things which are according to nature, 
and rejecting those contrary to nature. Archedamus, on the other hand, explained 
the end to be such, that in selecting the greatest and chief things according to 
nature, it was impossible to overstep it. In addition to these, Panictius 
pronounced the end to be, to live according to the means given to us by nature. 
And finally, Posidonius said that it was to live engaged in contemplating the 
truth and order of the universe, and forming himself as he best can, in nothing 
influenced by the irrational part of his soul. And some of the later Stoics 
defined the great end to consist in living agreeably to the constitution of man. 
Why should I mention Aristo? He said that the end was indifference; but what is 
indifferent simply abandons the indifferent. 
Shall I bring forward the opinions of Herillus? Herillus states the end to be 
to live according to science. For some think that the more recent disciples of 
the Academy define the end to be, the steady abstraction of the mind to its own 
impressions. Further, Lycus the Peripatetic used to say that the final end was 
the true joy of the soul; as Leucimus, that it was the joy it had in what was 
good. Critolaus, also a Peripatetic, said that it was the perfection of a life 
flowing rightly according to nature, referring to the perfection accomplished by 
the three kinds according to tradition. 
We must, however, not rest satisfied with these, but endeavour as we best can 
to adduce the doctrines laid down on the point by the naturalist; for they say 
that Anaxagoras of Clazomenae affirmed contemplation and the freedom. flowing 
from it to be the end of life; Heraclitus the Ephesian, complacency. The Pontic 
Heraclides relates, that Pythagoras taught that the knowledge of the perfection 
of the numbers I was happiness of the soul. The Abderites also teach the 
existence of an end. Democritus, in his work On the Chief End, said it was 
cheerfulness, which he also called well-being, and often exclaims, "For delight 
and its absence are the boundary of those who have reached full age;" Hecataeus, 
that it was sufficiency to one's self; Apollodotus of Cyzicum, that it was 
delectation as Nausiphanes, that it was undauntedness, for he said that it was 
this that was called by Democritus imperturbability. 
In addition to these still, Diotimus declared the end to be perfection of 
what is good, which he said was termed well-being. Again, Antisthenes, that it 
was humility. And those called Annicereans, of the Cyrenaic succession, laid 
down no definite end for the whole of life; but said that to each action 
belonged, as its proper end, the pleasure accruing from the action. These 
Cyrenaics reject Epicurus' definition of pleasure, that is the removal of pain, 
calling that the condition of a dead man; because we rejoice not only on account 
of pleasures, but companionships and distinctions; while Epicurns thinks that 
all joy of the soul arises from previous sensations of the flesh. Metrodorus, in 
his book On the Source of Happiness in Ourselves being greater than that which 
arises from Objects, says: What else is the good of the soul but the sound state 
of the flesh, and the sure hope of its continuance? 
CHAPTER XXII -- PLATO'S OPINION, THAT THE CHIEF GOOD CONSISTS IN ASSIMILATION 
TO GOD, AND ITS AGREEMENT WITH SCRIPTURE. 
Further, Plato the philosopher says that the end is twofold: that which is 
communicable, and exists first in the ideal forms themselves, which he also 
calls "the good;" and that which partakes of it, and receives its likeness from 
it, as is the case in the men who appropriate virtue and true philosophy. 
Wherefore also Cleanthes, in the second book, On Pleasure, says that Socrates 
everywhere teaches that the just man and the happy are one and the same, and 
execrated the first man who separated the just from the useful, as having done 
an impious thing. For those are in truth impious who separate the useful from 
that which is tight according to the law. Plato himself says that happiness 
(eudai monia) is to possess rightly the daemon, and that the ruling 
faculty of the soul is called the daemon; and he terms happiness 
(eudaimonia) the most perfect and complete good. Sometimes he calls it a 
consistent and harmonious life, sometimes the highest perfection in accordance 
with virtue; and this he places in the knowledge of the Good, and in likeness to 
God, demonstrating likeness to be justice and holiness with wisdom. For is it 
not thus that some of our writers have understood that man straightway on his 
creation received what is "according to the image," but that what is according 
"to the likeness" he will receive afterwards on his perfection? Now Plato, 
teaching that the virtuous man shall have this likeness accompanied with 
humility, explains the following: "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 
He says, accordingly, in The Laws: "God indeed, as the ancient saying has it, 
occupying the beginning, the middle, and the end of all things, goes straight 
through while He goes round the circumference. And He is always attended by 
Justice, the avenger of those who revolt from the divine law." You see how he 
connects fear with the divine law. He adds, therefore: "To which he, who would 
be happy, cleaving, will follow lowly and beautified." Then, connecting what 
follows these words, and admonishing by fear, he adds: "What conduct, then, is 
dear and conformable to God? That which is characterized by one word of old 
date: Like will be dear to like, as to what is in proportion; but things out of 
proportion are neither dear to one another, nor to those which are in 
proportion. And that therefore he that would be dear to God, must, to the best 
of his power, become such as He is And in virtue of the same reason, our 
self-controlling man is dear to God. But he that has no self-control is unlike 
and diverse." In saying that it was an ancient dogma, he indicates the teaching 
which had come to him from the law. And having in the Theaoetus admitted that 
evils make the circuit of mortal nature and of this spot, he adds: "Wherefore we 
must try to flee hence as soon as possible. For flight is likeness to God as far 
as possible. And likeness is to become holy and just with wisdom." Speusippus, 
the nephew of Plato, says that happiness is a perfect state in those who conduct 
themselves in accordance with nature, or the state of the good: for which 
condition all men have a desire, but the good only attained to quietude; 
consequently the virtues are the authors of happiness. And Xenocrates the 
Chalcedonian defines happiness to be the possession of virtue, strictly so 
called, and of the power subservient to it. Then he clearly says, that the seat 
in which it resides is the soul; that by which it is effected, the virtues; and 
that of these as parts are formed praiseworthy actions, good habits and 
dispositions, and motions, and relations; and that corporeal and external 
objects are not without these. For Polemo, the disciple of Xenocrates, seems of 
the opinion that happiness is sufficiency of all good things, or of the most and 
greatest. He lays down the doctrine, then, that happiness never exists without 
virtue; and that virtue, apart from corporeal and external objects, is 
sufficient for happiness. Let these things be so. The contradictions to the 
opinions specified shall be adduced in due time. But on us it is incumbent to 
reach the unaccomplished end, obeying the commands -- that is, God -- and living 
according to them, irreproachably and intelligently, through knowledge of the 
divine will; and assimilation as far as possible in accordance with right reason 
is the end, and restoration to perfect adoption by the Son, which ever glorifies 
the Father by the great High Priest who has deigned to call us brethren and 
fellow-heirs. And the apostle, succinctly describing the end, writes in the 
Epistle to the Romans: "But now, being made free from sin, and become servants 
to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life." And 
viewing the hope as twofold -- that which is expected, and that which has been 
received -- he now teaches the end to be the restitution of the hope. "For 
patience," he says, "worketh experience, and experience hope: and hope maketh 
not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy 
Spirit that is given to us." On account of which love and the restoration to 
hope, he says, in another place, "which rest is laid up for us." You will find 
in Ezekiel the like, as follows: "The soul that sinneth, it shall die. And the 
man who shall be righteous, and shall do judgment and justice, who has not eaten 
on the mountains, nor lifted his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, and 
hath not defiled his neighbour's wife, and hath not approached to a woman in the 
time of her uncleanness (for he does not wish the seed of man to be 
dishonoured), and will not injure a man; will restore the debtor's pledge, and 
will not take usury; will turn away his hand from wrong; will do true judgment 
between a man and his neighbour; will walk in my ordinances, and keep my 
commandments, so as to do the truth; he is righteous, he shall surely live, 
saith Adonai the Lord." Isaiah too, in exhorting him that hath not believed to 
gravity of life, and the Gnostic to attention, proving that man's virtue and 
God's are not the same, speaks thus: "Seek the Lord, and on finding Him call on 
Him. And when He shall draw near to you, let the wicked forsake his ways, and 
the unrighteous man his ways; and let him return to the Lord, and he shall 
obtain mercy," down to "and your thoughts from my thoughts."' "We," then, 
according to the noble apostle, "wait for the hope of righteousness by faith. 
For in Christ neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but 
faith which worketh by love." And we desire that every one of you show the same 
diligence to the full assurance of hope," down to "made an high priest for ever, 
after the order of Melchizedek." Similarly with Paul "the All-virtuous Wisdom" 
says, "He, that heareth me shall dwell trusting in hope." For the restoration of 
hope is called by the same term "hope." To the expression "will dwell" it has 
most beautifully added" trusting," showing that such an one has obtained rest, 
having received the hope for which he hoped. Wherefore also it is added, "and 
shall be quiet, without fear of any evil." And openly and expressly the apostle, 
in the first Epistle to the Corinthians says, "Be ye followers of me, as also I 
am of Christ," s in order that that may take place. If ye are of me, and I am of 
Christ, then ye are imitators of Christ, and Christ of God. Assimilation to God, 
then, so that as far as possible a man becomes righteous and holy with wisdom he 
lays down as the aim of faith, and the end to be that restitution of the promise 
which is effected by faith. From these doctrines gush the fountains, which we 
specified above, of those who have dogmatized about "the end." But of these 
enough. 
CHAPTER XXIII -- ON MARRIAGE. 
Since pleasure and lust seem to fall under marriage, it must also be treated 
of. Marriage is the first conjunction of man and woman for the procreation of 
legitimate children. Accordingly Menander the comic poet says: "For the 
begetting of legitimate children, I give thee my daughter." 
We ask if we ought to marry; which is one of the points, which are said to be 
relative. For some must marry, and a man must be in some condition, and he must 
marry some one in some condition. For every one is not to marry, nor always. But 
there is a time in which it is suitable, and a person for whom it is suitable, 
and an age up to which it is suitable. Neither ought every one to take a wife, 
nor is it every woman one is to take, nor always, nor in every way, nor 
inconsiderately. But only he who is in certain circumstances, and such an one 
and at such time as is requisite, and for the sake of children, and one who is 
in every respect similar, and who does not by force or compulsion love the 
husband who loves her. Hence Abraham, regarding his wife as a sister, says, "She 
is my sister by my father, but not by my mother; and she became my wife," 
teaching us that children of the same mothers ought not to enter into matrimony. 
Let us briefly follow the history. Plato ranks marriage among outward good 
things, providing for the perpetuity of our race, and handing down as a torch a 
certain perpetuity to children's children. Democritus repudiates marriage and 
the procreation of children, on account of the many annoyances thence arising, 
and abstractions from more necessary things. Epicurus agrees, and those who 
place good in pleasure, and in the absence of trouble and pain. According to the 
opinion of the Stoics, marriage and the rearing of children are a thing 
indifferent; and according to the Peripatetics, a good. In a word, these, 
following out their dogmas in words, became enslaved to pleasures; some using 
concubines, some mistresses, and the most youths. And that wise quaternion in 
the garden with a mistress, honoured pleasure by their acts. Those, then, will 
not escape the curse of yoking an ass with an ox, who, judging certain things 
not to suit them, command others to do them, or the reverse. This Scripture has 
briefly showed, when it says, "What thou hatest, thou shalt not do to another." 
But they who approve of marriage say, Nature has adapted us for marriage, as 
is evident from the structure of our bodies, which are male and female. And they 
constantly proclaim that command, "Increase and replenish." And though this is 
the case, yet it seems to them shameful that man, created by God, should be more 
licentious than the irrational creatures, which do not mix with many 
licentiously, but with one of the same species, such as pigeons and ringdoves, 
and creatures like them. Furthermore, they say, "The childless man fails in the 
perfection which is according to nature, not having substituted his proper 
successor in his place. For he is perfect that has produced from himself his 
like, or rather, when he sees that he has produced the same; that is, when that 
which is begotten attains to the same nature with him who begat." Therefore we 
must by all means marry, both for our country's sake, for the succession of 
children, and as far as we are concerned, the perfection of the world; since the 
poets also pity a marriage half-perfect and childless, but pronounce the 
fruitful one happy. But it is the diseases of the body that principally show 
marriage to be necessary. For a wife's care and the assiduity of her constancy 
appear to exceed the endurance of all other relations and friends, as much as to 
excel them in sympathy; and most of all, she takes kindly to patient watching. 
And in truth, according to Scripture, she is a needful help. The comic poet 
then, Menander, while running down marriage, and yet alleging on the other side 
its advantages, replies to one who had said: "I am averse to the thing, For you 
take it awkwardly." 
Then. he adds: "You see the hardships and the things which annoy you in it. 
But you do not look on the advantages." And so forth. 
Now marriage is a help in the case of those advanced in years, by furnishing 
a spouse to take care of one, and by rearing children of her to nourish one's 
old age. 
"For to a man after death his children bring renown, Just as corks bear the 
net, Saving the fishing-line from the deep." according to the tragic poet 
Sophocles. 
Legislators, moreover, do not allow those who are unmarried to discharge the 
highest magisterial offices. For instance, the legislator of the Spartans 
imposed a fine not on bachelorhood only, but on monogamy? and late marriage, and 
single life. And the renowned Plato orders the man who has not married to pay a 
wife's maintenance into the public treasury, and to give to the magistrates a 
suitable sum of money as expenses. For if they shall not beget children, not 
having married, they produce, as far as in them lies, a scarcity of men, and 
dissolve states and the world that is composed of them, impiously doing away 
with divine generation. It is also unmanly and weak to shun living with a wife 
and children. For of that of which the loss is an evil, the possession is by all 
means a good; and this is the case with the rest of things. But the loss of 
children is, they say, among the chiefest evils: the possession of children is 
consequently a good thing; and if it be so, so also is marriage. It is said: 
"Without a father there never could be a child, And without a mother conception 
of a child could not be. 
Marriage makes a father, as a husband a mother." 
Accordingly Homer makes a thing to be earnestly prayed for: "A husband and a 
house;" yet not simply, but along with good agreement. For the marriage of other 
people is an agreement for indulgence; but that of philosophers leads to that 
agreement which is in accordance with reason, bidding wives adorn themselves not 
in outward appearance, but in character; and enjoining husbands not to treat 
their wedded wives as mistresses, making corporeal wantonness their aim; but to 
take advantage of marriage for help in the whole of life, and for the best 
self-restraint. 
Far more excellent, in my opinion, than the seeds of wheat and barley that 
are sown at appropriate seasons, is man that is sown, for whom all things grow; 
and those seeds temperate husbandmen ever sow. Every foul and polluting practice 
must therefore be purged away from marriage; that the intercourse of the 
irrational animals may not be cast in our teeth, as more accordant with nature 
than human conjunction in procreation. Some of these, it must be granted, desist 
at the time in which they are directed, leaving creation to the working of 
Providence. 
By the tragedians, Polyxena, though being murdered, is described nevertheless 
as having, when dying, taken great care to fall decently,- "Concealing what 
ought to be hid from the eyes of men." 
Marriage to her was a calamity. To be subjected, then, to the passions, and 
to yield to them, is the extremest slavery; as to keep them in subjection is the 
only liberty. The divine Scripture accordingly says, that those who have 
transgressed the commandments are sold to strangers, that is, to sins alien to 
nature, till they return and repent. Marriage, then, as a sacred image, must be 
kept pure from those things which defile it. We are to rise from our slumbers 
with the Lord, and retire to sleep with thanksgiving and prayer,- "Both when you 
sleep, and when the holy light comes," confessing the Lord in our whole life; 
possessing piety in the soul, and extending self-control to the body. For it is 
pleasing to God to lead decorum from the tongue to our actions. Filthy speech is 
the way to effrontery; and the end of both is filthy conduct. 
Now that the Scripture counsels marriage, and allows no release from the 
union, is expressly contained in the law, "Thou shalt not put away thy wife, 
except for the cause of fornication;" and it regards as fornication, the 
marriage of those separated while the other is alive. Not to deck and adorn 
herself beyond what is becoming, renders a wife free of calumnious suspicion. 
while she devotes herself assiduously to prayers and supplications; avoiding 
frequent departures from the house, and shutting herself up as far as possible 
from the view of all not related to her, and deeming housekeeping of more 
consequence than impertinent trifling. "He that taketh a woman that has been put 
away," it is said, "committeth adultery; and if one puts away his wife, he makes 
her an adulteress," that is, compels her to commit adultery. And not only is he 
who puts her away guilty of this, but he who takes her, by giving to the woman 
the opportunity of sinning; for did he not take her, she would return to her 
husband. What, then, is the law? In order to check the impetuosity of the 
passions, it commands the adulteress to be put to death, on being convicted of 
this; and if of priestly family, to be committed to the flames. And the 
adulterer also is stoned to death, but not in the same place, that not even 
their death may be in common. And the law is not at variance with the Gospel, 
but agrees with it. How should it be otherwise, one Lord being the author of 
both? She who has committed fornication liveth in sin, and is dead to the 
commandments; but she who has repented, being as it were born again by the 
change in her life, has a regeneration of life; the old harlot being dead, and 
she who has been regenerated by repentance having come back again to life. The 
Spirit testifies to what has been said by Ezekiel, declaring, "I desire not the 
death of the sinner, but that he should turn." Now they are stoned to death; as 
through hardness of heart dead to the law which they believed not. But in the 
case of a priestess the punishment is increased, because "to whom much is given, 
from him shall more be required." 
Let us conclude this second book of the Stromata at this point, on account of 
the length and number of the chapters. 


