
Clement of Alexandria












The Stromata, or Miscellanies
Book IV
CHAPTER I -- ORDER OF CONTENTS. 
It will follow, I think, that I should treat of martyrdom, and of who the 
perfect man is. With these points shall be included what follows in accordance 
with the demands of the points to be spoken about, and how both bond and free 
must equally philosophize, whether male or female in sex. And in the sequel, 
after finishing what is to be said on faith and inquiry, we shall set forth the 
department of symbols; so that, on cursorily concluding the discourse on ethics, 
we shall exhibit the advantage which has accrued to the Greeks from the 
barbarian philosophy. After which sketch, the brief explanation of the 
Scriptures both against the Greeks and against the Jews will be presented, and 
whatever points we were unable to embrace in the previous Miscellanies (through 
having respect necessarily to the multitude of matters), in accordance with the 
commencement of the poem, purposing to finish them in one commentary. In 
addition to these points, afterwards on completing the sketch, as far as we can 
in accordance with what we propose, we must give an account of the physical 
doctrines of the Greeks and of the barbarians, respecting elementary principles, 
as far as their opinions have reached us, and argue against the principal views 
excogitated by the philosophers. 
It will naturally fall after these, after a cursory view of theology, to 
discuss the opinions handed down respecting prophecy; so that, having 
demonstrated that the Scriptures which we believe are valid from their 
omnipotent authority, we shall be able to go over them consecutively, and to 
show thence to all the heresies one God and Omnipotent Lord to be truly preached 
by the law and the prophets, and besides by the blessed Gospel. Many 
contradictions against the heterodox await us while we attempt, in writing, to 
do away with the force of the allegations made by them, and to persuade them 
against their will, proving by the Scriptures themselves. 
On completing, then, the whole of what we propose in the commentaries, on 
which, if the Spirit will, we ministering to the urgent need, (for it is 
exceedingly necessary, before coming to the truth, to embrace what ought to be 
said by way of preface), shall address ourselves to the true gnostic science of 
nature, receiving initiation into the minor mysteries before the greater; so 
that nothing may be in the way of the truly divine declaration of sacred things, 
the subjects requiring preliminary detail and statement being cleared away, and 
sketched beforehand. The science of nature, then, or rather observation, as 
contained in the gnostic tradition according to the rule of the truth, depends 
on the discussion concerning cosmogony, ascending thence to the department of 
theology. Whence, then, we shall begin our account of what is handed down, with 
the creation as related by the prophets, introducing also the tenets of the 
heterodox, and endeavouring as far as we can to confute them. But it shall be 
written if God will, and as He inspires; and now we must proceed to what we 
proposed, and complete the discourse on ethics. 
CHAPTER II -- THE MEANING OF THE NAME STROMATA OR MISCELLANIES. 
Let these notes of ours, as we have often said for the sake of those that 
consult them carelessly and unskilfully, be of varied character -- and as the 
name itself indicates, patched together -- passing constantly from one thing to 
another, and in the series of discussions hinting at one thing and demonstrating 
another. "For those who seek for gold," says Heraclitus, "dig much earth and 
find little gold." But those who are of the truly golden race, in mining for 
what is allied to them, will find the much in little. For the word will find one 
to understand it. The Miscellanies of notes contribute, then, to the 
recollection and expression of truth in the case of him who is able to 
investigate with reason. 
And you must prosecute, in addition to these, other labours and researches; 
since, in the case of people who are setting out on a road with which they are 
unacquainted, it is sufficient merely to point out the direction. After this 
they must walk and find out the rest for themselves. As, they say, when a 
certain slave once asked at the oracle what he should do to please his master, 
the Pythian priestess replied, "You will find if you seek." It is truly a 
difficult matter, then, as turns out, to find out latent good; since "Before 
virtue is placed exertion, And long and steep is the way to it, And rough at 
first; but when the summit is reached, Then is it easy, though difficult 
[before]." 
"For narrow," in truth, "and strait is the way" of the Lord. And it is to the 
"violent that the kingdom of God belongs." 
Whence, "Seek, and ye shall find," holding on by the truly royal road, and 
not deviating. As we might expect, then, the generative power of the seeds of 
the doctrines comprehended in this treatise is great in small space, as the 
"universal herbage of the field," as Scripture saith. Thus the Miscellanies of 
notes have their proper title, wonderfully like that ancient oblation culled 
from all sorts of things of which Sophocles writes: "For there was a sheep's 
fleece, and there was a vine, And a libation, and grapes well stored; And there 
was mixed with it fruit of all kinds, And the fat of the olive, and the most 
curious Wax-formed work of the yellow bee." 
Just so our Stromata, according to the husbandman of the comic poet Timocles, 
produce "figs, olives, dried figs, honey, as from an all-fruitful field;" on 
account of which exuberance he adds: "Thou speakest of a harvest-wreath not of 
husbandry." 
For the Athenians were wont to cry: "The harvest-wreath bears figs and fat 
loaves, And honey in a cup, and olive oil to anoint you." 
We must then often, as in winnowing sieves, shake and toss up this the great 
mixture of seeds, in order to separate the wheat. 
CHAPTER III -- THE TRUE EXCELLENCE OF MAN. 
The most of men have a disposition unstable and heedless, like the nature of 
storms. "Want of faith has done many good things, and faith evil things." And 
Epicharmus says, "Don't forget to exercise incredulity; for it is the sinews of 
the soul." Now, to disbelieve truth brings death, as to believe, life; and 
again, to believe the lie and to disbelieve the truth hutries to destruction. 
The same is the case with self-restraint and licentiousness. To restrain one's 
self from doing good is the work of vice; but to keep from wrong is the 
beginning of salvation. So the Sabbath, by abstinence from evils, seems to 
indicate self-restraint. And what, I ask, is it in which man differs from 
beasts, and the angels of God, on the other hand, are wiser than he? "Thou 
madest him a little lower than the angels." For some do not interpret this 
Scripture of the Lord, although He also bore flesh, but of the perfect man and 
the gnostic, inferior in comparison with the angels in time, and by reason of 
the vesture [of the body]. I call then wisdom nothing but science, since life 
differs not from life. For to live is common to the mortal nature, that is to 
man, with that to which has been vouchsafed immortality; as also the faculty of 
contemplation and of self-restraint, one of the two being more excellent. On 
this ground Pythagoras seems to me to have said that God alone is wise, since 
also the apostle writes in the Epistle to the Romans, "For the obedience of the 
faith among all nations, being made known to the only wise God through Jesus 
Christ;" and that he himself was a philosopher, on account of his friendship 
with God. Accordingly it is said, "God talked with Moses as a friend with a 
friend." s That, then, which is true being clear to God, forthwith generates 
truth. And the gnostic loves the truth. "Go," it is said, "to the ant, thou 
sluggard, and be the disciple of the bee;" thus speaks Solomon. For if there is 
one function belonging to the peculiar nature of each creature, alike of the ox, 
and horse, and dog, what shall we say is the peculiar function of man? He is 
like, it appears to me, the Centaur, a Thessalian figment, compounded of a 
rational and irrational part, of soul and body. Well, the body tills the ground, 
and hastes to it; but the soul is raised to God: trained in the true philosophy, 
it speeds to its kindred above, turning away from the lusts of the body, and 
besides these, from toil and fear, although we have shown that patience and fear 
belong to the good man. 
For if "by the law is the knowledge of sin," as those allege who disparage 
the law, and "till the law sin was in the world;" yet "without the law sin was 
dead," we oppose them. For when you take away the cause of fear, sin, you have 
taken away fear; and much more, punishment, when you have taken away that which 
gives rise to lust. "For the law is not made for the just man," says the 
Scripture. Well, then, says Heraclitus, "They would not have known the name of 
Justice if these things had not been." And Socrates says, "that the law was not 
made for the sake of the good." But the cavillers did not know even this, as the 
apostle says, "that he who loveth his brother worketh not evil;" for this, "Thou 
shalt not kill, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not steal; and if 
there be any other commandment, it is comprehended in the word, Thou shall love 
thy neighbour as thyself." So also is it said, "Thou shall love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." And "if he 
that loveth his neighbour worketh no evil," and if "every commandment is 
comprehended in this, the loving our neighbour," the commandments, by menacing 
with fear, work love, not hatred. Wherefore the law is productive of the emotion 
of fear. "So that the law is holy," and in truth "spiritual," according to the 
apostle. We must, then, as is fit, in investigating the nature of the body and 
the essence of the soul, apprehend the end of each, and not regard death as an 
evil. "For when ye were the servants of sin," says the apostle, "ye were free 
from righteousness. What fruit had ye then in those things in which ye are now 
ashamed? For the end of those things is death. But now, being made free from 
sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end 
everlasting life. For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal 
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord." The assertion, then, may be hazarded, that 
it has been shown that death is the fellowship of the soul in a state of sin 
with the body; and life the separation from sin. And many are the stakes and 
ditches of lust which impede us, and the pits of wrath and anger which must be 
overleaped, and all the machinations we must avoid of those who plot against us, 
-- who would no longer see the knowledge of God "through a glass." 
"The half of virtue the far-seeing Zeus takes From man, when he reduces him 
to a state of slavery." 
As slaves the Scripture views those "under sin" and "sold to sin," the lovers 
of pleasure and of the body; and beasts rather than men, "those who have become 
like to cattle, horses, neighing after their neighbours' wives." The licentious 
is "the lustful ass," the covetous is the "savage wolf," and the deceiver is "a 
serpent." The severance, therefore, of the soul from the body, made a life-long 
study, produces in the philosopher gnostic alacrity, so that he is easily able 
to bear natural death, which is the dissolution of the chains which bind the 
soul to the body. "For the world is crucified to me, and I to the world," the 
[apostle] says; "and now I live, though in the flesh, as having my conversation 
in heaven." 
CHAPTER IV -- THE PRAISES OF MARTYRDOM. 
Whence, as is reasonable, the gnostic, when Galled, obeys easily, and gives 
up his body to him who asks; and, previously divesting himself of the affections 
of this carcase, not insulting the tempter, but rather, in my opinion, training 
him and convincing him,- "From what honour and what extent of wealth fallen," as 
says Empedocles, here for the future he walks with mortals. He, in truth, bears 
witness to himself that he is faithful and loyal towards God; and to the 
tempter, that he in vain envied him who is faithful through love; and to the 
Lord, of the inspired persuasion in reference to His doctrine, from which he 
will not depart through fear of death; further, he confirms also the truth of 
preaching by his deed, showing that God to whom he hastes is powerful. You will 
wonder at his love, which he conspicuously shows with thankfulness, in being 
united to what is allied to him, and besides by his precious blood, shaming the 
unbelievers. He then avoids denying Christ through fear by reason of the 
command; nor does he sell his faith in the hope of the gifts prepared, but in 
love to the Lord he will most gladly depart from this life; perhaps giving 
thanks both to him who afforded the cause of his departure hence, and to him who 
laid the plot against him, for receiving an honourable reason which he himself 
furnished not, for showing what he is, to him by his patience, and to the Lord 
in love, by which even before his birth he was manifested to the Lord, who knew 
the martyr's choice. With good courage, then, he goes to the Lord, his friend, 
for whom he voluntarily gave his body, and, as his judges hoped, his soul, 
hearing from our Saviour the words of poetry, "Dear brother," by reason of the 
similarity of his life. We call martyrdom perfection, not because the man comes 
to the end of his life as others, but because he has exhibited the perfect work 
of love. And the ancients laud the death of those among the Greeks who died in 
war, not that they advised people to die a violent death, but because he who 
ends his life in war is released without the dread of dying, severed from the 
body without experiencing previous suffering or being enfeebled in his soul, as 
the people that suffer in diseases. For they de part in a state of effeminacy 
and desiring to live; and therefore they do not yield up the soul pure, but 
bearing with it their lusts like weights of lead; all but those who have been 
conspicuous in virtue. Some die in battle with their lusts, these being in no 
respect different from what they would have been if they had wasted away by 
disease. 
If the confession to God is martyrdom, each soul which has lived purely in 
the knowledge of God, which has obeyed the commandments, is a witness both by 
life and word, in whatever way it may be released from the body, -- shedding 
faith as blood along its whole life till its departure. For instance, the Lord 
says in the Gospel, "Whosoever shall leave father, or mother, or brethren," and 
so forth, "for the sake of the Gospel and my name," he is blessed; not 
indicating simple martyrdom, but the gnostic martyrdom, as of the man who has 
conducted himself according to the rule of the Gospel, in love to the Lord (for 
the knowledge of the Name and the understanding of the Gospel point out the 
gnosis, but not the bare appellation), so as to leave his worldly kindred, and 
wealth, and every possession, in order to lead a life free from passion. 
"Mother" figuratively means Country and sustenance; "fathers" are the laws of 
civil polity: which must be contemned thankfully by the high-souled just man; 
for the sake of being the friend of God, and of obtaining the right hand in the 
holy place, as the Apostles have done. 
Then Heraclitus says, "Gods and men honour those slain in battle;" and Plato 
in the fifth book of the Republic writes, "Of those who die in military service, 
whoever dies after winning renown, shall we not say that he is chief of the 
golden race? Most assuredly." But the golden race is with the gods, who are in 
heaven, in the fixed sphere, who chiefly hold command in the providence 
exercised towards men. Now some of the heretics who have misunderstood the Lord, 
have at once an impious and cowardly love of life; saying that the true 
martyrdom is the knowledge of the only true God (which we also admit), and that 
the man is a self-murderer and a suicide who makes confession by death; and 
adducing other similar sophisms of cowardice. To these we shall reply at the 
proper time; for they differ with us in regard to first principles. Now we, too, 
say that those who have rushed on death (for there are some, not belonging to 
us, but sharing the name merely, who are in haste to give themselves up, the 
poor wretches dying through hatred to the Creator ) -- these, we say, banish 
themselves without being martyrs, even though they are punished publicly. For 
they do not preserve the characteristic mark of believing martyrdom, inasmuch as 
they have not known the only true God, but give themselves up to a vain death, 
as the Gymnosophists of the Indians to useless fire. 
But since these falsely named calumniate the body, let them learn that the 
harmonious mechanism of the body contributes to the understanding which leads to 
goodness of nature. Wherefore in the third book of the Republic, Plato, whom 
they appeal to loudly as an authority that disparages generation, says, "that 
for the sake of harmony of soul, care must be taken for the body," by which, he 
who announces the proclamation of the truth, finds it possible to live, and to 
live well. For it is by the path of life and health that we learn gnosis. But is 
he who cannot advance to the height without being occupied with necessary 
things, and through them doing what tends to knowledge, not to choose to live 
well? In living, then, living well is secured. And he who in the body has 
devoted himself to a good life, is being sent on to the state of immortality. 
CHAPTER V -- ON CONTEMPT FOR PAIN, POVERTY, AND OTHER EXTERNAL THINGS. 
Fit objects for admiration are the Stoics, who say that the soul is not 
affected by the body, either to vice by disease, or to virtue by health; but 
both these things, they say, are indifferent. And indeed Job, through exceeding 
continence, and excellence of faith, when from rich he became poor, from being 
held in honour dishonoured, from being comely unsightly, and sick from being 
healthy, is depicted as a good example, putting the Tempter to shame, blessing 
his Creator; bearing what came second, as the first, and most clearly teaching 
that it is possible for the gnostic to make an excellent use of all 
circumstances, And that ancient achievements are proposed as images for our 
correction, the apostle shows, when he says, "So that my bonds in Christ are 
become manifest in all the palace, and to all the rest; and several of the 
brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak 
the word of God without fear," -- since martyrs' testimonies are examples 'of 
conversion gloriously sanctified. "For what things the Scripture speaks were 
written for our instruction, that we, through patience and the consolation of 
the Scriptures, might have the hope of consolation." When pain is present, the 
soul appears to decline from it, and to deem release from present pain a 
precious thing. At that moment it slackens from studies, when the other virtues 
also are neglected. And yet we do not say that it is virtue itself which 
suffers, for virtue is not affected by disease. But he who is partaker of both, 
of virtue and the disease, is afflicted by the pressure of the latter; and if he 
who has not yet attained the habit of self-command be not a high-souled man, he 
is distraught; and the inability to endure it is found equivalent to fleeing 
from it. 
The same holds good also in the case of poverty. For it compels the soul to 
desist from necessary things, I mean contemplation and from pure sinlessness, 
forcing him, who has not wholly dedicated himself to God in love, to occupy 
himself about provisions; as, again, health and abundance of necessaries keep 
the soul free and unimpeded, and capable of making a good use of what is at 
hand. "For," says the apostle, "such shall have trouble in the flesh. But I 
spare you. For I would have you without anxiety, in order to decorum and 
assiduity for the Lord, without distraction." 
These things, then, are to be abstained from, not for their own sakes, but 
for the sake of the body; and care for the body is exercised for the sake of the 
Soul, to which it has reference. For on this account it is necessary for the man 
who lives as a gnostic to know what is suitable. Since the fact that pleasure is 
not a good thing is admitted from the fact that certain pleasures are evil, by 
this reason good appears evil, and evil good. And then, if we choose some 
pleasures and shun others, it is not every pleasure that is a good thing. 
Similarly, also, the same rule holds with pains, some of which we endure, and 
others we shun. But choice and avoidance are exercised according to knowledge; 
so that it is not pleasure that is the good thing, but knowledge by which we 
shall choose a pleasure at a certain time, and of a certain kind. Now the martyr 
chooses the pleasure that exists in prospect through the present pain. If pain 
is conceived as existing in thirst, and pleasure in drinking, the pain that has 
preceded becomes the efficient cause of pleasure. But evil cannot be the 
efficient cause of good. Neither, then, is the one thing nor the other evil. 
Simonides accordingly (as also Aristotle) writes, "that to be in good health is 
the best thing, and the second best thing is to be handsome, and the third best 
thing is to be rich without cheating." 
And Theognis of Megara says: "You must, to escape poverty, throw Yourself, O 
Cyrnus down from The steep rocks into the deep sea." 
On the other hand, Antiphanes, the comic poet, says, "Plutus (Wealth), when 
it has taken hold of those who see better than others, makes them blind." Now by 
the poets he is proclaimed as blind from his birth: "And brought him forth blind 
who saw not the sun." 
Says the Chalcidian Euphorion: "Riches, then, and extravagant luxuries, Were 
for men the worst training for manliness." 
Wrote Euripides in Alexander: "And it is said, Penury has attained wisdom 
through misfortune; But much wealth will capture not Sparta alone, but every 
city." 
"It is not then the only coin that mortals have, that which is white silver 
or golden, but virtue too," as Sophocles says. 
CHAPTER VI -- SOME POINTS IN THE BEATITUDES. 
Our holy Saviour applied poverty and riches, and the like, both to spiritual 
things and objects of sense. For when He said, "Blessed are they that are 
persecuted for righteousness' sake," He clearly taught us in every circumstance 
to seek for the martyr who, if poor for righteousness' sake, witnesses that the 
righteousness which he loves is a good thing; and if he "hunger and thirst for 
righteousness' sake," testifies that righteousness is the best thing. Likewise 
he, that weeps and mourns for righteousness' sake, testifies to the best law 
that it is beautiful. As, then, "those that are persecuted," so also "those that 
hunger and thirst" for righteousness' sake, are called "blessed" by Him who 
approves of the true desire, which not even famine can put a stop to. And if 
"they hunger after righteousness itself," they are blessed. "And blessed are the 
poor," whether "in spirit" or in circumstances -- that is, if for righteousness' 
sake. It is not the poor simply, but those that have wished to become poor for 
righteousness' sake, that He pronounces blessed -- those who have despised the 
honours of this world in order to attain "the good;" likewise also those who, 
through chastity, have become comely in person and character, and those who are 
of noble birth, and honourable, having through righteousness attained to 
adoption, and therefore "have received power to become the sons of God," and "to 
tread on serpents and scorpions," and to rule over demons and "the host of the 
adversary." And, in fine, the Lord's disciplines draws the soul away gladly from 
the body, even if it wrench itself away in its removal. "For he that loveth his 
life shall lose it, and he that loseth his life shall find it," if we only join 
that which is mortal of us with the immortality of God. It is the will of God 
[that we should attain] the knowledge of God, which is the communication of 
immortality. He therefore, who, in accordance with the word of repentance, knows 
his life to be sinful will lose it -- losing it from sin, from which it is 
wrenched; but losing it, will find it, according to the obedience which lives 
again to faith, but dies to sin. This, then, is what it is "to find one's life," 
"to know one's self." 
The conversion, however, which leads to divine things, the Stoics say, is 
affected by a change, the soul being changed to wisdom. And Plato: "On the soul 
taking a turn to what is better, and a change from a kind of nocturnal day." Now 
the philosophers also allow the good man an exit from life in accordance with 
reason, in the case of one depriving him of active exertion, so that the hope of 
action is no longer left him. And the judge who compels us to deny Him whom we 
love, I regard as showing who is and who is not the friend of God. In that case 
there is not left ground for even examining what one prefers -- the menaces of 
man or the love of God. And abstinence from vicious acts is found, somehow, [to 
result in] the diminution and extinction of vicious propensities, their energy 
being destroyed by inaction. And this is the import of "Sell what thou hast, and 
give to the poor, and come, follow Me" -- that is, follow what is said by the 
Lord. Some say that by what "thou hast" He designated the things in the soul, of 
a nature not akin to it, though how these are bestowed on the poor they are not 
able to say. For God dispenses to all according to desert, His distribution 
being righteous. Despising, therefore, the possessions which God apportions to 
thee in thy magnificence, comply with what is spoken by me; haste to the ascent 
of the Spirit, being not only justified by abstinence from what is evil, but in 
addition also perfected, by Christlike beneficence. In this instance He 
convicted the man, who boasted that he had fulfilled the injunctions of the law, 
of not loving his neighbour; and it is by beneficence that the love which, 
according to the gnostic ascending scale, is Lord of the Sabbath, proclaims 
itself. We must then, according to my view, have recourse to the word of 
salvation neither from fear of punishment nor promise of a gift, but on account 
of the good itself. Such, as do so, stand on the right hand of the sanctuary; 
but those who think that by the gift of what is perishable they shall receive in 
exchange what belongs to immortality are in the parable of the two brothers 
called "hirelings." And is there not some light thrown here on the expression 
"in the likeness and image," in the fact that some live according to the 
likeness of Christ, while those who stand on the left hand live according to 
their image? There are then two things proceeding from the truth, one root lying 
beneath both, -- the choice being, however, not equal, or rather the difference 
that is in the choice not being equal. To choose by way of imitation differs, as 
appears to me, from the choice of him who chooses according to knowledge, as 
that which is set on fire differs from that which is illuminated. Israel, then, 
is the light of the likeness which is according to the Scripture. But the image 
is another thing. What means the parable of Lazarus, by showing the image of the 
rich and poor? And what the saying, "No man can serve two masters, God and 
Mammon?" -- the Lord so terming the love of money. For instance, the covetous, 
who were invited, responded not to the invitation to the supper, not because of 
their possessing property, but of their inordinate affection to what they 
possessed. "The foxes," then, have holes. He called those evil and earthly men 
who are occupied about the wealth which is mined and dug from the ground, foxes. 
Thus also, in reference to Herod: "Go, tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, 
and perform cures to-day and to-morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected." 
For He applied the name "fowls of the air" to those who were distinct from the 
other birds -- those really pure, those that have the power of flying to the 
knowledge of the heavenly Word. For not riches only, but also honour, and 
marriage, and poverty, have ten thousand cares for him who is unfit for them. 
And those cares He indicated in the parable of the fourfold seed, when He said 
that "the seed of the word which fell unto the thorns" and hedges was choked by 
them, and could not bring forth fruit. It is therefore necessary to learn how to 
make use of every occurrence, so as by a good life, according to knowledge, to 
be trained for the state of eternal life. For it said, "I saw the wicked exalted 
and towering as the cedars of Lebanon; and I passed," says the Scripture, "and, 
lo, he was not; and I sought him, and his place was not found. Keep innocence, 
and look on uprightness: for there is a remnant to the man of peace." Such will 
he be who believes unfeignedly with his whole heart, and is tranquil in his 
whole soul. "For the different people honour me with their lips, but their heart 
is far from the Lord." "They bless with their mouth, but they curse in their 
heart." "They loved Him with their mouth, and lied to Him with their tongue; but 
their heart was not right with Him, and they were not faithful to His covenant." 
Wherefore "let the false lips become speechless, and let the Lord destroy the 
boastful tongue: those who say, We shall magnify our tongue, and our lips are 
our own; who is Lord over us? For the affliction of the poor and the groaning of 
the needy now will I arise, saith the Lord; I will set him in safety; I will 
speak out in his case." For it is to the humble that Christ belongs, who do not 
exalt themselves against His flock. "Lay not up for yourselves, therefore, 
treasures on the earth, where moth and rust destroy, and thieves break through 
and steal," says the Lord, in reproach perchance of the covetous, and perchance 
also of those who are simply anxious and full of cares, and those too who 
indulge their bodies. For amours, and diseases, and evil thoughts "break 
through" the mind and the whole man. But our true "treasure" is where what is 
allied to our mind is, since it bestows the communicative power of 
righteousness, showing that we must assign to the habit of our old conversation 
what we have acquired by it, and have recourse to God, beseeching mercy. He is, 
in truth, "the bag that waxeth not old," the provisions of eternal life, "the 
treasure that faileth not in heaven." "For I will have mercy on whom I will have 
mercy," saith the Lord. And they say those things to those who wish to be poor 
for righteousness' sake. For they have heard in the commandment that "the broad 
and wide way leadeth to destruction, and many there are who go in by it." It is 
not of anything else that the assertion is made, but of profligacy, and love of 
women, and love of glory, and ambition, and similar passions. For so He says, 
"Fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and whose shall those 
things be which thou hast prepared?" And the commandment is expressed in these 
very words, "Take heed, therefore, of covetousness. For a man's life does not 
consist in the abundance of those things which he possesses. For what shall it 
profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what 
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" "Wherefore I say, Take no thought 
for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for your body, what ye shall put on. 
For your life is more than meat, and your body than raiment." And again, "For 
your Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things." "But seek first the 
kingdom of heaven, and its righteousness," for these are the great things, and 
the things which are small and appertain to this life "shall be added to you." 
Does He not plainly then exhort us to follow the gnostic life, and enjoin us to 
seek the truth in word and deed? Therefore Christ, who trains the soul, reckons 
one rich, not by his gifts, but by his choice. It is said, therefore, that 
Zaccheus, or, according to some, Matthew, the chief of the publicans, on hearing 
that the Lord had deigned to come to him, said, "Lord, and if I have taken 
anything by false accusation, I restore him fourfold;" on which the Saviour 
said, "The Son of man, on coming to-day, has found that which was lost." Again, 
on seeing the rich cast into the treasury according to their wealth, and the 
widow two mites, He said "that the widow had cast in more than they all," for 
"they had contributed of their abundance, but she of her destitution." And 
because He brought all things to bear on the discipline of the soul, He said, 
"Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth." And the meek are those 
who have quelled the battle of unbelief in the soul, the battle of wrath, and 
lust, and the other forms that are subject to them. And He praises those meek by 
choice, not by necessity. For there are with the Lord both rewards and" many 
mansions," corresponding to men's lives. "Whosoever shall receive," says He, "a 
prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward; and 
whosoever shall receive a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall 
receive a righteous man's reward; and whoso shall receive one of the least of 
these my disciples, shall not lose his reward." And again, the differences of 
virtue according to merit, and the noble rewards, He indicated by the hours 
unequal in number; and in addition, by the equal reward given to each of the 
labourers -- that is, salvation, which is meant by the penny -- He indicated the 
equality of justice; and the difference of those called He intimated, by those 
who worked for unequal portions of time. They shall work, therefore, in 
accordance with the appropriate mansions of which they have been deemed worthy 
as rewards, being fellow-workers in the ineffable administration and service. 
"Those, then," says Plato, "who seem called to a holy life, are those who, freed 
and released from those earthly localities as from prisons, have reached the 
pure dwelling-place on high." In clearer terms again he expresses the same 
thing: "Those who by philosophy have been sufficiently purged from those things, 
live without bodies entirely for all time. Although they are enveloped in 
certain shapes; in the case of some, of air, and others, of fire." He adds 
further: "And they reach abodes fairer than those, which it is not easy, nor is 
there sufficient time now to describe." Whence with reason, "blessed are they 
that mourn: for they shall be comforted;" for they who have repented of their 
former evil life shall attain to "the calling" (klhsin), for this is the 
meaning of being comforted (paraklhqhnai). And there are two styles of 
penitents. That which is more common is fear on account of what is done; but the 
other which is more special, the shame which the spirit feels in itself arising 
from conscience. Whether then, here or elsewhere (for no place is devoid of the 
beneficence of God), He again says, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall 
obtain mercy." And mercy is not, as some of the philosophers have imagined, pain 
on account of others' calamities, but rather something good, as the prophets 
say. For it is said, "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice." And He means by the 
merciful, not only those who do acts of mercy, but those who wish to do them, 
though they be not able; who do as far as purpose is concerned. For sometimes we 
wish by the gift of money or by personal effort to do mercy, as to assist one in 
want, or help one who is sick, or stand by one who is in any emergency; and are 
not able either from poverty, or disease, or old age (for this also is natural 
disease), to carry out our purpose, in reference to the things to which we are 
impelled, being unable to conduct them to the end we wished. Those, who have 
entertained the wish whose purpose is equal, share in the same honour with those 
who have the ability, although others have the advantage in point of resources. 
And since there are two paths of reaching the perfection of salvation, works and 
knowledge, He called the "pure in heart blessed, for they shall see God." And if 
we really look to the truth of the matter, knowledge is the purification of the 
leading faculty of the soul, and is a good activity. Some things accordingly are 
good in themselves, and others by participation in what is good, as we say good 
actions are good. But without things intermediate which hold the place of 
material, neither good nor bad actions are constituted, such I mean as life, and 
health, and other necessary things or circumstantials. Pure then as respects 
corporeal lusts, and pure in respect of holy thoughts, he means those are, who 
attain to the knowledge of God, when the chief faculty of the soul has nothing 
spurious to stand in the way of its power. When, therefore, he who partakes 
gnostically of this holy quality devotes himself to contemplation, communing in 
purity with the divine, he enters more nearly into the state of impassible 
identity, so as no longer to have science and possess knowledge, but to be 
science and knowledge. 
"Blessed, then, are the peacemakers," who have subdued and tamed the law 
which wars against the disposition of the mind, the menaces of anger, and the 
baits of lust, and the other passions which war against the reason; who, having 
lived in the knowledge both of good works and true reason, shall be reinstated 
in adoption, Which is dearer. It follows that the perfect peacemaking is that 
which keeps unchanged in all circumstances what is peaceful; calls Providence 
holy and good; and has its being in the knowledge of divine and human affairs, 
by which it deems the opposites that are in the world to be the fairest harmony 
of creation. They also are peacemakers, who teach those who war against the 
stratagems of sin to have recourse to faith and peace. And it is the sum of all 
virtue, in my opinion, when the Lord teaches us that for love to God we must 
gnostically despise death. "Blessed are they," says He, "who are persecuted for 
righteousness' sake, for they shall be called the sons of God;" or, as some of 
those who transpose the Gospels say, "Blessed are they who are persecuted by 
righteousness, for they shall be perfect." And, "Blessed are they who are 
persecuted for my sake; for they shall have a place where they shall not be 
persecuted." And, "Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, when they shall 
separate you, when they shall cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's 
sake;" if we do not detest our persecutors, and undergo punishments at their 
hands, not hating them under the idea that we have been put to trial more 
tardily than we looked for; but knowing this also, that every instance of trial 
is an occasion for testifying. 
CHAPTER VII -- THE BLESSEDNESS OF THE MARTYR. 
Then he who has lied and shown himself unfaithful, and revolted to the 
devil's army, in what evil do we think him to be? He belies, therefore, the 
Lord, or rather he is cheated of his own hope who believes not God; and he 
believes not who does not what He has commanded. 
And what? Does not he, who denies the Lord, deny himself? For does he not rob 
his Master of His authority, who deprives himself of his relation to Him? He, 
then, who denies the Saviour, denies life; for "the light was life." He does not 
term those men of little faith, but faithless and hypocrites, who have the name 
inscribed on them, but deny that they are really believers. But the faithful is 
called both servant and friend. So that if one loves himself, he loves the Lord, 
and confesses to salvation that he may save his soul. Though you die for your 
neighbour out of love, and regard the Saviour as our neighbour (for God who 
saves is said to be nigh in respect to what is saved); you do so, choosing death 
on account of life, and suffering for your own sake rather than his. And is it 
not for this that he is called brother? he who, suffering out of love to God, 
suffered for his own salvation; while he, on the other hand, who dies for his 
own salvation, endures for love to the Lord. For he being life, in what he 
suffered wished to suffer that we might live by his suffering. 
"Why call ye me Lord, Lord," He says, "and do not the things which I say?" 
For "the people that loveth with their lips, but have their heart far away from 
the Lord," is another people, and trust in another, and have willingly sold 
themselves to another; but those who perform the commandments of the Lord, in 
every action "testify," by doing what He wishes, and consistently naming the 
Lord's name; and "testifying" by deed to Him in whom they trust, that they are 
those "who have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts." "If we live 
in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit." s "He that soweth to his flesh, 
shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of 
the Spirit reap life everlasting." 
But to those miserable men, witness to the Lord by blood seems a most violent 
death, not knowing that such a gate of death is the beginning of the true life; 
and they will understand neither the honours after death, which belong to those 
who have lived holily, nor the punishments of those who have lived unrighteously 
and impurely? I do not say only from our Scriptures (for almost all the 
commandments indicate them); but they will not even hear their own discourses. 
For the Pythagorean Theano writes, "Life were indeed a feast to the wicked, who, 
having done evil, then die; were not the soul immortal, death would be a 
godsend." And Plato in the Phaedo, "For if death were release from everything," 
and so forth. We are not then to think according to the Telephus of Aeschylus, 
"that a single path leads to Hades." The ways are many, and the sins that lead 
thither. Such deeply erring ones as the unfaithful are, Aristophanes properly 
makes the subjects of comedy. "Come," he says, "ye men of obscure life, ye that 
are like the race of leaves, feeble, wax figures, shadowy tribes, evanescent, 
fleeting, ephemeral." And Epicharmus, "This nature of men is inflated skins." 
And the Saviour has said to us, "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak." 
"Because the carnal mind is enmity against God," explains the apostle: "for it 
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed, can be. And they that are in 
the flesh cannot please God." And in further explanation continues, that no one 
may, like Marcion regard the creature as evil. "But if Christ be in you, the 
body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness." 
And again: "For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die. For I reckon that the 
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared to the glory which 
shall be revealed in us. If we suffer with Him, that we also may be glorified 
together as joint-heirs of Christ. And we know that all things work together for 
good to them that love God, to them that are called according to the purpose. 
For whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image 
of His Son, that He might be the first-born among many brethren. And whom He did 
predestinate, them He also called; and whom He called, them He also justified; 
and whom He justified, them He also glorified." 
You see that martyrdom for love's sake is taught. And should you wish to be a 
martyr for the recompense of advantages, you shall hear again. "For we are saved 
by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he 
yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait 
for it." "But if we also suffer for righteousness' sake," says Peter, "blessed 
are we. Be not afraid of their fear, neither be troubled. But sanctify the Lord 
God in your hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to him that asks a 
reason of the hope that is in you, but with meekness and fear, having a good 
conscience; so that in reference to that for which you are spoken against, they 
may be ashamed who calumniate your good conversation in Christ. For it is better 
to suffer for well-doing. if the will of God, than for evil-doing." But if one 
should cap tiously say, And how is it possible for feeble flesh to resist the 
energies and spirits of the Powers? well, let him know this, that, confiding in 
the Almighty and the Lord, we war against the principalities of darkness, and 
against death. "Whilst thou art yet speaking," He says, "Lo, here am I." See the 
invincible Helper who shields us. "Think it not strange, therefore, concerning 
the burning sent for your trial, as though some strange thing happened to you; 
But, as you are partaken in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice; that at the 
revelation of His glory ye may rejoice exultant. If ye be reproached in the name 
of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth on you." As 
it is written, "Because for Thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are 
accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more than 
conquerors, through Him that loved us." 
"What you wish to ascertain from my mind, You shall not ascertain, not were 
you to apply Horrid saws from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, Not 
were you to load me with chains," says a woman acting manfully in the tragedy. 
And Antigone, contemning the proclamation of Creon, says boldly: "It was not 
Zeus who uttered this proclamation." 
But it is God that makes proclamation to us, and He must be believed. "For 
with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation. Wherefore the Scripture saith, "Whosoever believeth on 
Him shah not be put to shame." Accordingly Simonides justly writes, "It is said 
that virtue dwells among all but inaccessible rocks, but that she speedily 
traverses a pure place. Nor is she visible to the eyes of all mortals. He who is 
not penetrated by heart-vexing sweat will not scale the summit of manliness." 
And Pindar says: "But the anxious thoughts of youths, revolving with toils, Will 
find glory: and in time their deeds Will in resplendent ether splendid shine." 
Æschylus, too, having grasped this thought, says: "To him who toils is due, 
As product of his toil, glory from the gods." 
"For great Fates attain great destinies," according to Heraclitus: "And what 
slave is there, who is careless of death?" 
"For God hath not given us the spirit of bondage again to fear; but of power, 
and love, and of a sound mind. Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our 
Lord, or of me his prisoner," he writes to Timothy. Such shall he be "who 
cleaves to that which is good," according to the apostle, "who hates evil, 
having love unfeigned; for he that loveth another fulfilleth the law." If, then, 
this God, to whom we bear witness, be as He is, the God of hope, we acknowledge 
our hope, speeding on to hope, "saturated with goodness, filled with all 
knowledge." 
The Indian sages say to Alexander of Macedon: "You transport men's bodies 
from place to place. But you shall not force our souls to do what we do not 
wish. Fire is to men the greatest torture, this we despise." Hence Heraclitus 
preferred one thing, glory, to all else; and professes "that he allows the crowd 
to stuff themselves to satiety like cattle." 
"For on account of the body are many toils, For it we have invented a roofed 
house, And discovered how to dig up silver, and sow the land, And all the rest 
which we know by names." 
To the multitude, then, this vain labour is desirable. But to us the apostle 
says, "Now we know this, that our old man is crucified with Him, that the body 
of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin." Does not 
the apostle then plainly add the following, to show the contempt for faith in 
the case of the multitude? "For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles 
last, as appointed to death: we are made a spectacle to the world, and to 
angels, and to men. Up to this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are 
naked, and are beaten, and are feeble, and labour, working with our hands. Being 
reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure; being defamed, we entreat; we 
are become as it were the offscourings of the world." Such also are the words of 
Plato in the Republic: "The just man, though stretched on the rack, though his 
eyes are dug out, will be happy." The Gnostic will never then have the chief end 
placed in life, but in being always happy and blessed, and a kingly friend of 
God. Although visited with ignominy and exile, and confiscation, and above all, 
death, he will never be wrenched from his freedom, and signal love to God. "The 
charity which bears all things, endures all things," is assured that Divine 
Providence orders all things well. "I exhort you," therefore it is said, "Be 
followers of me." The first step to salvation is the instruction accompanied 
with fear, in consequence of which we abstain from what is wrong; and the second 
is hope, by reason of which we desire the best things; but love, as is fitting, 
perfects, by training now according to knowledge. For the Greeks, I know not 
how, attributing events to unreasoning necessity, own that they yield to them 
unwillingly. Accordingly Euripides says: "What I declare, receive from me, 
madam: 
No mortal exists who has not toil; He buries children, and begets others, And 
he himself dies, And thus mortals are afflicted." 
Then he adds: - "We must bear those things which are inevitable according to 
nature, and go through them: Not one of the things which are necessary is 
formidable for mortals." 
And for those who are aiming at perfection there is proposed the rational 
gnosis, the foundation of which is "the sacred Triad." "Faith, hope, love; but 
the greatest of these is love." Truly, "all things are lawful, but all things 
are not expedient," says the apostle: "all things are lawful for me, but all 
things edify not." And, "Let no one seek his own advantage, but also that of his 
neighbour," so as to be able at once to do and to teach, building and building 
up. For that "the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof," is admitted; 
but the conscience of the weak is supported. "Conscience, I say, not his own, 
but that of the other; for why is my liberty judged of by another conscience? 
For if I by grace am partaker, why am I evil spoken of l for that for which I 
give thanks? Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to 
the glory of God." "For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the 
flesh; for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to 
the demolition of fortifications, demolishing thoughts, and every high thing 
which exalteth itself against the knowledge of Christ." Equipped with these 
weapons, the Gnostic says: O Lord, give opportunity, and receive demonstration; 
let this dread event pass; I contemn dangers for the love I bear to Thee. 
"Because alone of human things Virtue receives not a recompense from without, 
But has itself as the reward of its toils." 
"Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, 
kindness, humbleness, meekness, long-suffering. And above all these, love, which 
is the bond of perfection. And let the peace of God reign in your hearts, to 
which also ye are called in one body; and be thankful," ye who, while still in 
the body, like the just men of old, enjoy impassibility and tranquillity of 
soul. 
CHAPTER VIII -- WOMEN AS WELL AS MEN, SLAVES AS WELL AS FREEMEN, CANDIDATES 
FOR THE MARTYR'S CROWN. 
Since, then, not only the Aesopians, and Macedonians, and the Lacedaemonians 
endured when subjected to torture, as Eratosthenes says in his work, On Things 
Good and Evil; but also Zeno of Elea, when subjected to compulsion to divulge a 
secret, held out against the tortures, and confessed nothing; who, when 
expiring, bit out his tongue and spat it at the tyrant, whom some term Nearchus, 
and some Demulus. Theodotus the Pythagorean acted also similarly, and Paulus the 
friend of Lacydes, as Timotheus of Pergamus says in his work on The Fortitude of 
Philosophers, and Achaicus in The Ethics. Posthumus also, the Roman, when 
captured by Peucetion, did not divulge a single secret; but putting his hand on 
the fire, held it to it as if to a piece of brass, without moving a muscle of 
his face. I omit the case of Anaxarchus, who exclaimed, "Pound away at the sack 
which holds Anaxarchus, for it is not Anaxarchus you are pounding," when by the 
tyrant's orders he was being pounded with iron pestles. Neither, then, the hope 
of happiness nor the love of God takes what befalls ill, but remains free, 
although thrown among the wildest beasts or into the all-devouring fire; though 
racked with a tyrant's tortures. Depending as it does on the divine favour, it 
ascends aloft unenslaved, surrendering the body to those who can touch it alone. 
A barbarous nation, not cumbered with philosophy, select, it is said, annually 
an ambassador to the hero Zamolxis. Zamolxis was one of the disciples of 
Pythagoras. The one, then, who is judged of the most sterling worth is put to 
death, to the distress of those who have practised philosophy, but have not been 
selected, at being reckoned unworthy of a happy service. 
So the Church is full of those, as well chaste women as men, who all their 
life have contemplated the death which rouses up to Christ? For the individual 
whose life is framed as ours is, may philosophize without Learning, whether 
barbarian, whether Greek, whether slave -- whether an old man, or a boy, or a 
woman. For self-control is common to all human beings who have made choice of 
it. And we admit that the same nature exists in every race, and the same virtue. 
As far as respects human nature, the woman does not possess one nature, and the 
man exhibit another, but the same: so also with virtue. If, consequently, a 
self-restraint and righteousness, and whatever qualities are regarded as 
following them, is the virtue of the male, it belongs to the male alone to be 
virtuous, and to the woman to be licentious and unjust. But it is offensive even 
to say this. Accordingly woman is to practise self-restraint and righteousness, 
and every other virtue, as well as man, both bond and free; since it is a fit 
consequence that the same nature possesses one and the same virtue. We do not 
say that woman's nature is the same as man's, as she is woman. For undoubtedly 
it stands to reason that some difference should exist between each of them, in 
virtue of which one is male and the other female. Pregnancy and parturition, 
accordingly, we say belong to woman, as she is woman, and not as she is a human 
being. But if there were no difference between man and woman, both would do and 
suffer the same things. As then there is sameness, as far as respects the soul, 
she will attain to the same virtue; but as there is difference as respects the 
peculiar construction of the body, she is destined for child-bearing and 
housekeeping. "For I would have you know," says the apostle, "that the head of 
every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man: for the man is not of 
the woman, but the woman of the man. I For neither is the woman without the man, 
nor the man without the woman, in the Lord." For as we say that the man ought to 
be conti-nent, and superior to pleasures; so also we reckon that the woman 
should be continent and practised in fighting against pleasures. "But I say, 
Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh," counsels 
the apostolic command; "for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit 
against the flesh. These, then, are contrary" (not as good to evil, but as 
fighting advantageously), he adds therefore, so that ye cannot do the things 
that ye would. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are, fornication 
uncleanness, profligacy, idolatry, witchcrafts, enmities, strifes, jealousies, 
wrath, contentions, dissensions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, 
and such like; of which I tell you before, as I have also said before, that they 
which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But the fruit of the 
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, temperance, goodness, 
faith, meekness." He calls sinners, as I think, "flesh," and the righteous 
"spirit." Further, manliness is to be assumed in order to produce confidence and 
forbearance, so as "to him that strikes on the one cheek, to give to him the 
other; and to him that takes away the cloak, to yield to him the coat also," 
strongly, restraining anger. For we do not train our women like Amazons to 
manliness in war; since we wish the men even to be peaceable. I hear that the 
Sarmatian women practise war no less than the men; and the women of the Sacae 
besides, who shoot backwards, feigning flight as well as the men. I am aware, 
too, that the women near Iberia practise manly work and toil, not refraining 
from their tasks even though near their delivery; but even in the very struggle 
of her pains, the woman, on being delivered, taking up the infant, carries it 
home. Further, the females no less than the males manage the house, and hunt, 
and keep the flocks: "Cressa the hound ran keenly in the stag's track." 
Women are therefore to philosophize equally with men, though the males are 
preferable at everything, unless they have become effeminate To the whole human 
race, then, discipline and virtue are a necessity, if they would pursue after 
happiness. And how recklessly Euripides writes sometimes this and sometimes 
that! On one occasion, "For every wife is inferior to her husband, though the 
most excellent one marry her that is of fair fame." And on another: "For the 
chaste is her husband's slave, While she that is unchaste in her folly despises 
her consort. 
. . . .. For nothing is better and more excellent, Than when as husband and 
wife ye keep house, Harmonious in your sentiments." The ruling power is 
therefore the head. And if "the Lord is head of the man, and the man is head of 
the woman," the man, "being the image and glory of God, is lord of the woman." 
Wherefore also in the Epistle to the Ephesians it is written, "Subjecting 
),ourselves one to another in the fear of God. Wives, submit yourselves to your 
own husbands, as to the Lord. For the husband is head of the wife, as also 
Christ is the head of the Church; and He is the Saviour of the body. Husbands, 
love your wives, as also Christ loved the Church. So also ought men to love 
their wives as their own bodies: he that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no 
man ever yet hated his own flesh." And in that to the Colossians it is said, 
"Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands, as is fit in the Lord. Husbands, 
love your wives, and be not bitter against them. Children, obey your parents in 
all things; for this is well pleasing to the Lord. Fathers, provoke not your 
children to anger, lest they be discouraged. Servants, be obedient in all things 
to those who are your masters according to the flesh; not with eye-service, as 
men-pleasers; but with singleness of heart, fearing the Lord. And whatsoever ye 
do, do it heartily, as serving the Lord and not men; knowing that of the Lord ye 
shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. For 
the wrongdoer shall receive the Wrong, which he hath done; and there is no 
respect of persons. Masters, render to your servants justice and equity; knowing 
that ye also have a Master in heaven, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, 
circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bond, free: but Christ is 
all, and in all." And the earthly Church is the image of the heavenly, as we 
pray also "that the will of God may be done upon the earth as in heaven." 
"Putting on, therefore, bowels of mercy, gentleness, humbleness, meekness, 
long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if one have a 
quarrel against any man; as also Christ hath forgiven us, so also let us. And 
above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness. And let 
the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which ye are called in one body; and be 
thankful." For there is no obstacle to adducing frequently the same Scripture in 
order to put Marcion to the blush, if perchance he be persuaded and converted; 
by learning that the faithful ought to be grateful to God the Creator, who hath 
called us, and who preached the Gospel in the body. From these considerations 
the unity of the faith is clear, and it is shown who is the perfect man; so that 
though some are reluctant, and offer as much resistance as they can, though 
menaced with punishments at the hand of husband or master, both the domestic and 
the wife will philosophize. Moreover, the free, though threatened with death at 
a tyrant's hands, and brought before the tribunals, and all his substances 
imperilled, will by no means abandon piety; nor will the wife who dwells with a 
wicked husband, or the son if he has a bad father, or the domestic if he has a 
bad master, ever fail in holding nobly to virtue. But as it is noble for a man 
to die for virtue, and for liberty, and for himself, so also is it for a woman. 
For this is not peculiar to the nature of males, but to the nature of the good. 
Accordingly, both the old man, the young, and the servant will live faithfully, 
and if need be die; which will be to be made alive by death. So we know that 
both children, and women, and servants have often, against their fathers', and 
masters', and husbands' will, reached the highest degree of excellence. 
Wherefore those who are determined to live piously ought none the less to 
exhibit alacrity, when some seem to exercise compulsion on them; but much more, 
I think, does it become them to show eagerness, and to strive with uncommon 
vigour, lest, being overcome, they abandon the best and most indispensable 
counsels. For it does not, I think, admit of comparison, whether it be better to 
be a follower of the Almighty than to choose the darkness of demons. For the 
things which are done by us on account of others we are to do always, 
endeavouring to have respect to those for whose sake it is proper that they be 
done, regarding the gratification rendered in their case, as what is to be our 
rule; but the things which are done for our own sake rather than that of others, 
are to be done with equal earnestness, whether they are like to please certain 
people or not. If some indifferent things have obtained such honour as to appear 
worthy of adoption, though against the will of some; much more is virtue to be 
regarded by us as worth contending for, looking the while to nothing but what 
can be rightly done, whether it seem good to others or not. Well then, Epicurus, 
writing to Menoeceus, says, "Let not him who is young delay philosophizing, and 
let not the old man grow weary of philosophizing; for no one is either not of 
age or past age for attending to the health of his soul. And he who says that 
the time for philosophizing is not come or is past, is like the man who says 
that the time for happiness is not come or has gone. So that young s as well as 
old ought to philosophize: the one, in order that, while growing old, he may 
grow young in good things out of favour accruing from what is past; and the 
other, that he may be at once young and old, from want of fear for the future." 
CHAPTER IX -- CHRIST'S SAYINGS RESPECTING MARTYRDOM. 
On martyrdom the Lord hath spoken explicitly, and what is written in 
different places we bring together. "But I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess 
in Me before men, the Son of man also shall confess before the angels of God; 
but whosoever shall deny Me before men, him will I deny before the angels." 
"Whosoever shall be ashamed of Me or of My words in this adulterous and sinful 
generation, of him shall the Son of man also be ashamed when He cometh in the 
glory of His Father with His angels. 
Whosoever therefore shall confess in Me before men, him will I also confess 
before my Father in heaven. "And when they bring you before synagogues, and 
rulers, and powers, think not: beforehand how ye shall make your defence, or 
what ye shall say. For the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the same hour what ye 
must say." In explanation of this passage, Heracleon, the most distinguished of 
the school of Valentinians, says expressly, "that there is a confession by faith 
and conduct, and one with the voice. The confession that is made with the voice, 
and before the authorities, is what the most reckon the only confession. Not 
soundly: and hypocrites also can confess with this confession. But neither will 
this utterance be found to be spoken universally; for all the saved have 
confessed with the confession made by the voice, and departed. Of whom are 
Matthew, Philip, Thomas, Levi, and many others. And confession by the lip is not 
universal, but partial. But that which He specifies now is universal, that which 
is by deeds and actions corresponding to faith in Him. This confession is 
followed by that which is partial, that before the authorities, if necessary, 
and reason dictate. For he will confess rightly with his voice who has first 
confessed by his disposition. And he has well used, with regard to those who 
confess, the expression 'in Me,' and applied to those who deny the expression 
'Me.' For those, though they confess Him with the voice, yet deny Him, not 
confessing Him in their conduct. But those alone confess 'in Him,' who live in 
the confession and conduct according to Him, in which He also confesses, who is 
contained in them and held by them. Wherefore 'He never can deny Himself.' And 
those deny Him who are not in Him. For He said not, 'Whosoever shall deny' in 
Me, but 'Me.' For no one who is in Him will ever deny Him. And the expression 
'before men ' applies both to the saved and the heathen similarly by conduct 
before the one, and by voice before the other. Wherefore they never can deny 
Him. But those deny Him who are not in Him." So far Heracleon. And in other 
things he seems to be of the same sentiments with us in this section; but he has 
not adverted to this, that if some have not by conduct and in their life 
"confessed Christ before men," they are manifested to have believed with the 
heart; by confessing Him with the mouth at the tribunals, and not denying Him 
when tortured to the death. And the disposition being confessed, and especially 
not being changed by death at any time, cuts away all passions which were 
engendered by corporeal desire. For there is, so to speak, at the close of life 
a sudden repentance in action, and a true confession toward Christ, in the 
testimony of the voice. But if the Spirit of the Father testifies in us, how can 
we be any more hypocrites, who are said to bear testimony with the voice alone? 
But it will be given to some, if expedient, to make a defence, that by their 
witness and confession all may be benefited -- those in the Church being 
confirmed, and those of the heathen who have devoted themselves to the search 
after salvation wondering and being led to the faith; and the rest seized with 
amazement. So that confession is by all means necessary. For it is in our power. 
But to make a defence for our faith is not universally necessary. For that does 
not depend on us. "But he that endureth to the end shall be saved." For who of 
those who are wise would not choose to reign in God, and even to serve? So some 
"confess that they know God," according to the apostle; "but in works they deny 
Him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate." And 
these, though they confess nothing but this, will have done at the end one good 
work. Their witness, then, appears to be the cleansing away of sins with glory. 
For instance, the Shepherd says: "You will escape the energy of the wild beast, 
if your heart become pure and blameless." Also the Lord Himself says: "Satan 
hath desired to sift you; but I have prayed." Alone, therefore, the Lord, for 
the purification of the men who plotted against Him and disbelieved Him, "drank 
the cup;" in imitation of whom the apostles, that they might be in reality 
Gnostics, and perfect, suffered for the Churches which they founded. 
So, then, also the Gnostics who tread in the footsteps of the apostles ought 
to be sinless, and, out of love to the Lord, to love also their brother; so 
that, if occasion call, enduring without stumbling, afflictions for the Church, 
"they may drink the cup." Those who witness in their life by deed, and at the 
tribunal by word, whether entertaining hope or surmising fear, are better than 
those who confess salvation by their mouth alone. But if one ascend also to 
love, he is a really blessed and true martyr, having confessed perfectly both to 
the commandments and to God, by the Lord; whom having loved, he acknowledged a 
brother, giving himself up wholly for God, resigning pleasantly and lovingly the 
man when asked, like a deposit. 
CHAPTER X -- THOSE WHO OFFERED THEMSELVES FOR MARTYRDOM REPROVED. 
When, again, He says, "When they persecute you in this city, flee ye to the 
other," He does not advise flight, as if persecution were an evil thing; nor 
does He enjoin them by flight to avoid death, as if in dread of it, but wishes 
us neither to be the authors nor abettors of any evil to any one, either to 
ourselves or the persecutor and murderer. For He, in a way, bids us take care of 
ourselves. But he who disobeys is rash and foolhardy. If he who kills a man of 
God sins against God, he also who presents himself before the judgment-seat 
becomes guilty of his death. And such is also the case with him who does not 
avoid persecution, but out of daring presents himself for capture. Such a one, 
as far as in him lies, becomes an accomplice in the crime of the persecutor. And 
if he also uses provocation, he is wholly guilty, challenging the wild beast. 
And similarly, if he afford any cause for conflict or punishment, or retribution 
or enmity, he gives occasion for persecution. Wherefore, then, we are enjoined 
not to cling to anything that belongs to this life; but "to him that takes our 
cloak to give our coat," not only that we may continue destitute of inordinate 
affection, but that we may not by retaliating make our persecutors savage 
against ourselves, and stir them up to blaspheme the name. 
CHAPTER XI -- THE OBJECTION, WHY DO YOU SUFFER IF GOD CARES FOR YOU, 
ANSWERED. 
But, say they, if God cares for you, why are you persecuted and put to death? 
Has He delivered you to this? No, we do not suppose that the Lord wishes us to 
be involved in calamities, but that He foretold prophetically what would happen 
-- that we should be persecuted for His name's sake, slaughtered, and impaled. 
So that it was not that He wished us to be persecuted, but He intimated 
beforehand what we shall suffer by the prediction of what would take place, 
training us to endurance, to which He promised the inheritance, although we are 
punished not alone, but along with many. But those, it is said, being 
malefactors, are righteously punished. Accordingly, they unwillingly bear 
testimony to our righteousness, we being unjustly punished for righteousness' 
sake. But the injustice of the judge does not affect the providence of God. For 
the judge must be master of his own opinion -- not pulled by strings, like 
inanimate machines, set in motion only by external causes. Accordingly he is 
judged in respect to his judgment, as we also, in accordance with our choice of 
things desirable, and our endurance. 
Although we do not wrong, yet the judge looks on us as doing wrong, for he 
neither knows nor wishes to know about us, but is influenced by unwarranted 
prejudice; wherefore also he is judged. Accordingly they persecute us, not from 
the supposition that we are wrong-doers. but imagining that by the very fact of 
our being Christians we sin against life in so conducting ourselves, and 
exhorting others to adopt the like life. 
But why are you not helped when persecuted? say they. What wrong is done us, 
as far as we are concerned, in being released by death to go to the Lord, and so 
undergoing a change of life, as if a change from one time of life to another? 
Did we think rightly, we should feel obliged to those who have afforded the 
means for speedy departure, if it is for love that we bear witness; and if not, 
we should appear to the multitude to be base men. Had they also known the truth, 
all would have bounded on to the way, and there would have been no choice. But 
our faith, being the light of the world, reproves unbelief. "Should Anytus and 
Melitus kill me, they will not hurt me in the least; for I do not think it right 
for the better to be hurt by the worse," [says Socrates]. So that each one of us 
may with confidence say, "The Lord is my helper; I will not fear: what shall man 
do to me?" "For the souls of the righteous are in the hand of the Lord, and no 
plague shall touch them." 
CHAPTER XII -- BASILIDES' IDEA OF MARTYRDOM REFUTED. 
Basilides, in the twenty-third book of the Exegetics, respecting those that 
are punished by martyrdom, expresses himself in the following language: "For I 
say this, Whosoever fall under the afflictions mentioned, in consequence of 
unconsciously transgressing in other matters, are brought to this good end by 
the kindness of Him who brings them, but accused on other grounds; so that they 
may not suffer as condemned for what are owned to be iniquities, nor reproached 
as the adulterer or the murderer, but because they are Christians; which will 
console them, so that they do not appear to suffer. And if one who has not 
sinned at all incur suffering -- a rare case -- yet even he will not suffer 
aught through the machinations of power, but will suffer as the child which 
seems not to have sinned would suffer." Then further on he adds: "As, then, the 
child which has not sinned before, or committed actual sin in itself, but has 
that which committed sin, when subjected to suffering, gets good, reaping the 
advantage of many difficulties; so also, although a perfect man may not have 
sinned in act, while he endures afflictions, he suffers similarly with the 
child. Having within him the sinful principle, but not embracing the opportunity 
of committing sin, he does not sin; so that he is not to be reckoned as not 
having sinned. For as he who wishes to commit adultery is an adulterer, although 
he does not succeed in committing adultery; and he that wishes to commit murder 
is a murderer, although he is unable to kill; so also, if I see the man without 
sin, whom I specify, suffering, though he have done nothing bad, I should call 
him bad, on account of his wishing to sin. For I will affirm anything rather 
than call Providence evil." Then, in continuation, he says expressly concerning 
the Lord, as concerning man: "If then, passing from all these observations, you 
were to proceed to put me to shame by saying, perchance impersonating certain 
parties, This man has then sinned; for this man has suffered; -- if you permit, 
I will say, He has not sinned; but was like a child suffering. If you were to 
insist more urgently, I would say, That the man you name is man, but that God is 
righteous: ' For no one is pure,' as one said, ' from pollution.' " But the 
hypothesis of Basilides says that the soul, having sinned before in another 
life, endures punishment in this -- the elect soul with honour by martyrdom, the 
other purged by appropriate punishment. How can this be true, when the 
confessing and suffering punishment or not depends on ourselves? For in the case 
of the man who shall deny, Providence, as held by Basilides, is done away with. 
I will ask him, then, in the case of a confessor who has been arrested, whether 
he will confess and be punished in virtue of Providence or not? For in the case 
of denying he will not be punished. But if, for the sake of escaping and evading 
the necessity of punishing such an one, he shall say that the destruction of 
those who shall deny is of Providence, he will be a martyr against his will. And 
how any more is it the case, that there is laid up in heaven the very glorious 
recompense to him who has witnessed, for his witnessing? If Providence did not 
permit the sinner to get the length of sinning, it is unjust in both cases; both 
in not rescuing the man who is dragged to punishment for righteousness' sake, 
and in having rescued him who wished to do wrong, he having done it as far as 
volition was concerned, but [Providence] having prevented the deed, and unjustly 
favoured the sinner. And how impious, in deifying the devil, and in daring to 
call the Lord a sinful man! For the devil tempting us, knowing what we are, but 
not knowing if we will hold out, but wishing to dislodge us from the faith, 
attempts also to bring us into subjection to himself. Which is all that is 
allowed to him, partly from the necessity of saving us, who have taken occasion 
from the commandment, from ourselves; partly for the confusion of him who has 
tempted and failed; for the confirmation of the members of the Church, and the 
conscience of those who admire the constancy [displayed]. But if martyrdom be 
retribution by way of punishment, then also faith and doctrine, on account of 
which martyrdom comes, are co-operators in punishment -- than which, what other 
absurdity could be greater? But with reference to these dogmas, whether the soul 
is changed to another body, also of the devil, at the proper time mention will 
be made. But at present, to what has been already said, let us add the 
following: Where any more is faith in the retribution of sins committed before 
martyrdom takes place? And where is love to God, which is persecuted and endures 
for the truth? And where is the praise of him who has confessed, or the censure 
of him who has denied? And for what use is right conduct, the mortification of 
the lusts, and the hating of no creature? But if, as Basilides himself says, we 
suppose one part of the declared will of God to be the loving of all things 
because all things bear a relation to the Whole, and another "not to lust after 
anything," and a third "not to hate anything," by the will of God these also 
will be punishments, which it were impious to think. For neither did the Lord 
suffer by the will of the Father, nor are those who are persecuted by the will 
of God; since either of two things is the case: either persecution in 
consequence of the will of God is a good thing, or those who decree and afflict 
are guiltless. But nothing is without the will of the Lord of the universe. It 
remains to say that such things happen without the prevention of God; for this 
alone saves both the providence and the goodness of God. We must not therefore 
think that He actively produces afflictions (far be it that we should think 
this!); but we must be persuaded that He does not prevent those that cause them, 
but overrules for good the crimes of His enemies: "I will therefore," He says, 
"destroy the wall, and it shall be for treading under foot." Providence being a 
disciplinary art; in the case of others for each individual's sins, and in the 
case of the Lord and His apostles for ours. To this point says the divine 
apostle: "For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye abstain 
from fornication: that each one of you should know how to possess his vessel in 
sanctification and honour; not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles who 
know not the Lord: that none of you should overreach or take advantage of his 
brother in any matter; because the Lord is the avenger in respect of all such, 
as we also told you before, and testified. For God hath not called us unto 
uncleanness, but to holiness. Wherefore he that despiseth, despiseth not man, 
but God, who hath also given His Holy Spirit to you." Wherefore the Lord was not 
prohibited from this sanctification of ours. if, then, one of them were to say, 
in reply, that the martyr is punished for sins committed before this embodying, 
and that he will again reap the fruit of his conduct in this life, for that such 
are the arrangements of the [divine administration], we shall ask him if the 
retribution takes place by Providence. For if it be not of the divine 
administration, the economy of expiations is gone, and their hypothesis falls to 
the ground; but if expiations are by Providence, punishments are by Providence 
too. But Providence, although it begins, so to speak, to move with the Ruler, 
yet is implanted in substances along with their origin by the God of the 
universe. Such being the case, they must confess either that punish-merit is not 
just, and those who condemn and persecute the martyrs do right, or that 
persecutions even are wrought by the will of God. Labour and fear are not, then, 
as they say, incident to affairs as rust to iron, but come upon the soul through 
its own will. And on these points there is much to say, which will be reserved 
for future consideration, taking them up in due course. 
CHAPTER XIII -- VALENTINIAN'S VAGARIES ABOUT THE ABOLITION OF DEATH REFUTED. 
Valentinian, in a homily, writes in these words: "Ye are originally immortal, 
and children of eternal life, and ye would have death distributed to you, that 
ye may spend and lavish it, and that death may die in you and by you; for when 
we dissolve the world, and are not yourselves dissolved, ye have dominion over 
creation and all corruption." For he also, similarly with Basilides, supposes a 
class saved by nature, and that this different race has come hither to us from 
above for the abolition of death, and that the origin of death is the work of 
the Creator of the world. Wherefore also he so expounds that Scripture, "No man 
shall see the face of God, and live," as if He were the cause of death. 
Respecting this God, he makes those allusions when writing in these expressions: 
"As much as the image is inferior to the living face, so much is the world 
inferior to the living Æon. What is, then, the cause of the image? The majesty 
of the face, which exhibits the figure to the painter, to be honoured by his 
name; for the form is not found exactly to the life, but the name supplies what 
is wanting in the effigy. The invisibility of God co-operates also in order to 
the faith of that which has been fashioned." For the Creator, called God and 
Father, he designated as "Painter," and "Wisdom," whose image that which is 
formed is, to the glory of the invisible One; since the things which proceed 
from a pair are complements, and those which proceed from one are images. But 
since what is seen is no part of Him, the soul comes from what is intermediate, 
which is different; and this is the inspiration of the different spirit, and 
generally what is breathed into the soul, which is the image of the spirit. And 
in general, what is said of the Creator, who was made according to the image, 
they say was foretold by a sensible image in the book of Genesis respecting the 
origin of man; and the likeness they transfer to themselves, teaching that the 
addition of the different spirit was made; unknown to the Creator. When, then, 
we treat of the unity of the God who is proclaimed in the law, the prophets, and 
the Gospel, we shall also discuss this; for the topic is supreme. But we must 
advance to that which is urgent. If for the purpose of doing away with death the 
peculiar race has come, it is not Christ who has abolished death, unless He also 
is said to be of the same essence with them. And if He abolished it to this end, 
that it might not touch the peculiar race, it is not these, the rivals of the 
Creator, who breathe into the image of their intermediate spirit the life from 
above -- in accordance with the principle of their dogma -- that abolish death. 
But should they say that this takes place by His mother, or should they say that 
they, along with Christ, war against death, let them own their secret dogma that 
they have the hardihood to assail the divine power of the Creator, by setting to 
rights His creation, as if they were superior, endeavouring to save the vital 
image which He was not able to rescue from corruption. Then the Lord would be 
superior to God the Creator; for the son would never contend with the father, 
especially among the gods. But the point that the Creator of all things, the 
omnipotent Lord, is the Father of the Son, we have deferred till the discussion 
of these points, in which we have under taken to dispute against the heresies, 
showing that He alone is the God proclaimed by Him. 
But the apostle, writing to us with reference to the endurance of 
afflictions, says, "And this is of God, that it is given to you on behalf of 
Christ, not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake; having the 
same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me. If there is 
therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any communion of 
spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfil ye my joy, that ye may be of the same 
mind, having the same love, unanimous, thinking one thing. And if he is offered 
on the sacrifice and service of faith, joying and rejoicing" with the 
Philippians, to whom the apostle speaks, calling them "fellow-partakers of joy," 
how does he say that they are of one soul, and having a soul? Likewise, also, 
writing respecting Timothy and himself, he says, "For I have no one like-souled, 
who will nobly care for your state. For all seek their own, not the-things which 
are Jesus Christ's." 
Let not the above-mentioned people, then, call us, by way of reproach, 
"natural men" (yukikoi), nor the Phrygians either; for these now call 
those who do not apply themselves to the new prophecy "natural men" 
(yukikoi), with whom we shall discuss in our remarks on "Prophecy." The 
perfect man ought therefore to practise love, and thence to haste to the divine 
friendship, fulfilling the commandments from love. And loving one's enemies does 
not mean loving wickedness, or impiety, or adultery, or theft; but the thief, 
the impious, the adulterer, not as far as he sins, and in respect of the actions 
by which he stains the name of man, but as he is a man, and the work of God. 
Assuredly sin is an activity, not an existence: and therefore it is not a work 
of God. Now sinners are called enemies of God -- enemies, that is, of the 
commands which they do not obey, as those who obey become friends, the one named 
so from their fellowship, the others from their estrangement, which is the 
result of free choice; for there is neither enmity nor sin without the enemy and 
the sinner. And the command "to covet nothing," not as if the things to be 
desired did not belong to us, does not teach us not to entertain desire, as 
those suppose who teach that the Creator is different from the first God, not as 
if creation was loathsome and bad (for such opinions are impious). But we say 
that the things of the world are not our own, not as if they were monstrous, not 
as if they did not belong to God, the Lord of the universe, but because we do 
not continue among them for ever; being, in respect of possession, not ours, and 
passing from one to another in succession; but belonging to us, for whom they 
were made in respect of use, so long as it is necessary to continue with them. 
In accordance, therefore, with natural appetite, things disallowed are to be 
used rightly, avoiding all excess and inordinate affection. 
CHAPTER XIV -- THE LOVE OF ALL, EVEN OF OUR ENEMIES. 
How great also is benignity! "Love your enemies," it is said, "bless them who 
curse you, and pray for them who despitefully use you," and the like; to which 
it is added, "that ye may be the children of your Father who is in heaven," in 
allusion to resemblance to God. Again, it is said, "Agree with thine adversary 
quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him." The adversary is not the body, as 
some would have it, but the devil, and those assimilated to him, who walks along 
with us in the person of men, who emulate his deeds in this earthly life. It is 
inevitable, then, that those who confess themselves to belong to Christ, but 
find themselves in the midst of the devil's works, suffer the most hostile 
treatment. For it is written, "Lost he deliver thee to the judge, and the judge 
deliver thee to the officers of Satan's kingdom." "For I am persuaded that 
neither death," through the assault of persecutors, "nor life" in this world, 
"nor angels," the apostate ones, " nor powers" (and Satan's power is the life 
which he chose, for such are the powers and principalities of darkness belonging 
to him), "nor things present," amid which we exist during the time of life, as 
the hope entertained by the soldier, and the merchant's gain, "nor height, nor 
depth, nor any other creature," in consequence of the energy proper to a man, -- 
opposes the faith of him who acts according to free choice. "Creature" is 
synonymous with activity, being our work, and such activity "shall not be able 
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." You 
have got a compendious account of the gnostic martyr. 
CHAPTER XV -- ON AVOIDING OFFENCE. 
"We know that we all have knowledge" -- common knowledge in common things, 
and the knowledge that there is one God. For he was writing to believers; whence 
he adds, "But knowledge (gnosis) is not in all," being communicated to few. And 
there are those who say that the knowledge about things sacrificed to idols is 
not promulgated among all, "lest our liberty prove a stumbling-block to the 
weak. For by thy knowledge he that is weak is destroyed. " Should they say, 
"Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, ought that to be bought?" adding, by way of 
interrogation, "asking no questions," as if equivalent to "asking questions," 
they give a ridiculous interpretation. For the apostle says, "All other things 
buy out of the shambles, asking no questions," with the exception of the things 
mentioned in the Catholic epistle of all the apostles, "with the consent of the 
Holy Ghost," which is written in the Acts of the Apostles, and conveyed to the 
faithful by the hands of Paul himself. For they intimated "that they must of 
necessity abstain from things offered to idols, and from blood, and from things 
strangled, and from fornication, from which keeping themselves, they should do 
well." It is a different matter, then, which is expressed by the apostle: "Have 
we not power to eat and to drink? Have we not power to lead about a sister, a 
wife, as the rest of the apostles, as the brethren of the Lord and Cephas? But 
we have not used this power," he says, "but bear all things, lest we should 
occasion hindrance to the Gospel of Christ;" namely, by bearing about burdens, 
when it was necessary to be untrammelled for all things; or to become an example 
to those who wish to exercise temperance, not encouraging each other to eat 
greedily of what is set before us, and not to consort inconsiderately with 
woman. And especially is it incumbent on those entrusted with such a 
dispensation to exhibit to disciples a pure example. "For though I be free from 
all men, I have made myself servant to all," it is said, "that I might gain all. 
And every one that striveth for mastery is temperate in all things." "But the 
earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof." For conscience' sake, then, we 
are to abstain from what we ought to abstain. "Conscience, I say, not his own," 
for it is endued with knowledge, "but that of the other," lest he be trained 
badly, and by imitating in ignorance what he knows not, he become a despiser 
instead of a strong-minded man. "For why is my liberty judged of by another 
conscience? For if I by grace am a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that 
for which I give thanks? Whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God " -- what 
you are commanded to do by the rule of faith. 
CHAPTER XVI -- PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE RESPECTING THE CONSTANCY, PATIENCE, AND 
LOVE OF THE MARTYRS. 
"With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth 
confession is made unto salvation. Wherefore the Scripture saith, Whosoever 
believeth on Him shall not be ashamed; that is, the word of faith which we 
preach: for if thou confess the word with thy mouth that Jesus is Lord, and 
believe in thy heart that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be 
saved." There is clearly described the perfect righteousness, fulfilled both in 
practice and contemplation. Wherefore we are "to bless those who persecute us. 
Bless, and curse not." " For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of a good 
conscience, that in holiness and sincerity we know God" by this inconsiderable 
instance exhibiting the work of love, that "not in fleshly wisdom, but by the 
grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world." So far the apostle 
respecting knowledge; and in the second Epistle to the Corinthians he calls the 
common "teaching of faith" the savour of knowledge. "For unto this day the same 
veil remains on many in the reading of the Old Testament," not being uncovered 
by turning to the Lord. Wherefore also to those capable of perceiving he showed 
resurrection, that of the life still in the flesh, creeping on its belly. Whence 
also he applied the name "brood of vipers" to the voluptuous, who serve the 
belly and the pudenda, and cut off one another's heads for the sake of worldly 
pleasures. "Little children, let us not love in word, or in tongue," says John, 
teaching them to be perfect, "but in deed and in truth; hereby shall we know 
that we are of the truth." And if "God be love," piety also is love: "there is 
no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear." "This is the love of God, 
that we keep His commandments." And again, to him who desires to become a 
Gnostic, it is written, "But be thou an example of the believers, in word, in 
conversation, in love, in faith, in purity." For perfection in faith differs, I 
think, from ordinary faith. And the divine apostle furnishes the rule for the 
Gnostic in these words, writing as follows: "For I have learned, in whatsoever 
state I am, to be content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to 
abound. Everywhere and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be 
hungry, both to abound and to lack. I can do all things through Him who 
strengtheneth me." And also when discussing with others in order to put them, to 
shame, he does not shrink from saying, "But call to mind the former days, in 
which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions; 
partly, whilst ye were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches and afflictions; 
and partly, whilst ye became companions of them that were so used. For ye had 
compassion of me in my bonds, and took with joy the spoiling of your goods, 
knowing that you have a better and enduring substance. Cast not away therefore 
your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward. For ye have need of 
patience, that, after doing the will of God, ye may obtain the promise. For yet 
a little while, and He that cometh will come, and will not tarry. Now the just 
shall live by faith: and if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in 
him. But we are not of them that draw back unto perdition, but of them that 
believe to the saving of the soul." He then brings forward a swarm of divine 
examples. For was it not "by faith," he says, this endurance, that they acted 
nobly who "had trial of mockeries and scourgings, and, moreover, of bonds and 
imprisonments? They were stoned, they were tempted, were slain with the sword. 
They wandered about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted, 
tormented, of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in deserts, in 
mountains, in dens, and caves of the earth. And all having received a good 
report, through faith, received not the promise of God" (what is expressed by a 
parasiopesis is left to be understood, viz., "alone "). He adds accordingly, 
"God having provided some better thing for us (for He was good), that they 
should not without us be made perfect. 
Wherefore also, having encompassing us such a cloud," holy and transparent, 
"of witnesses, laying aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset 
us, let us run with patience the race set before us, looking unto Jesus, the 
author and finisher of our faith." Since, then, he specifies one salvation in 
Christ of the righteous, and of us he has expressed the former unambiguously, 
and saying nothing less respecting Moses, adds, "Esteeming the reproach of 
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect to the 
recompense of the reward. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of 
the king: for he endured as seeing Him who is invisible." The divine Wisdom says 
of the martyrs, "They seemed in the eyes of the foolish to die, and their 
departure was reckoned a calamity, and their migration from us an affliction. 
But they are in peace. For though in the sight of men they were punished, their 
hope was full of immortality." He then adds, teaching martyrdom to be a glorious 
purification, "And being chastened a little, they shall be benefited much; 
because God proved them," that is, suffered them to be tried, to put them to the 
proof, and to put to shame the author of their trial, "and found them worthy of 
Himself," plainly to be called sons. "As gold in the furnace He proved them, and 
as a whole burned-offering of sacrifice He accepted them. And in the time of 
their visitation they will shine forth, even as sparks run along the stubble. 
They shall judge the nations, and rule over the peoples, and the Lord shall 
reign over them forever." 
CHAPTER XVII -- PASSAGES FROM CLEMENT'S EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS ON 
MARTYRDOM. 
Moreover, in the Epistle to the Corinthians, the Apostle Clement also, 
drawing a picture of the Gnostic, says: "For who that has sojourned among you 
has not proved your perfect and firm faith? and has not admired your sound and 
gentle piety? and has not celebrated the munificent style of your hospitality? 
and has not felicitated your complete and sure knowledge? For ye did all things 
impartially, and walked in the ordinances of God;" and so forth. 
Then more clearly: "Let us fix our eyes on those who have yielded perfect 
service to His magnificent glory. Let us take Enoch, who, being by his obedience 
found righteous, was translated; and Noah, who, having believed, was saved; and 
Abraham, who for his faith and hospitality was called the friend of God, and was 
the father of Isaac." "For hospitality and piety, Lot was saved from Sodom." 
"For faith and hospitality, Rahab the harlot was saved." "From patience and 
faith they walked about in goat-skins, and sheep-skins, and folds of camels' 
hair, proclaiming the kingdom of Christ. We name His prophets Elias, and 
Eliseus, and Ezekiel, and John." 
"For Abraham, who for his free faith was called ' the friend of God,' was not 
elated by glory, but modestly said, 'I am dust and ashes.' And of Job it is thus 
written: ' Job was just and blameless, true and pious, abstaining from all 
evil.'" He it was who overcame the tempter by patience, and at once testified 
and was testified to by God; who keeps hold of humility, and says, "No one is 
pure from defilement, not even if his life were but for one day." "Moses, 'the 
servant who was faithful in all his house,' said to Him who uttered the oracles 
from the bush,' Who am I, that Thou sendest me? I am slow of speech, and of a 
stammering tongue,' to minister the voice of God in human speech. And again: ' I 
am smoke from a pot.'" "For God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the 
humble." 
"David too, of whom the Lord, testifying, says, 'I found a man after my own 
heart, David the son of Jesse. With my holy oil I anointed him.' But he also 
says to God, 'Pity me, O God, according to Thy mercy; and according to the 
multitude of Thy tender mercies, blot out my transgression. Wash me thoroughly 
from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know my transgression, and 
my sin is ever before me.' " Then, alluding to sin which is not subject to the 
law, in the exercise of the moderation of true knowledge, he adds, "Against Thee 
only have I sinned, and done evil in Thy sight." For the Scripture somewhere 
says, "The Spirit of the Lord is a lamp, searching the recesses of the belly." 
And the more of a Gnostic a man becomes by doing right, the nearer is the 
illuminating Spirit to him. "Thus the Lord draws near to the righteous, and none 
of the thoughts and reasonings of which we are the authors escape Him -- I mean 
the Lord Jesus," the scrutinizer by His omnipotent will of our heart, "whose 
blood was consecrated for us. Let us therefore respect those who are over us, 
and reverence the elders; let us honour the young, and let us teach the 
discipline of God." For blessed is he who shah do and teach the Lord's commands 
worthily; and he is of a magnanimous mind, and of a mind contemplative of truth. 
"Let us direct our wives to what is good; let them exhibit," says he, "the 
lovable disposition of chastity; let them show the guileless will of their 
meekness; let them manifest the gentleness of their tongue by silence; let them 
give their love not according to their inclinations, but equal love in sanctity 
to all i that fear God. Let our children share in the discipline that is in 
Christ; let them learn what humility avails before God; what is the power of 
holy love before God, how lovely and great is the fear of the Lord, saving all 
that walk in it holily; with a pure heart: for He is the Searcher of the 
thoughts and sentiments, whose breath is in us, and when He wills He will take 
it away." 
"Now all those things are confirmed by the faith that is in Christ. 'Come, ye 
children,' says the Lord, ' hearken to me, and I will teach you the fear of the 
Lord. Who is the man that desireth life, that loveth to see good days?' Then He 
subjoins the gnostic mystery of the numbers seven and eight. 'Stop thy tongue 
from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil, and do good. Seek 
peace, and pursue it.' For in these words He alludes to knowledge (gnosis), with 
abstinence from evil and the doing of what is good, teaching that it is to be 
perfected by word and deed. ' The eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and His 
ears are to their prayer. But the face of God is against those thai do evil, to 
root out their memory from the earth. The righteous cried, and the Lord heard, 
and delivered him out of all his distresses.' ' Many are the stripes of sinners; 
but those who hope in the Lord, mercy shall compass about.'" "A multitude of 
mercy," he nobly says, "surrounds him that trusts in the Lord." 
For it is written in the Epistle to the Corinthians, "Through Jesus Christ 
our foolish and darkened mind springs up to the light. By Him the Sovereign Lord 
wished us to taste the knowledge that is immortal." And, showing more expressly 
the peculiar nature of knowledge, he added: "These things, then, being clear to 
us, looking into the depths of divine knowledge, we ought to do all things in 
order which the Sovereign Lord commanded us to perform at the appointed seasons. 
Let the wise man, then, show his wisdom not in words only, but in good deeds. 
Let the humble not testify to himself, but allow testimony to be borne to him by 
another. Let not him who is pure in the flesh boast, knowing that it is another 
who furnishes him with continence. Ye see, brethren, that the more we are 
subjected to peril, the more knowledge are we counted worthy of." 
CHAPTER XVIII -- ON LOVE, AND THE REPRESSING OF OUR DESIRES. 
"The decorous tendency of our philanthropy, therefore," according to Clement, 
"seeks the common good;" whether by suffering martyrdom, or by teaching by deed 
and word, -- the latter being twofold, unwritten and written. This is love, to 
love God and our neighbour. "This conducts to the height which is unutterable. ' 
Love covers a multitude of sins. Love beareth all things, suffereth all things.' 
Love joins us to God, does all things in concord. In love, all the chosen of God 
were perfected. Apart from love, nothing is well pleasing to God." "Of its 
perfection there is no unfolding," it is said. "Who is fit to be found in it, 
except those whom. God counts worthy?" To the point the Apostle Paul speaks, "If 
I give my body, and have not love, I am sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal." 
If it is not from a disposition determined by gnostic love that I shall testify, 
he means; but if through fear and expected reward, moving my lips in order to 
testify to the Lord that I shall confess the Lord, I am a common man, sounding 
the Lord's name, not knowing Him. "For there is the people that loveth with the 
lips; and there is another which gives the body to be burned." "And if I give 
all my goods in alms," he says, not according to the principle of loving 
communication, but on account of recompense, either from him who has received 
the benefit, or the Lord who has promised; "and if I have all faith so as to 
remove mountains," and cast away obscuring passions, and be not faithful to the 
Lord from love, "I am nothing," as in comparison of him who testifies as a 
Gnostic, and the crowd, and being reckoned nothing better. 
"Now all the generations from Adam to this day are gone. But they who have 
been perfected in love, through the grace of God, hold the place of the godly, 
who shall be manifested at the visitation of the kingdom of Christ." Love 
permits not to sin; but if it fall into any such case, by reason of the 
interference of the: adversary, in imitation of David, it will sing: "I will 
confess unto the Lord, and it will please Him above a young bullock that has 
horns and hoofs. Let the poor see it, and be glad." For he says, "Sacrifice to 
God a sacrifice of praise, and pay to the Lord thy vows; and call upon me in the 
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." "For the 
sacrifice of God is a broken spirit." 
"God," then, being good, "is love," it is said. Whose "love worketh no ill to 
his neighhour," neither injuring nor revenging ever, but, in a word, doing good 
to all according to the image of God. "Love is," then, "the fulfilling of the 
law; " like as Christ, that is the presence of the Lord who loves us; and our 
loving teaching of, and discipline according to Christ. By love, then, the 
commands not to commit adultery, and not to covet one's neighbour's wife, are 
fulfilled, [these sins being] formerly prohibited by fear. 
The same work, then, presents a difference, according as it is done by fear, 
or accomplished by love, and is wrought by faith or by knowledge. Rightly, 
therefore, their rewards are different. To the Gnostic "are prepared what eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath entered into the heart of man;" but to 
him who has exercised simple faith He testifies a hundredfold in return for what 
he has left, -- a promise which has turned out to fall within human 
comprehension. Come to this point, I recollect one who called himself a Gnostic. 
For, expounding the words, "But i say unto you, he that looketh on a woman to 
lust after, hath committed adultery," he thought that it was not bare desire 
that was condemned; but if through the desire the act that results from it 
proceeding beyond the desire is accomplished in it. For dream employs phantasy 
and the body. Accordingly, the historians relate the following decision, of 
Bocchoris the just. A youth, falling in love with a courtezan, persuades the 
girl, for a stipulated reward, to come to him next day. But his desire being 
unexpectedly satiated, by laying hold of the girl in a dream, by anticipation, 
when the object of his love came according to stipulation, he prohibited her 
from coming in. But she, on learning what had taken place, demanded the reward, 
saying that in this way she had sated the lover's desire. They came accordingly 
to the judge. He, ordering the youth to hold out the purse containing the reward 
in the sun, bade the courtezan take hold of the shadow; facetiously bidding him 
pay the image of a reward for the image of an embrace. 
Accordingly one dreams, the soul assenting to the vision. But he dreams 
waking, who looks so as to lust; not only, as that Gnostic said, if along with 
the sight of the woman he imagine in his mind intercourse, for this is already 
the act of lust, as lust; but if one looks on beauty of person (the Word says), 
and the flesh seem to him in the way of lust to be fair, looking on cam ally and 
sinfully, he is judged because he admired. For, on the other hand, he who in 
chaste love looks on beauty, thinks not that the flesh is beautiful, but the 
spirit, admiring, as I judge, the body as an image, by whose beauty he 
transports himself to the Artist, and to the true beauty; exhibiting the sacred 
symbol, the bright impress of righteousness to the angels that wait on the 
ascension; I mean the unction of acceptance, the quality of disposition which 
resides in the soul that is gladdened by the communication of the Holy Spirit. 
This glory, which Shone forth on the face of Moses, the people could not look 
on. Wherefore he took a veil for the glory, to those who looked cam ally. For 
those, who demand toll, detain those who bring in any worldly things, who are 
burdened with their own passions. But him that is free of all things which are 
subject to duty, and is full of knowledge, and of the righteousness of works, 
they pass on with their good wishes, blessing the man with his work. "And his 
life shall not fall away" -- the leaf of the living tree that is nourished "by 
the water-courses." Now the righteous is likened to fruit-bearing trees, and not 
only to such as are of the nature of tall-growing ones. And in the sacrificial 
oblations, according to the law, there were those who looked for blemishes in 
the sacrifices. They who are skilled in such matters distinguish propension 
(orexis) from lust (epiqumia); and assign the latter, as being 
irrational, to pleasures and licentiousness; and propension, as being a rational 
movement, they assign to the necessities of nature. 
CHAPTER XIX -- WOMEN AS WELL AS MEN CAPABLE OF PERFECTION. 
In this perfection it is possible for man and woman equally to share. It is 
not only Moses, then, that heard from God, "I have spoken to thee once, and 
twice, saying, I have seen this people, and lo, it is stiff-necked. Suffer me to 
exterminate them, and blot out their name from under heaven; and I will make 
thee into a great and wonderful nation much greater than this;" who answers not 
regarding himself, but the common salvation: "By no means, O Lord; forgive this 
people their sin, or blot me out of the book of the living." How great was his 
perfection, in wishing to die together with the people, rather than be saved 
alone! 
But Judith too, who became perfect among women, in the siege of the city, at 
the entreaty of the elders went forth into the strangers' camp, despising all 
danger for her country's sake, giving herself into the enemy's hand in faith in 
God; and straightway she obtained the reward of her faith, -- though a woman, 
prevailing over the enemy of her faith, and gaining possession of the head of 
Holofernes. And again, Esther perfect by faith, who rescued Israel from the 
power of the king and the satrap's cruelty: a woman alone, afflicted with 
fastings, held back ten thousand armed hands, annulling by her faith the 
tyrant's decree; him indeed she appeased, Haman she restrained, and Israel she 
preserved scathless by her perfect prayer to God. I pass over in silence Susanna 
and the sister of Moses, since the latter was the prophet's associate in 
commanding the host, being superior to all the women among the Hebrews who were 
in repute for their wisdom; and the former in her surpassing modesty, going even 
to death condemned by licentious admirers, remained the unwavering martyr of 
chastity. 
Dion, too, the philosopher, tells that a certain woman Lysidica, through 
excess of modesty, bathed in her clothes; and that Philotera, when she was to 
enter the bath, gradually drew back her tunic as the water covered the naked 
parts; and then rising by degrees, put it on. And did not Lesena of Attica 
manfully bear the torture? She being privy to the conspiracy of Harmodius and 
Aristogeiton against Hipparchus, uttered not a word, though severely tortured. 
And they say that the Argolic women, under the guidance of Telesilla the 
poetess, turned to flight the doughty Spartans by merely showing themselves; and 
that she produced in them fearlessness of death. Similarly speaks he who 
composed the Danais respecting the daughters of Danaus: "And then the daughters 
of Danaus swiftly armed themselves, Before the fair-flowing river, majestic 
Nile," and so forth. 
And the rest of the poets sing of Atalanta's swiftness in the chase, of 
Anticlea's love for children, of Alcestis's love for her husband, of the courage 
of Makaeria and of the Hyacinthides. What shall I say? Did not Theano the 
Pythagorean make such progress in philosophy, that to him who looked intently at 
her, and said, "Your arm is beautiful," she answered "Yes, but it is not 
public." Characterized by the same propriety, there is also reported the 
following reply. When asked when a woman after being with her husband attends 
the Thesmophoria, said, "From her own husband at once, from a stranger never." 
Themisto too, of Lampsacus, the daughter of Zoilus, the wife of Leontes of 
Lampsacus, studied the Epicurean philosophy, as Myia the daughter of Theano the 
Pythagorean, and Arignote, who wrote the history of Dionysius. 
And the daughters of Diodorus, who was called Kronus, all became 
dialecticians, as Philo the dialectician says in the Mrenexenus, whose names are 
mentioned as follows -- Menexene, Argia, Theognis, Artemesia, Pantaclea. I also 
recollect a female Cynic, -- she was called Hipparchia, a Maronite, the wife of 
Crates, -- in whose case the so-called dog-wedding was celebrated in the 
Pcecile. Arete of Cyrene, too, the daughter of Aristippus, educated her son 
Aristippus, who was surnamed Mother-taught. Lastheneia of Arcis, and Axiothea of 
Phlius, studied philosophy with Plato. Besides, Aspasia of Miletus, of whom the 
writers of comedy write much, was trained by Socrates in philosophy, by Pericles 
in rhetoric. I omit, on account of the length of the discourse, the rest; 
enumerating neither the poetesses Corinna, Telesilla, Myia, and Sappho; nor the 
painters, as Irene the daughter of Cratinus, and Anaxandra the daughter of 
Nealces, according to the account of Didymus in the Symposiaci. The daughter of 
Cleobulus, the sage and monarch of the Lindii, was not ashamed to wash the feet 
of her father's guests. Also the wife of Abraham, the blessed Sarah, in her own 
person prepared the cakes baked in the ashes for the angels; and princely 
maidens among the Hebrews fed sheep. Whence also the Nausicaa of Homer went to 
the washing-tubs. 
The wise woman, then, win first choose to persuade her husband to be her 
associate in what is conducive to happiness. And should that be found 
impracticable, let her by herself earnestly aim at virtue, gaining her husband's 
consent in everything, so as never to do anything against his will, with 
exception of what is reckoned as contributing to virtue and salvation. But if 
one keeps from such a mode of life either wife or maid-servant, whose heart is 
set on it; what such a person in that case plainly does is nothing else than 
determine to drive her away from righteousness and sobriety, and to choose to 
make his own house wicked and licentious. 
It is not then possible that man or woman can be conversant with anything 
whatever, without the advantage of education, and application, and training; and 
virtue, we have said, depends not on others, but on ourselves above all. Other 
things one can repress, by waging war against them; but with what depends on 
one's self, this is entirely out of the question, even with the most strenuous 
persistence. For the gift is one conferred by God, and not in the power of any 
other. Whence licentiousness should be regarded as the evil of no other one than 
of him who is guilty of licentiousness; and temperance, on the other hand, as 
the good of him who is able to practise it. 
CHAPTER XX -- A GOOD WIFE. 
The woman who, with propriety, loves her husband, Euripides describes, while 
admonishing,- "That when her husband says aught, She ought to regard him as 
speaking well if she say nothing; And if she will say anything, to do her 
endeavour to gratify her husband." 
And again he subjoins the like : "And that the wife should sweetly look sad 
with her husband, Should aught evil befall him, And have in common a share of 
sorrow and joy." 
Then, describing her as gentle and kind even in misfortunes, he adds: "And I, 
when you are ill, will, sharing your sickness bear it; And I will bear my share 
in your misfortunes." 
And: "Nothing is bitter to me, For with friends one ought to be happy, For 
what else is friendship but this?" 
The marriage, then, that is consummated according to the word, is sanctified, 
if the union be under subjection to God, and be conducted "with a true heart, in 
full assurance of faith, having hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and 
the body washed with pure water, and holding the confession of hope; for He is 
faithful that promised." And the happiness of marriage ought never to be 
estimated either by wealth or beauty, but by virtue. 
"Beauty," says the tragedy, "helps no wife with her husband; But virtue has 
helped many; for every good wife Who is attached to her husband knows how to 
pracise sobriety." 
Then, as giving admonitions, he says: "First, then, this is incumbent on her 
who is endowed with mind, That even if her husband be ugly, he must appear good 
looking; For it is for the mind, not the eye, to judge." And so forth. 
For with perfect propriety Scripture has said that woman is given by God as 
"an help" to man. It is evident, then, in my opinion, that she will charge 
herself with remedying, by good sense and persuasion, each of the annoyances 
that originate with her husband in domestic economy. And if he does not yield, 
then she will endeavour, as far as possible for human nature, to lead a sinless 
life; whether it be necessary to die, in accordance with reason, or to live; 
considering that God is her helper and associate in such a course of conduct, 
her true defender and Saviour both for the present and for the future; making 
Him the leader and guide of all her actions, reckoning sobriety and 
righteousness her work, and making the favour of God her end. Gracefully, 
therefore, the apostle says in the Epistle to Titus, "that the eider women 
should be of godly behaviour, should not be slanderers, not enslaved to much 
wine; that they should counsel the young women to be lovers of their husbands, 
lovers of their children, discreet, chaste, housekeepers, good, subject to their 
own husbands; that the word of God be not blasphemed." But rather, he says, 
"Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the 
Lord: looking diligently, lest there be any fornicator or profane person, as 
Esau, who for one morsel surrendered his birthright; and lest any root of 
bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled." And then, as 
putting the finishing stroke to the question about marriage, he adds: 
"Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and 
adulterers God will judge." 
And one aim and one end, as far as regards perfection, being demonstrated to 
belong to the man and the woman, Peter in his Epistle says, "Though now for a 
season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations; that the 
trial of your faith, being much more precious than that of gold which perisheth, 
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honour, and glory 
at the revelation of Jesus Christ; whom, having not seen, ye love; in whom, 
though now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and 
full of glory, receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls." 
Wherefore also Paul rejoices for Christ's sake that he was "in labours, more 
abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths oft." 
CHAPTER XXI -- DESCRIPTION OF THE PERFECT MAN, OR GNOSTIC. 
Here I find perfection apprehended variously in relation to Him who excels in 
every virtue. Accordingly one is perfected as pious, and as patient, and as 
continent, and as a worker, and as a martyr, and as a Gnostic. But I know no one 
of men perfect in all things at once, while still human, though according to the 
mere letter of the law, except Him alone who for us clothed Himself with 
humanity. Who then is perfect? He who professes abstinence from what is bad. 
Well, this is the way to the Gospel and to well-doing. But gnostic perfection in 
the case of the legal man is the acceptance of the Gospel, that he that is after 
the law may be perfect. For so he, who was after the law, Moses, foretold that 
it was necessary to hear in order that we might, according to the apostle, 
receive Christ, the fulness of the law. But now in the Gospel the Gnostic 
attains proficiency not only by making use of the law as a step, but by 
understanding and comprehending it, as the Lord who gave the Covenants delivered 
it to the apostles. And if he conduct himself rightly (as assuredly it is 
impossible to attain knowledge (gnosis) by bad conduct); and if, further, having 
made an eminently right confession, he become a martyr out of love, obtaining 
considerable renown as among men; not even thus will he be called perfect in the 
flesh beforehand; since it is the close of life which claims this appellation, 
when the gnostic martyr has first shown the perfect work, and rightly exhibited 
it, and having thankfully shed his blood, has yielded up the ghost: blessed then 
will he be, and truly proclaimed perfect, "that the excellency of the power may 
be of God, and not of us," as the apostle says. Only let us preserve free-will 
and love: "troubled on every side, yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in 
despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed." For those 
who strive after perfection, according to the same apostle, must "give no 
offence in anything, but in everything approve themselves not to men, but to 
God." And, as a consequence, also they ought to yield to men; for it is 
reasonable, on account of abusive calumnies: Here is the specification: "in much 
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in 
imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, in pureness, 
in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Ghost, in love 
unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God," that we may be the 
temples of God, purified "from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit." 
"And I," He says, "will receive you; and I will be to you for a Father, and ye 
shall be to Me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." "Let us then," 
he says, "perfect holiness in the fear of God." For though fear beget pain, "I 
rejoice," he says, "not that ye were made sorry, but that ye showed 
susceptibility to repentance. For ye sorrowed after a godly sort, that ye might 
receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow worketh repentance unto 
salvation not to be regretted; but the sorrow of the world worketh death. For 
this same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what earnestness it wrought 
in you; yea, what clearing of yourselves; yea, what compunction; yea, what fear; 
yea, what desire; yea, what zeal; yea, revenge! In all things ye have showed 
yourselves clear in the matter." Such are the preparatory exercises of gnostic 
discipline. And since the omnipotent God Himself "gave some apostles, and some 
prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the 
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ, till we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of the 
knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of 
the fulness of Christ; " we are then to strive to reach manhood as befits the 
Gnostic, and to be as perfect as we can while still abiding in the flesh, making 
it our study with perfect concord here to concur with the will of God, to the 
restoration of what is the truly perfect nobleness and relationship, to the 
fulness of Christ, that which perfectly depends on our perfection. 
And now we perceive where, and how, and when the divine apostle mentions the 
perfect man, and how he shows the differences of the perfect. And again, on the 
other hand: "The manifestation of the Spirit is given for our profit. For to one 
is given the word of wisdom by the Spirit; to another the word of knowledge 
according to the same Spirit; to another faith through the same Spirit; to 
another the gifts of healing through the same Spirit; to another the working of 
miracles; to another prophecy; to another discernment of spirits; to another 
diversities of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues: and all these 
worketh the one and the same Spirit, distributing to each one according as He 
wills."' Such being the case, the prophets are perfect in prophecy, the 
righteous in righteousness, and the martyrs in confession, and others in 
preaching, not that they are not sharers in the common virtues, but are 
proficient in those to which they are appointed. For what man in his senses 
would say that a prophet was not righteous? For what? did not righteous men like 
Abraham prophesy? 
"For to one God has given warlike deeds, To another the accomplishment of the 
dance, To another the lyre and song," says Homer. "But each has his own proper 
gift of God " -- one in one way, another in another. But the apostles were 
perfected in all. You will find, then, if you choose, in their acts and 
writings, knowledge, life, preaching, righteousness, purity, prophecy. We must 
know, then, that if Paul is' young in respect to time -- having flourished 
immediately after the Lord's ascension -- yet his writings depend on the Old 
Testament, breathing and speaking of them. For faith in Christ and the knowledge 
of the Gospel are the explanation and fulfilment of the law; and therefore it 
was said to the Hebrews, "If ye believe not, neither shall you understand;" that 
is, unless you believe what is prophesied in the law, and oracularly delivered 
by the law, you will not understand the Old Testament, which He by His coming 
expounded. 
CHAPTER XXII -- THE TRUE GNOSTIC DOES GOOD, NOT FROM FEAR OF PUNISHMENT OR 
HOPE OF REWARD, BUT ONLY FOR THE SAKE OF GOOD ITSELF. 
The man of understanding and perspicacity is, then, a Gnostic. And his 
business is not abstinence from what is evil (for this is a step to the highest 
perfection), or the doing of good out of fear. For it is written, "Whither shall 
I flee, and where shall I hide myself from Thy presence? If I ascend into 
heaven, Thou art there; if I go away to the uttermost parts of the sea, there is 
Thy right hand; if I go down into the depths, there is Thy Spirit." Nor any more 
is he to do so from hope of promised recompense. For it is said, "Behold the 
Lord, and His reward is before His face, to give to every one according to his 
works; what eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, and hath not entered into 
the heart of man what God hath prepared for them that love Him." But only the 
doing of good out of love, and for the sake of its own excellence, is to be the 
Gnostic's choice. Now, in the person of God it is said to the Lord, "Ask of Me, 
and I will give the heathen for Thine inheritance;" teaching Him to ask a truly 
regal request -- that is, the salvation of men without price, that we may 
inherit and possess the Lord. For, on the contrary, to desire knowledge about 
God for any practical purpose, that this may be done, or that may not be done, 
is not proper to the Gnostic; but the knowledge itself suffices as the reason 
for contemplation. For I will dare aver that it is not because he wishes to be 
saved that he, who devotes himself to knowledge for the sake of the divine 
science itself, chooses knowledge. For the exertion of the intellect by exercise 
is prolonged to a perpetual exertion. And the perpetual exertion of the 
intellect is the essence of an intelligent being, which results from an 
uninterrupted process of admixture, and remains eternal contemplation, a living 
substance. Could we, then, suppose any one proposing to the Gnostic whether he 
would choose the knowledge of God or everlasting salvation; and if these, which 
are entirely identical, were separable, he would without the least hesitation 
choose the knowledge of God, deeming that property of faith, which from love 
ascends to knowledge, desirable, for its own sake. This, then, is the perfect 
man's first form of doing good, when it is done not for any advantage in what 
pertains to him, but because he judges it right to do good; and the energy being 
vigorously exerted in all things, in the very act becomes good; not, good in 
some things, and not good in others; but consisting in the habit of doing good, 
neither for glory, nor, as the philosophers say, for reputation, nor from reward 
either from men or God; but so as to pass life after the image and likeness of 
the Lord. 
And if, in doing good, he be met with anything adverse, he will let the 
recompense pass without resentment as if it were good, he being just and good 
"to the just and the unjust." To such the Lord says, "Be ye, as your Father is 
perfect." 
To him the flesh is dead; but he himself lives alone, having consecrated the 
sepulchre into a holy temple to the Lord, having turned towards God the old 
sinful soul. 
Such an one is no longer continent, but has reached a state of 
passionlessness, waiting to put on the divine image. "If thou doest alms," it is 
said, "let no one know it; and if thou fastest, anoint thyself, that God alone 
may know," and not a single human being. Not even he himself who shows mercy 
ought to know that he does show mercy; for in this way he will be sometimes 
merciful, sometimes not. And when he shall do good by habit, he will imitate the 
nature of good, and his disposition will be his nature and his practice. There 
is no necessity for removing those who are raised on high, but there is 
necessity for those who are walking to reach the requisite goal, by passing over 
the whole of the narrow way. For this is to be drawn by the Father, to become 
worthy to receive the power of grace from God, so as to run without hindrance. 
And if some hate the elect, such an one knows their ignorance, and pities their 
minds for its folly. 
As is right, then, knowledge itself loves and teaches the ignorant, and 
instructs the whole creation to honour God Almighty. And if such an one teaches 
to love God, he will not hold virtue as a thing to be lost in any case, either 
awake or in a dream, or in any vision; since the habit never goes out of itself 
by falling from being a habit. Whether, then, knowledge be said to be habit or 
disposition; on account of diverse sentiments never obtaining access, the 
guiding faculty, remaining unaltered, admits no alteration of appearances by 
framing in dreams visionary conceptions out of its movements by day. Wherefore 
also the Lord enjoins "to watch," so that our soul may never be perturbed with 
passion, even in dreams; but also to keep the life of the night pure and 
stainless, as if spent in the day. For assimilation to God, as far as we can, is 
preserving the mind in its relation to the same things. And this is the relation 
of mind as mind. 
But the variety of disposition arises from inordinate affection to material 
things. And for this reason, as they appear to me, to have called night 
Euphrone; since then the soul, released from the perceptions of sense, turns in 
on itself, and has a truer hold of intelligence (Fronhsis). Wherefore the 
mysteries are for the most part celebrated by night, indicating the withdrawal 
of the soul from the body, which takes place by night. "Let us not then sleep, 
as do others; but let us watch and be sober. For they that sleep, sleep in the 
night; and they that are drunken, are drunken in the night. But let us who are 
of the day be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and as an 
helmet the hope of salvation." And as to what, again, they say of sleep, the 
very same things are to be understood of death. For each exhibits the departure 
of the soul, the one more, the other less; as we may also get this in 
Heraclitus: "Man touches night in himself, when dead and his light quenched; and 
alive, when he sleeps he touches the dead; and awake, when he shuts his eyes, he 
touches the sleeper." "For blessed are those that have seen the Lord," according 
to the apostle; "for it is high time to awake out of sleep. For now is our 
salvation nearer than when we believed. The night is far spent, the day is at 
hand. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the armour of 
light." By day and light he designates figuratively the Son, and by the armour 
of light metaphorically the promises. 
So it is said that we ought to go washed to sacrifices and prayers, clean and 
bright; and that this external adornment and purification are practised for a 
sign. Now purity is to think holy thoughts. Further, there is the image of 
baptism, which also was handed down to the poets from Moses as follows: "And she 
having drawn water, and wearing on her body clean clothes." 
It is Penelope that is going to prayer: "And Telemachus, Having washed his 
hands in the hoary sea, prayed to Athene." 
It was a custom of the Jews to wash frequently after being in bed. It was 
then well said,- "Be pure, not by washing of water, but in the mind." 
For sanctity, as I conceive it, is perfect pureness of mind, and deeds, and 
thoughts, and words too, and in its last degree sinlessness in dreams. 
And sufficient purification to a man, I reckon, is thorough and sure 
repentance. If, condemning ourselves for our former actions, we go forward, 
after these things taking thought, and divesting our mind both of the things 
which please us through the senses, and of our former transgressions. 
If, then, we are to give the etymology of episthmh, knowledge, its 
signification is to be derived from stasiu, placing; for our soul, which 
was formerly borne, now in one way, now in another, it settles in objects. 
Similarly faith is to be explained etymologically, as the settling 
(stasiu) of our soul respecting that which is. 
But we desire to learn about the man who is always and in all things 
righteous; who, neither dreading the penalty proceeding from the law, nor 
fearing to entertain hatred of evil in the case of those who live with him and 
who prosecute the injured, nor dreading danger at the hands of those who do 
wrong, remains righteous. For he who, on account of these considerations, 
abstains from anything wrong, is not voluntarily kind, but is good from fear. 
Even Epicurus says, that the man who in his estimation was wise, "would not do 
wrong to any one for the sake of gain; for he could not persuade himself that he 
would escape detection." So that, if he knew he would not be detected, he would, 
according to him, do evil. And such are the doctrines of darkness. If, too, one 
shall abstain from doing wrong from hope of the recompense given by God on 
account of righteous deeds, he is not on this supposition spontaneously good. 
For as fear makes that man just, so reward makes this one; or rather, makes him 
appear to be just. But with the hope after death -- a good hope to the good, to 
the bad the reverse -- not only they who follow after Barbarian wisdom, but also 
the Pythagoreans, are acquainted. For the latter also proposed hope as an end to 
those who philosophize. Whereas Socrates also, in the Phaedo, says "that good 
souls depart hence with a good hope;" and again, denouncing the wicked, he sets 
against this the assertion, "For they live with an evil hope." With him 
Heraclitus manifestly agrees in his dissertations concerning men: "There awaits 
man after death what they neither hope nor think." 
Divinely, therefore, Paul writes expressly, "Tribulation worketh, patience, 
and patience experience, and experience hope; and hope maketh not ashamed." 
For the patience is on account of the hope in the future. Now hope is 
synonymous with the recompense and restitution of hope; which maketh not 
ashamed, not being any more vilified. 
But he who obeys the mere call, as he is called, neither for fear, nor for 
enjoyments, is on his way to knowledge (gnwsiu). For he does not consider 
whether any extrinsic lucrative gain or enjoyment follows to him; but drawn by 
the love of Him who is the true object of love, and led to what is requisite, 
practises piety. So that not even were we to suppose him to receive from God 
leave to do things forbidden with impunity; not even if he were to get the 
promise that he would receive as a reward the good things of the blessed; but 
besides, not even if he could persuade himself that God would be hoodwinked with 
reference to what he does (which is impossible), would he ever wish to do aught 
contrary to right reason, having once made choice of what is truly good and 
worthy of choice on its own account, and therefore to be loved. For it is not in 
the food of the belly, that we have heard good to be situated. But he has heard 
that "meat will not commend us," nor marriage, nor abstinence from marriage in 
ignorance; but virtuous gnostic conduct. For the dog, which is an irrational 
animal, may be said to be continent, dreading as it does the uplifted stick, and 
therefore keeping away from the meat. But let the predicted promise be taken 
away, and the threatened dread cancelled, and the impending danger removed, and 
the disposition of such people will be revealed. 
CHAPTER XXIII -- THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED. 
For it is not suitable to the nature of the thing itself, that they should 
apprehend in the truly gnostic manner the truth, that all things which were 
created for our use are good; as, for example, marriage and procreation, when 
used in moderation; and that it is better than good to i become free of passion, 
and virtuous by assimilation to the divine. But in the case of external things, 
agreeable or disagreeable, from some they abstain, from others not. But in those 
things from which they abstain from disgust, they plainly find fault with the 
creature and the Creator; and though in appearance they walk faithfully, the 
opinion they maintain is impious. That command, "Thou shall not lust," needs 
neither the necessity arising from fear, which compels to keep from things that 
are pleasant; nor the reward, which by promise persuades to restrain the 
impulses of passion. 
And those who obey God through the promise, caught by the bait of pleasure, 
choose obedience not for the sake of the commandment, but for the sake of the 
promise. Nor will turning away from objects of sense, as a matter of necessary 
consequence, produce attachment to intellectual objects. On the contrary, the 
attachment to intellectual objects naturally becomes to the Gnostic an influence 
which draws away from the objects of sense; inasmuch as he, in virtue of the 
selection of what is good, has chosen what is good according to knowledge 
(gnwstikwu), admiring generation, and by sanctifying the Creator 
sanctifying assimilation to the divine. But I shall free myself from lust, let 
him say, O Lord, for the sake of alliance with Thee. For the economy of creation 
is good, and all things are well administered: nothing happens without a cause. 
I must be in what is Thine, O Omnipotent One. And if I am there, I am near Thee. 
And I would be free of fear that I may be able to draw near to Thee, and to be 
satisfied with little, practising Thy just choice between things good and things 
like. 
Right mystically and sacredly the apostle, teaching us the choice which is 
truly gracious, not in the way of rejection of other things as bad, but so as to 
do things better than what is good, has spoken, saying, "So he that giveth his 
virgin in marriage doeth well; and he that giveth her not doeth better; as far 
as respects seemliness and undistracted attendance on the Lord." 
Now we know that things which are difficult are not essential; but that 
things which are essential have been graciously made easy of attainment by God. 
Wherefore Democritus well says, that "nature and instruction" are like each 
other. And we have briefly assigned the cause. For instruction harmonizes man, 
and by harmonizing makes him natural; and it is no matter whether one was made 
such as he is by nature, or transformed by time and education. The Lord has 
furnished both; that which is by creation, and that which is by creating again 
and renewal through the covenant. And that is preferable which is advantageous 
to what is superior; but what is superior to everything is mind. So, then, what 
is really good is seen to be most pleasant, and of itself produces the fruit 
which is desired -- tranquillity of soul. "And he who hears Me," it is said, 
"shall rest in peace, confident, and shall be calm without fear of any evil." 
"Rely with all thy heart and thy mind on God." 
On this wise it is possible for the Gnostic already to have become God. "I 
said, Ye are gods, and sons of the highest." And Empedocles says that the souls 
of the wise become gods, writing as follows: "At last prophets, minstrels, and 
physicians, And the foremost among mortal men, approach; Whence spring gods 
supreme in honours." 
Man, then, genetically considered, is formed in accordance with the idea of 
the connate spirit. For he is not created formless and shapeless in the workshop 
of nature, where mystically the production of man is accomplished, both art and 
essence being common. But the individual man is stamped according to the 
impression produced in the soul by the objects of his choice. Thus we say that 
Adam was perfect, as far as respects his formation; for none of the distinctive 
characteristics of the idea and form of man were wanting to him; but in the act 
of coming into being he received perfection. And he was justified by obedience; 
this was reaching manhood, as far as depended on him. And the cause lay in his 
choosing, and especially in his choosing what was forbidden. God was not the 
cause. 
For production is twofold -- of things procreated, and of things that grow. 
And manliness in man, who is subject to perturbation, as they say, makes him who 
partakes of it essentially fearless and invincible; and anger is the mind's 
satellite in patience, and endurance, and the like; and self-constraint and 
salutary sense are set over desire. But God is impassible, free of anger, 
destitute of desire. And He is not free of fear, in the sense of avoiding what 
is terrible; or temperate, in the sense of having command of desires. For 
neither can the nature of God fall in with anything terrible, nor does God flee 
fear; just as He will not feel desire, so as to rule over desires. 
Accordingly that Pythagorean saying was mystically uttered respecting us, 
"that man ought to become one;" for the high priest himself is one, God being 
one in the immutable state of the perpetual flow or good things. Now the Saviour 
has taken away wrath in and with lust, wrath being lust of vengeance. 
For universally liability to feeling belongs to every kind of desire; and 
man, when deified purely into a passionless state, becomes a unit. As, then, 
those, who at sea are held by an anchor, pull at the anchor, but do not drag it 
to them, but drag themselves to the anchor; so those who, according to the 
gnostic life, draw God towards them, imperceptibly bring themselves to God: for 
he who reverences God, reverences himself. In the contemplative life, then, one 
in worshipping God attends to himself, and through his own spotless purification 
beholds the holy God holily; for self-control, being present, surveying and 
contemplating itself uninterruptedly, is as far as possible assimilated to God. 
CHAPTER XXIV -- THE REASON AND END OF DIVINE PUNISHMENTS. 
Now that is in our power, of which equally with its opposite we are masters, 
-- as, say to philosophize or not, to believe or disbelieve. In consequence, 
then, of our being equally masters of each of the opposites, what depends on us 
is found possible. Now the commandments may be done or not done by us, who, as 
is reasonable, are liable to praise and blame. And those, again, who are 
punished on account of sins committed by them, are punished for them alone; for 
what is done is past, and what is done can never be undone. 
The sins committed before faith are accordingly forgiven by the Lord, not 
that they may be undone, but as if they had not been done. "But not all," says 
Basilides, "but only sins involuntary and in ignorance, are forgiven;" as would 
be the case were it a man, and not God, that conferred such a boon. To such an 
one Scripture says, "Thou thoughtest that I would be like thee." 
But if we are punished for voluntary sins, we are punished not that the sins 
which are done may be undone, but because they were done. But punishment does 
not avail to him who has sinned, to undo his sin, but that he may sin no more, 
and that no one else fall into the like. Therefore the good God corrects for 
these three causes: First, that he who is corrected may become better than his 
former self; then that those who are capable of being saved by examples may be 
driven back, being admonished; and thirdly, that he who is injured may not be 
readily despised, and be apt to receive injury. And there are two methods of 
correction -- the instructive and the punitive, which we have called the 
disciplinary. It ought to be known, then, that those who fall into sin after 
baptism are those who are subjected to discipline; for the deeds done before are 
remitted, and those done after are purged. It is in reference to the unbelieving 
that it is said, "that they are reckoned as the chaff which the wind drives from 
the face of the earth, and the drop which falls from a vessel." 
CHAPTER XXV -- TRUE PERFECTION CONSISTS IN THE KNOWLEDGE AND LOVE OF GOD. 
"Happy he who possesses the culture of knowledge, and is not moved to the 
injury of the citizens or to wrong actions, but contemplates the undecaying 
order of immortal nature, how and in what way and manner it subsists. To such 
the practice of base deeds attaches not," Rightly, then, Plato says, "that the 
man who devotes himself to the contemplation of ideas will live as a god among 
men; now the mind is the place of ideas, and God is mind." He says that be who 
contemplates the unseen God lives as a god among men. And in the Sophist, 
Socrates calls the stranger of Elea, who was a dialectician, "god:" "Such are 
the gods who, like stranger guests, frequent cities. For when the soul, rising 
above the sphere of generation, is by itself apart, and dwells amidst ideas," 
like the Coryphaeus in Theaetetus, now become as an angel, it will be with 
Christ, being rapt in contemplation, ever keeping in view the will of God; in 
reality "Alone wise, while these flit like shadows." 
"For the dead bury their dead." Whence Jeremiah says: "I will fill it with 
the earth-born dead whom mine anger has smitten." God, then, being not a subject 
for demonstration, cannot be the object of science. But the Son is wisdom, and 
knowledge, and truth, and all else that has affinity thereto. He is also 
susceptible of demonstration and of description. And all the powers of the 
Spirit, becoming collectively one thing, terminate in the same point -- that is, 
in the Son. But He is incapable of being declared, in respect of the idea of 
each one of His powers. And the Son is neither simply one thing as one thing, 
nor many things as parts, but one thing as all things; whence also He is all 
things. For He is the circle of all powers rolled and united into one unity. 
Wherefore the Word is called the Alpha and the Omega, of whom alone the end 
becomes beginning, and ends again at the original beginning without any break. 
Wherefore also to believe in Him, and by Him, is to become a unit, being 
indissolubly united in Him; and to disbelieve is to be separated, disjoined, 
divided. 
"Wherefore thus saith the Lord, Every alien son is uncircumcised in heart, 
and uncircumcised in flesh" (that is, unclean in body and soul): "there shall 
not enter one of the strangers into the midst of the house of Israel, but the 
Lerites." He calls those that would not believe, but would disbelieve, 
strangers. Only those who live purely being true priests of God. Wherefore, of 
all the circumcised tribes, those anointed to be high priests, and kings, and 
prophets, were reckoned more holy. Whence He commands them not to touch dead 
bodies, or approach the dead; not that the body was polluted, but that sin and 
disobedience were incarnate, and embodied, and dead, and therefore abominable. 
It was only, then, when a father and mother, a son and daughter died, that 
the priest was allowed to enter, because these were related only by flesh and 
seed, to whom the priest was indebted for the immediate cause of his entrance 
into life. And they purify themselves seven days, the period in which Creation 
was consummated. For on the seventh day the rest is celebrated; and on the 
eighth he brings a propitiation, as is written in Ezekiel, according to which 
propitiation the promise is to be received. And the perfect propitiation, I take 
it, is that propitious faith in the Gospel which is by the law and the prophets, 
and the purity which shows itself in universal obedience, with the abandonment 
of the things of the world; in order to that grateful surrender of the 
tabernacle, which results from the enjoyment of the soul. Whether, then, the 
time be that which through the seven periods enumerated returns to the chiefest 
rest, or the seven heavens, which some reckon one above the other; or whether 
also the fixed sphere which borders on the intellectual world be called the 
eighth, the expression denotes that the Gnostic ought to rise out of the sphere 
of creation and of sin. After these seven days, sacrifices are offered for sins. 
For there is still fear of change, and it touches the seventh circle. The 
righteous Job says: "Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I 
return there;" not naked of possessions, for that were a trivial and common 
thing; but, as a just man, he departs naked of evil and sin, and of the 
unsightly shape which follows those who have led bad lives. For this was what 
was said, "Unless ye be converted, and become as children," pure in flesh, holy 
in soul by abstinence from evil deeds; showing that He would have us to be such 
as also He generated us from our mother -- the water. For the intent of one 
generation succeeding another is to immortalize by progress. "But the lamp of 
the wicked shall be put out." That purity in body and soul which the Gnostic 
partakes of, the all-wise Moses indicated, by employing repetition in describing 
the incorruptibility of body and of soul in the person of Rebecca, thus: "Now 
the virgin was fair, and man had not known her." And Rebecca, interpreted, means 
"glory of God;" and the glory of God is immortality. This is in reality 
righteousness, not to desire other things, but to be entirely the consecrated 
temple of the Lord. Righteousness is peace of life and a well-conditioned state, 
to which the Lord dismissed her when He said, "Depart into peace." For Salem is, 
by interpretation, peace; of which our Saviour is enrolled King, as Moses says, 
Melchizedek king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who gave bread and wine, 
furnishing consecrated food for a type of the Eucharist. And Melchizedek is 
interpreted "righteous king;" and the name is a synonym for righteousness and 
peace. Basilides however, supposes that Righteousness and her daughter Peace 
dwell stationed in the eighth sphere. 
But we must pass from physics to ethics, which are clearer; for the discourse 
concerning these will follow after the treatise in hand. The Saviour Himself, 
then, plainly initiates us into the mysteries, according to the words of the 
tragedy: - "Seeing those who see, he also gives the orgies." 
And if you ask, "These orgies, what is their nature?" 
You will hear again: "It is forbidden to mortals uninitiated in the Bacchic 
rites to know." 
And if any one will inquire curiously what they are, let him hear: "It is not 
lawful for thee to hear, but they are worth knowing; The rites of the God detest 
him who practises impiety." 
Now God, who is without beginning, is the perfect beginning of the universe, 
and the producer of the beginning. As, then, He is being, He is the first 
principle of the department of action, as He is good, of morals; as He is mind, 
on the other hand, He is the first principle of reasoning and of judgment. 
Whence also He alone is Teacher, who is the only Son of the Most High Father, 
the Instructor of men. 
CHAPTER XXVI -- HOW THE PERFECT MAN TREATS THE BODY AND THE THINGS OF THE 
WORLD. 
Those, then, who run down created existence and vilify the body are wrong; 
not considering that the frame of man was formed erect for the contemplation of 
heaven, and that the organization of the senses tends to knowledge; and that the 
members and parts are arranged for good, not for pleasure. Whence this abode 
becomes receptive of the soul which is most precious to God; and is dignified 
with the Holy Spirit through the sanctification of soul and body, perfected with 
the perfection of the Saviour. And the succession of the three virtues is found 
in the Gnostic, who morally, physically, and logically occupies himself with 
God. For wisdom is the knowledge of things divine and human; and righteousness 
is the concord of the parts of the soul; and holiness is the service of God. But 
if one were to say that he disparaged the flesh, and generation on account of 
it, by quoting Isaiah, who says, "All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man 
as the flower of grass: the grass is withered, and the flower has fallen; but 
the word of the Lord endureth for ever; " let him hear the Spirit interpreting 
the matter in question by Jeremiah, "And I scattered them like dry sticks, that 
are made to fly by the wind into the desert. This is the lot and portion of your 
disobedience, saith the Lord. As thou hast forgotten Me, and hast trusted in 
lies, so will I discover thy hinder parts to thy face; and thy disgrace shall be 
seen, thy adultery, and thy neighing," and so on. For "the flower of grass," and 
"walking after the flesh," and "being carnal," according to the apostle, are 
those who are in their sins. The soul of man is confessedly the better part of 
man, and the body the inferior. But neither is the soul good by nature, nor, on 
the other hand, is the body bad by nature. Nor is that which is not good 
straightway bad. For there are things which occupy a middle place, and among 
them are things to be preferred, and things to be re jected. The constitution of 
man, then, which has its place among things of sense, was necessarily composed 
of things diverse, but not opposite -- body and soul. 
Always therefore the good actions, as better, attach to the better and ruling 
spirit; and voluptuous and sinful actions are attributed to the worse, the 
sinful one. 
Now the soul of the wise man and Gnostic, as sojourning in the body, conducts 
itself towards it gravely and respectfully, not with inordinate affections, as 
about to leave the tabernacle if the time of departure summon. "I am a stranger 
in the earth, and a sojourner with you," it is said. And hence Basilides says, 
that he apprehends that the election are strangers to the world, being 
supramundane by nature. But this is not the case. For all things are of one God. 
And no one is a stranger to the world by nature, their essence being one, and 
God one. But the elect man dwells as a sojourner, knowing all things to be 
possessed and disposed of; and he makes use of the things which the Pythagoreans 
make out to be the threefold good things. The body, too, as one sent on a 
distant pilgrimage, uses inns and dwellings by the way, having care of the 
things of the world, of the places where he halts; but leaving his 
dwelling-place and property without excessive emotion; readily following him 
that leads him away from life; by no means and on no occasion turning back; 
giving thanks for his sojourn, and blessing [God] for his departure, embracing 
the mansion that is in heaven "For we know, that, if the earthly house of our 
tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with 
hands, eternal in the heavens. For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, 
desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven: if so be that 
being clothed we shall not be found naked. For we by sight," as the apostle 
says; walk by faith, not "and we are willing rather to be absent from the body, 
and present with God." The rather is in comparison. And comparison obtains in 
the case of things that fall under resemblance; as the more valiant man is more 
valiant among the valiant, and most valiant among cowards. Whence he adds, 
"Wherefore we strive, whether present or absent, to be accepted with Him," that 
is, God, whose work and creation are all things, both the world and things 
supramundane. I admire Epicharmus, who clearly says: "Endowed with pious mind, 
you will not, in dying, Suffer aught evil. The spirit will dwell in heaven 
above;" and the minstrel who sings: "The souls of the wicked flit about below 
the skies on earth, In murderous pains beneath inevitable yokes of evils; But 
those of the pious dwell in the heavens, Hymning in songs the Great, the Blessed 
One." 
The soul is not then sent down from heaven to what is worse. For God works 
all things up to what is better. But the soul which has chosen the best life -- 
the life that is from God and righteousness -- exchanges earth for heaven. With 
reason therefore, Job, who had attained to knowledge, said, "Now I know that 
thou canst do all things; and nothing is impossible to Thee. For who tells me of 
what I know not, great and wonderful things with which I was unacquainted? And I 
felt myself vile, considering myself to be earth and ashes." For he who, being 
in a state of ignorance, is sinful, "is earth and ashes; "while he who is in a 
state of knowledge, being assimilated as far as possible to God, is already 
spiritual, and so elect. And that Scripture calls the senseless and disobedient 
"earth," will be made clear by Jeremiah the prophet, saying, in reference to 
Joachim and his brethren "Earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord; Write this 
man, as man excommunicated." And another prophet says again, "Hear, O heaven; 
and give ear, O earth," calling understanding "ear," and the soul of the 
Gnostic, that of the man who has applied himself to the contemplation of heaven 
and divine things, and in this way has become an Israelite, "heaven." For again 
he calls him who has made ignorance and hardness of heart his choice, 
"earth."And the expression" give ear" he derives from the "organs of hearing, 
the ears," attributing carnal things to those who cleave to the things of sense. 
Such are they of whom Micah the prophet says, "Hear the word of the Lord, ye 
peoples who dwell with pangs." And Abraham said, "By no means. The Lord is He 
who judgeth the earth; " "since he that believeth not, is," according to the 
utterance of the Saviour, "condemned already." And there is written in the Kings 
the judgment and sentence of the Lord, which stands thus: "The Lord hears the 
righteous, but the wicked He saveth not, because they do not desire to know 
God." For the Almighty will not accomplish what is absurd. What do the heresies 
say to this utterance, seeing Scripture proclaims the Almighty God to be good, 
and not the author of evil and wrong, if indeed ignorance arises from one not 
knowing? But God does nothing absurd. "For this God," it is said, "is our God, 
and there is none to save besides Him." "For there is no unrighteous ness with 
God," according to the apostle. And clearly yet the prophet teaches the will of 
God, and the gnostic proficiency, in these words: "And now, Israel, what doth 
the Lord God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and walk in all His 
ways, and love Him, and serve Him alone?" He asks of thee, who hast the power of 
choosing salvation. What is it, then, that the Pythagoreans mean when they bid 
us "pray with the voice"? As seems to me, not that they thought the Divinity 
could not hear those who speak silently, but because they wished prayers tO be 
right, which no one would be ashamed to make in the knowledge of many. We shall, 
however, treat of prayer in due course by and by. But we ought to have works 
that cry aloud, as becoming "those who walk in the day." "Let thy works shine," 
and behold a man and his works before his face. "For behold God and His works." 
For the gnostic must, as far as is possible, imitate God. And the poets call the 
elect in their pages godlike and gods, and equal to the gods, and equal in 
sagacity to Zeus, and having counsels like the gods, and resembling the gods, -- 
nibbling, as seems to me, at the expression, "in the image and likeness." 
Euripides accordingly says, "Golden wings are round my back, and I am shod 
with the winged sandals of the Sirens; and I shall go aloft into the wide ether, 
to hold convene with Zeus." 
But I shall pray the Spirit of Christ to wing me to my Jerusalem. For the 
Stoics say that heaven is properly a city, but places here on earth are not 
cities; for they are called so, but are not. For a city is an important thing, 
and the people a decorous body, and a multitude of men regulated by law as the 
church by the word -- a city on earth impregnable -- free from tyranny; a 
product of the divine will on earth as in heaven. Images of this city the poets 
create with their pen. For the Hyperboreans, and the Arimaspian cities, and the 
Elysian plains, are commonwealths of just men. And we know Plato's city placed 
as a pattern in heaven. 


