
The Octavius of Minucius Felix











Minucius Felix 
Octavius
CHAP. I.--ARGUMENT: MINUCIUS RELATES HOW DELIGHTFUL TO HIM IS THE 
RECOLLECTION OF THE THINGS THAT HAD HAPPENED TO HIM WITH OCTAVIUS WHILE HE WAS 
ASSOCIATED WITH HIM AT ROME, AND ESPECIALLY OF THIS DISPUTATION. 
WHEN I consider and mentally review my remembrance of Octavius, my excellent 
and most faithful companion, the sweetness and charm of the man so clings to me, 
that I appear to myself in some sort as if I were returning to past times, and 
not merely recalling in my recollection things which have long since happened 
and gone by. Thus, in the degree in which the actual contemplation of him is 
withdrawn from my eyes, it is bound up in my heart and in my most intimate 
feelings. And it was not without reason that that remarkable and holy man, when 
he departed this life, left to me an unbounded regret for him, especially since 
he himself also glowed with such a love for me at all times, that, whether in 
matters of amusement or of business, he agreed with me in similarity of will, in 
either liking or disliking the same things. You would think that one mind had 
been shared between us two. Thus he alone was my confidant in my loves, my 
companion in my mistakes; and when, after the gloom had been dispersed, I 
emerged from the abyss of darkness into the light of wisdom and truth, he did 
not cast off his associate, but--what is more glorious still--he outstripped 
him. And thus, when my thoughts were traversing the entire period of our 
intimacy and friendship, the direction of my mind fixed itself chiefly on that 
discourse of his, wherein by very weighty arguments he converted Caecilius, who 
was still cleaving to superstitious vanities, to the true religion. 
CHAP. II--ARGUMENT: THE ARRIVAL OF OCTAVIUS AT ROME DURING THE TIME OF THE 
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS WAS VERY AGREEABLE TO MINUCIUS. BOTH OF THEM WERE DESIROUS OF 
GOING TO THE MARINE BATHS OF OSTIA, WITH CAeCILIUS ASSOCIATED WITH THEM AS A 
COMPANION OF MINUCIUS. ON THEIR WAY TOGETHER TO THE SEA, CAECILlUS, SEEING AN 
IMAGE OF SERAPIS, RAISES HIS HAND TO HIS MOUTH, AND WORSHIPS IT. 
For, for the sake of business and of visiting me, Octavius had hastened to 
Rome, having left his home, his wife, his children, and that which is most 
attractive in children, while yet their innOCent years are attempting only 
half-uttered words,--a language all the sweeter for the very imperfection of the 
faltering tongue. And at this his arrival I cannot express in words with how 
great and with how impatient a joy I exulted, since the unexpected presence of a 
man so very dear to me greatly enhanced my gladness. Therefore, after one or two 
days, when the frequent enjoyment of our continual association had satisfied the 
craving of affection, and when we had ascertained by mutual narrative all that 
we were ignorant of about one another by reason of our separation, we agreed to 
go to that very pleasant city Ostia, that my body might have a soothing and 
appropriate remedy for drying its humours from the marine bathing, especially as 
the holidays of the courts at the vintage-time had released me from my cares. 
For at that time, after the summer days, the autumn season was tending to a 
milder temperature. And thus, when in the early morning we were going towards 
the sea along the shore (of the Tiber), that both the breathing air might gently 
refresh our limbs, and that the yielding sand might sink down under our easy 
footsteps with excessive pleasure; Caecilius, observing an image of Serapis, 
raised his hand to his mouth, as is the custom of the superstitious common 
people, and pressed a kiss on it with his lips. 
CHAP. III.--ARGUMENT: OCTAVIUS, DISPLEASED AT THE ACT OF THIS SUPERSTITIOUS 
MAN, SHARPLY REPROACHES MINUCIUS, ON THE GROUND THAT THE DISGRACE OF THIS WICKED 
DEED IS REFLECTED NOT LESS ON HIMSELF, AS CAECILIUS"/b> HOST, THAN ON 
CAECILIUS. 
Then Octavius said: "It is not the part of a good man, my brother Marcus, so 
to desert a man who abides by your side at home and abroad, in this blindness of 
vulgar ignorance, as that you should suffer him in such broad daylight as this 
to give himself up to stones, however they may be carved into images, anointed 
and crowned; since you know that the disgrace of this his error redounds in no 
less degree to your discredit than to his own." With this discourse of his we 
passed over the distance between the city and the sea, and we were now walking 
on the broad and open shore There the gently rippling wave was smoothing the 
outside sands as if it would level them for a promenade; and as the sea is 
always restless, even when the winds are lulled, it came up on the shore, 
although not with waves crested and foaming, yet with waves crisped and cuffing. 
Just then we were excessively delighted at its vagaries, as on the very 
threshold of the water we were wetting the soles of our feet, and it now by 
turns approaching broke upon our feet, and now the wave retiring and retracing 
its course, sucked itself back into itself. And thus, slowly and quietly going 
along, we tracked the coast of the gently bending shore, beguiling the way with 
stories. These stories were related by Octavius, who was discoursing on 
navigation. But when we had occupied a sufficiently reasonable time of our walk 
with discourse, retracing the same way again, we trod the path with reverted 
footsteps. And when we came to that place where the little ships, drawn up on an 
oaken framework, were lying at rest supported above the (risk of) ground-rot, we 
saw some boys eagerly gesticulating as they played at throwing shells into the 
sea. This play is: To choose a shell from the shore, rubbed and made smooth by 
the tossing of the waves; to take hold of the shell in a horizontal position 
with the fingers; to whiff it along sloping and as low down as possible upon the 
waves, that when thrown it may either skim the back of the wave, or may swim as 
it glides along with a smooth impulse, or may spring up as it cleaves the top of 
the waves, and rise as if lifted up with repeated springs. That boy claimed to 
be conqueror whose shell both went out furthest, and leaped up most frequently. 
CHAP. IV.--ARGUMENT: CAeCILIUS, SOMEWHAT GRIEVED AT THIS KIND OF REBUKE WHICH 
FOR HIS SAKE MINUCIUS HAD HAD TO BEAR FROM OCTAVIUS, BEGS TO ARGUE WITH OCTAVIUS 
ON THE TRUTH OF HIS RELIGION. OCTAVIUS WITH HIS COMPANION CONSENTS, AND MINUCIUS 
SITS IN THE MIDDLE BETWEEN CAeCILIUS AND OCTAVIUS. 
And thus, while we were all engaged in the enjoyment of this spectacle, 
Caecilius was paying no attention, nor laughing at the contest; but silent, 
uneasy, standing apart, confessed by his countenance that he was grieving for I 
knew not what. To whom I said: "What is the matter? Wherefore do I not 
recognise, Caecilius, your usual liveliness? and why do I seek vainly for that 
joyousness which is characteristic of your glances even in serious matters?" 
Then said he: "For some time our friend Octavius' speech has bitterly vexed and 
worried me, in which he, attacking you, reproached you with negligence, that he 
might under cover of that charge more seriously condemn me for ignorance. 
Therefore I shall proceed further: the matter is now wholly and entirely between 
me and Octavius. If he is willing that I, a man of that form of opinion, should 
argue with him, he will now at once perceive that it is easier to hold an 
argument among his comrades, than to engage in close conflict after the manner 
of the philosophers. Let us be seated on those rocky barriers that are cast 
there for the protection of the baths, and that run far out into the deep, that 
we may be able both to rest after our journey, and to argue with more 
attention," And at his word we sat down, so that, by covering me on either side, 
they sheltered me in the midst of the three. Nor was this a matter of 
observance, or of rank, or of honour, because friendship always either receives 
or makes equals; but that, as an arbitrator, and being near to both, I might 
give my attention, and being in the middle, I might separate the two. Then 
Caecilius began thus: 
CHAP. V.--ARGUMENT: CAECILIUS BEGINS HIS ARGUMENT FIRST OF ALL BY REMINDING 
THEM THAT IN HUMAN AFFAIRS ALL THINGS ARE DOUBTFUL AND UNCERTAIN, AND THAT 
THEREFORE IT IS TO BE LAMENTED THAT CHRISTIANS, WHO FOR THE MOST PART ARE 
UNTRAINED AND ILLITERATE PERSONS, SHOULD DARE TO DETERMINE ON ANYTHING WITH 
CERTAINTY CONCERNING THE CHIEF OF THINGS AND THE DIVINE MAJESTY: HENCE HE ARGUES 
THAT THE WORLD IS GOVERNED BY NO PROVIDENCE, AND CONCLUDES THAT IT IS BETTER TO 
ABIDE BY THE RECEIVED FORMS OF RELIGION. 
"Although to you, Marcus my brother, the subject on which especially we are 
inquiring is not in doubt, inasmuch as, being carefully informed in both kinds 
of life, you have rejected the one and assented to the other, yet in file 
present case your mind must be so fashioned that you may hold the balance of a 
most just judge, nor lean with a disposition to one side (more than another), 
lest your decision may seem not to arise so much from our arguments, as to be 
originated from your own perceptions. Accordingly, if you sit in judgment on me, 
as a person who is new, and as one ignorant of either side, there is no 
difficulty in making plain that all things in human affairs are doubtful, 
uncertain, and unsettled, and that all things are rather probable than true. 
Wherefore it is the less wonderful that some, from the weariness of thoroughly 
investigating truth, should rashly succumb to any sort of opinion rather than 
persevere in exploring it with persistent diligence. And thus all men must be 
indignant, all men must feel pain, that certain persons--and these unskilled in 
learning, strangers to literature, without knowledge even of sordid arts--should 
dare to determine on any certainty concerning the nature at large, and the 
(divine) majesty, of which so many of the multitude of sects in all ages (still 
doubt), and philosophy itself deliberates still. Nor without reason; since the 
mediocrity of human intelligence is so far from (the capacity of) divine 
investigation, that neither is it given us to know, nor is it permitted to 
search, nor is it religious to ravish, the things that are supported in suspense 
in the heaven above us, nor the things which are deeply submerged below the 
earth; and we may rightly seem sufficiently happy and sufficiently prudent, if, 
according to that ancient oracle of the sage, we should know ourselves 
intimately. But even if we indulge in a senseless and useless labour, and wander 
away beyond the limits proper to our humility, and though, inclined towards the 
earth, we transcend with daring ambition heaven itself, and the very stars, let 
us at least not entangle this error with vain and fearful opinions. Let the 
seeds of all things have been in the beginning condensed by a nature combining 
them in itself--what God is the author here? Let the members of the whole world 
be by fortuitous concurrences united digested, fashioned--what God is the 
contriver? Although fire may have lit up the stars; although (the lightness of) 
its own material may have suspended the heaven; although its own material may 
have established the earth by its weight; and although the sea may have flowed 
in from moisture, whence is this religion? 
Whence this fear? What is this superstition? Man, and every animal which is 
born, inspired with life, and nourished, is as a voluntary concretion of the 
elements, into which again man and every animal is divided, resolved, and 
dissipated. So all things flow back again into their source, and are turned 
again into themselves, without any artificer, or judge, or creator. Thus the 
seeds of fires, being gathered together, cause other suns, and again others, 
always to shine forth. Thus the vapours of the earth, being exhaled, cause the 
mists always to grow, which being condensed and collected, cause the clouds to 
rise higher; and when they fall, cause the rains to flow, the winds to blow, the 
hail to rattle down; or when the clouds clash together, they cause the thunder 
to bellow, the lightnings to grow red, the thunderbolts to gleam forth. 
Therefore they fall everywhere, they rush on the mountains, they strike the 
trees; without any choice, they blast places sacred and profane; they smite 
mischievous men, and often, too, religious men. Why should I speak of tempests, 
various and uncertain, wherein the attack upon all things is tossed about 
without any order or discrimination?--in shipwrecks, that the fates of good and 
bad men are jumbled together, their deserts confounded?--in conflagrations, that 
the destruction of innocent and guilty is united?--and when with the 
plague-taint of the sky a region is stained, that all perish without 
distinction?--and when the heat of war is raging, that it is the better men who 
generally fall? In peace also, not only is wickedness put on the same level with 
(the lot of) those who are better, but it is also regarded in such esteem, that, 
in the case of many people, you know not whether their depravity is most to be 
detested, or their felicity to be desired. But if the world were governed by 
divine providence and by the authority of any deity, Phalaris and Dionysius 
would never have deserved to reign, Rutilius and Camillus would never have 
merited banishment, Socrates would never have merited the poison. Behold the 
fruit-bearing trees, behold the harvest already white, the vintage, already 
dropping, is destroyed by the rain, is beaten down by the hail. Thus either an 
uncertain truth is hidden from us, and kept back; or, which is rather to be 
believed, in these various and wayward chances, fortune, unrestrained by laws, 
is ruling over us. 
CHAP. VI.--ARGUMENT: THE OBJECT OF ALL NATIONS, AND ESPECIALLY OF THE ROMANS, 
IN WORSHIPPING THEIR DIVINITIES, HAS BEEN TO ATTAIN FOR THEIR WORSHIP THE 
SUPREME DOMINION OVER THE WHOLE EARTH. 
"Since, then, either fortune is certain or nature is uncertain, how much more 
reverential and better it is, as the high priests of truth, to receive the 
teaching of your ancestors, to cultivate the religions handed down to you, to 
adore the gods whom you were first trained by your parents to fear rather than 
to know with familiarity; not to assert an opinion concerning the deities, but 
to believe your forefathers, who, while the age was still untrained in the 
birth-times of the world itself, deserved to have gods either propitious to 
them, or as their kings. Thence, therefore, we see through all empires, and 
provinces, and cities, that each people has its national rites of worship, and 
adores its local gods: as the Eleusinians worship Ceres; the Phrygians, Mater; 
the Epidaurians, Aesculapius; the Chaldaeans; Belus; the Syrians, Astarte; the 
Taurians, Diana; the Gauls, Mercurius; the Romans, all divinities. Thus their 
power and authority has occupied the circuit of the whole world: thus it has 
propagated its empire beyond the paths of the sun, and the bounds of the ocean 
itself; in that in their arms they practise a religious valour; in that they 
fortify their city with the religions of sacred rites, with chaste virgins, with 
many honours, and the names of priests; in that, when besieged and taken, all 
but the Capitol alone, they worship the gods which when angry any other people 
would have despised; and through the lines of the Gauls, marvelling at the 
audacity of their superstition, they move unarmed with weapons, but armed with 
the worship of their religion; while in the city of an enemy, when taken while 
still in the fury of victory, they venerate the conquered deities; while in all 
directions they seek for the gods of the strangers, and make them their own; 
while they build altars even to unknown divinities, and to the Manes. Thus, in 
that they acknowledge the sacred institutions of all nations, they have also 
deserved their dominion. Hence the perpetual course of their veneration has 
continued, which is not weakened by the long lapse of time, but increased, 
because antiquity has been accustomed to attribute to ceremonies and temples so 
much of sanctity as it has ascribed of age. 
CHAP. VII.--ARGUMENT: THAT THE ROMAN AUSPICES AND AUGURIES HAVE BEEN 
NEGLECTED WITH ILL CONSEQUENCES, BUT HAVE BEEN OBSERVED WITH GOOD FORTUNE. 
"Nor yet by chance (for I would venture in the meantime even to take for 
granted the point in debate, and so to err on the safe side) have our ancestors 
succeeded in their undertakings either by the observance of auguries, or by 
consulting the entrails, or by the institution of sacred rites, or by the 
dedication of temples. Consider what is the record of books. You will at once 
discover that they have inaugurated the rites of all kinds of religions, either 
that the divine indulgence might be rewarded, or that the threatening anger 
might be averted, or that the wrath already swelling and raging might be 
appeased. Witness the Idaean mother, who at her arrival both approved the 
chastity of the matron, and delivered the city from the fear of the enemy. 
Witness the statues of the equestrian brothers, consecrated even as they had 
showed themselves on the lake, who, with horses breathless, foaming, and 
smoking, announced the victory over the Persian on the same day on which they 
had gained it. Witness the renewal of the games of the offended Jupiter, on 
account of the dream of a man of the people. And an acknowledged witness is the 
devotion of the Decii. Witness also Curtius, who filled up the opening of the 
profound chasm either with the mass, or with the glory of his knighthood. 
Moreover, more frequently than we wished have the auguries, when despised, borne 
witness to the presence of the gods:, thus Allia is an unlucky name; thus the 
battle of Claudius and Junius is not a battle against the Carthaginians, but a 
fatal shipwreck. Thus, that Thrasymenus might be both swollen and discoloured 
with the blood of the Romans, Flaminius despised the auguries; and that we might 
again demand our standards from the Parthians, Crassus both deserved and scoffed 
at the imprecations of the terrible sisters. I omit the old stories, which are 
many, and I pass by the songs of the poets about the births, and the gifts, and 
the rewards of the gods. Moreover, I hasten over the fates predicted by the 
oracles, lest antiquity should appear to you excessively fabulous. Look at the 
temples and lanes of the gods by which the Roman city is both protected and 
armed: they are more august by the deities which are their inhabitants, who are 
present and constantly dwelling in them, than opulent by the ensigns and gifts 
of worship. Thence therefore the prophets, filled with the god, and mingled with 
him, collect futurity beforehand, give caution for dangers, medicine for 
diseases, hope for the afflicted, help to the wretched, solace to calamities, 
alleviation to labours. Even in our repose we see, we hear, we acknowledge the 
gods, whom in the day-time we impiously deny, refuse, and abjure. 
CHAP. VIII.--ARGUMENT: THE IMPIOUS TEMERITY OF THEODORUS, DIAGORAS, AND 
PROTAGORAS IS NOT AT ALL TO BE ACQUIESCED IN, WHO WISHED EITHER ALTOGETHER TO 
GET RID OF THE RELIGION OF THE GODS, OR AT LEAST TO WEAKEN IT. BUT INFINITELY 
LESS TO BE ENDURED IS THAT SKULKING AND LIGHT-SHUNNING PEOPLE OF THE CHRISTIANS, 
WHO REJECT THE GODS, AND WHO, FEARING TO DIE AFTER DEATH, DO NOT IN THE MEANTIME 
FEAR TO DIE. 
"Therefore, since the consent of all nations concerning the existence of the 
immortal gods remains established, although their nature or their origin remains 
uncertain, I suffer nobody swelling with such boldness, and with I know not what 
irreligious wisdom, who would strive to undermine or weaken this religion, so 
ancient, so useful, so wholesome, even although he may he Theodorus of Cyrene, 
or one who is before him Diagoras the Melian, to whom antiquity applied the 
surname of Atheist,--both of whom, by asseverating that there were no gods, took 
away all the fear by which humanity is ruled, and all veneration absolutely; yet 
never will they prevail in this discipline of impiety, under the name and 
authority of their pretended philosophy. When the men of Athens both expelled 
Protagoras of Abdera, and in public assembly burnt his writings, because he 
disputed deliberately rather than profanely concerning the divinity, why is it 
not a thing to be lamented, that men (for you will bear with my making use 
pretty freely of the force of the plea that I have undertaken)--that men, I say, 
of a reprobate, unlawful, and desperate faction, should rage against the gods? 
who, having gathered together from the lowest dregs the more unskilled, and 
women, credulous and, by the facility of their sex, yielding, establish a herd 
of a profane conspiracy, which is leagued together by nightly meetings, and 
solemn fasts and inhuman meats--not by any sacred rite, but by that which 
requires expiation--a people skulking and shunning the light, silent in public, 
but garrulous in corners. They despise the temples as dead-houses, they reject 
the gods, they laugh at sacred things; wretched, they pity, if they are allowed, 
the priests; half naked themselves, they despise honours and purple robes. Oh, 
wondrous folly and incredible audacity! they despise present torments, although 
they i fear those which are uncertain and future; and while they fear to die 
after death, they do not fear to die for the present: so does a deceitful hope 
soothe their fear with the solace of a revival. 
CHAP. IX.--ARGUMENT: THE RELIGION OF THE CHRISTIANS IS FOOLISH, INASMUCH AS 
THEY WORSHIP A CRUCIFIED MAN, AND EVEN THE INSTRUMENT ITSELF OF HIS PUNISHMENT. 
THEY ARE SAID TO WORSHIP THE HEAD OF AN ASS, AND EVEN THE NATURE OF THEIR 
FATHER. THEY ARE INITIATED BY THE SLAUGHTER AND THE BLOOD OF AN INFANT, AND IN 
SHAMELESS DARKNESS THEY ARE ALL MIXED UP IN AN UNCERTAIN MEDLEY. 
"And now, as wickeder things advance more fruitfully, and abandoned manners 
creep on day by day, those abominable shrines of an impious assembly are 
maturing themselves throughout the whole world. Assuredly this confederacy ought 
to be rooted out and execrated. They know one another by secret marks and 
insignia, and they love one another almost before they know one another. 
Everywhere also there is mingled among them a certain religion of lust, and they 
call one another promiscuously brothers and sisters, that even a not unusual 
debauchery may by the intervention of that sacred name become incestuous: it is 
thus that their vain and senseless superstition glories in crimes. Nor, 
concerning these things, would intelligent report speak of things so great and 
various, and requiring to be prefaced by an apology, unless truth were at the 
bottom of it. I hear that they adore the head of an ass, that basest of 
creatures, consecrated by I know not what silly persuasion,--a worthy and 
appropriate religion for such manners. Some say that they worship the virilia of 
their pontiff and priest, and adore the nature, as it were, of their common 
parent. I know not whether these things are false; certainly suspicion is 
applicable to secret and nocturnal rites; and he who explains their ceremonies 
by reference to a man punished by extreme suffering for his wickedness, and to 
the deadly wood of the cross, appropriates fitting altars for reprobate and 
wicked men, that they may worship what they deserve. Now the story about the 
initiation of young novices is as much to be detested as it is well known. An 
infant covered over with meal, that it may deceive the unwary, is placed before 
him who is to be stained with their rites: this infant is slain by the young 
pupil, who has been urged on as if to harmless blows on the surface of the meal, 
with dark and secret wounds. 
Thirstily--O horror!--they lick up its blood; eagerly they divide its limbs. 
By this victim they are pledged together; with this consciousness of wickedness 
they are covenanted to mutual silence. Such sacred rites as these are more foul 
than any sacrileges. And of their banqueting it is well known all men speak of 
it everywhere; even the speech of our Cirtensian testifies to it. On a solemn 
day they assemble at the feast, with all their children, sisters, mothers, 
people of every sex and of every age. There, after much feasting, when the 
fellowship has grown warm, and the fervour of incestuous lust has grown hot with 
drunkenness, a dog that has been tied to the chandelier is provoked, by throwing 
a small piece of offal beyond the length of a line by which he is bound, to rush 
and spring; and thus the conscious light being overturned and extinguished in 
the shameless darkness, the connections of abominable lust involve them in the 
uncertainty of fate. Although not all in fact, yet in consciousness all are 
alike incestuous, since by the desire of all of them everything is sought for 
which can happen in the act of each individual. 
CHAP. X.--ARGUMENT: WHATEVER THE CHRISTIANS WORSHIP, THEY STRIVE IN EVERY WAY 
TO CONCEAL: THEY HAVE NO ALTARS, NO TEMPLES, NO ACKNOWLEDGED IMAGES. THEIR GOD, 
LIKE THAT OF THE JEWS, IS SAID TO BE ONE, WHOM, ALTHOUGH THEY ARE NEITHER ABLE 
TO SEE NOR TO SHOW, THEY THINK NEVERTHELESS TO BE MISCHIEVOUS, RESTLESS, AND 
UNSEASONABLY INQUISITIVE. 
"I purposely pass over many things, for those that I have mentioned are 
already too many; and that all these, or the greater part of them, are true, the 
obscurity of their vile religion declares. For why do they endeavour with such 
pains to conceal and to cloak whatever they worship, since honourable things 
always rejoice in publicity, while crimes are kept secret? Why have they no 
altars, no temples, no acknowledged images? Why do they never speak openly, 
never congregate freely, unless for the reason that what they adore and conceal 
is either worthy of punishment, or something to be ashamed of? Moreover, whence 
or who is he, or where is the one God, solitary, desolate, whom no free people, 
no kingdoms, and not even Roman superstition, have known? The lonely and 
miserable nationality of the Jews worshipped one God, and one peculiar to 
itself; but they worshipped him openly, with temples, with altars, with victims, 
and with ceremonies; and he has so little force or power, that he is enslaved, 
with his own special nation, to the Roman deities. But the Christians, moreover, 
what wonders, what monstrosities do they feign!--that he who is their God, whom 
they can neither show nor behold, inquires diligently into the character of all, 
the acts of all, and, in fine, into their words and secret thoughts; that he 
runs about everywhere, and is everywhere present: they make him out to be 
troublesome, restless, even shamelessly inquisitive, since he is present at 
everything that is done, wanders in and out in all places, although, being 
occupied with the whole, he cannot give attention to particulars, nor can he be 
sufficient for the whole while he is busied with particulars. What! because they 
threaten conflagration to the whole world, and to the universe itself, with all 
its stars, are they meditating its destruction?--as if either the eternal order 
constituted by the divine laws of nature would be disturbed, or the league of 
all the elements would be broken up, and the heavenly structure dissolved, and 
that fabric in which it is contained and bound together would be overthrown. 
CHAP. XI.--ARGUMENT: BESIDES ASSERTING THE FUTURE CONFLAGRATION OF THE WHOLE 
WORLD, THEY PROMISE AFTERWARDS THE RESURRECTION OF OUR BODIES: AND TO THE 
RIGHTEOUS AN ETERNITY OF MOST BLESSED LIFE; TO THE UNRIGHTEOUS, OF EXTREME 
PUNISHMENT. 
"And, not content with this wild opinion, they add to it and associate with 
it old women's fables: they say that they will rise again after death, and 
ashes, and dust; and with I know not what confidence, they believe by turns in 
one another's lies: you would think that they had already lived again. It is a 
double evil and a twofold madness to denounce destruction to the heaven and the 
stars, which we leave just as we find them, and to promise eternity to 
ourselves, who are dead and extinct--who, as we are born, so also perish! It is 
for this cause, doubtless, also that they execrate our funeral piles, and 
condemn our burials by fire, as if every body, even although it be withdrawn 
from the flames, were not, nevertheless, resolved into the earth by lapse of 
years and ages, and as if it mattered not whether wild beasts tore the body to 
pieces, or seas consumed it, or the ground covered it, or the flames carried it 
away; since for the carcases every mode of sepulture is a penalty if they feel 
it; if they feel it not, in the very quickness of their destruction there is 
relief. Deceived by this error, they promise to themselves, as being good, a 
blessed and perpetual life after their death; to others, as being unrighteous, 
eternal punishment. Many things occur to me to say in addition, if the limits of 
my discourse did not hasten me. I have already shown, and take no more pains to 
prove, that they themselves are unrighteous; although, even if I should allow 
them to be righteous, yet your agreement also concurs with the opinions of many, 
that guilt and innocence are attributed by fate. For whatever we do, as some 
ascribe it to fate, so you refer it to God: thus it is according to your sect to 
believe that men will, not of their own accord, but as elected to will. 
Therefore you feign an iniquitous judge, who punishes in men, not their will, 
but their destiny. Yet I should be glad to be informed whether or no you rise 
again with bodies; and if so, with what bodies--whether with the same or with 
renewed bodies? Without a body? Then, as far as I know, there will neither be 
mind, nor soul, nor life. With the same body? But this has already been 
previously destroyed. With another body? Then it is a new man who is born, not 
the former one restored; and yet so long a time has passed away, innumerable 
ages have flowed by, and what single individual has returned from the dead 
either by the fate of Protesilaus, with permission to sojourn even for a few 
hours, or that we might believe it for an example? All such figments of an 
unhealthy belief, and vain sources of comfort, with which deceiving poets have 
trifled in the sweetness of their verse, have been disgracefully remoulded by 
you, believing undoubtingly on your God. 
CHAP. XII.--ARGUMENT: MOREOVER, WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THE CHRISTIANS THEMSELVES 
AFTER DEATH, MAY BE ANTICIPATED FROM THE FACT THAT EVEN NOW THEY ARE DESTITUTE 
OF ALL MEANS, AND ARE AFFLICTED WITH THE HEAVIEST CALAMITIES AND MISERIES. 
"Neither do you at least take experience from things present, how the 
fruitless expectations of vain promise deceive you. Consider, wretched 
creatures, (from your lot) while you are yet living, what is threatening you 
after death. Behold, a portion of you--and, as you declare, the larger and 
better portion--are in want, are cold, are labouring in hard work and hunger; 
and God suffers it, He feigns; He either is not willing or not able to assist 
His people; and thus He is either weak or inequitable. Thou, who dreamest over a 
posthumous immortality, when thou art shaken by danger, when thou art consumed 
with fever, when thou art torn with pain, dost thou not then feel thy real 
condition? Dost thou not then acknowledge thy frailty? Poor wretch, art thou 
unwillingly convinced of thine infirmity, and wilt not confess it? But I omit 
matters that are common to all alike. Lo, for you there are threats, 
punishments, tortures, and crosses; and that no longer as objects of adoration, 
but as tortures to be undergone; fires also, which you both predict and fear. 
Where is that God who is able to help you when you come to life again, since he 
cannot help you while you are in this life? Do not the Romans, without any help 
from your God, govern, reign, have the enjoyment of the whole world, and have 
dominion over you? But you in the meantime, in suspense and anxiety, are 
abstaining from respectable enjoyments. You do not visit exhibitions; you have 
no concern in public displays; you reject the public banquets, and abhor the 
sacred contests; the meats previously tasted by, and the drinks made a libation 
of upon, the altars. Thus you stand in dread of the gods whom you deny. You do 
not wreath your heads with flowers; you do not grace your bodies with odours; 
you reserve unguents for funeral rites; you even refuse garlands to your 
sepulchres--pallid, trembling beings, worthy of the pity even of our gods! Thus, 
wretched as you are, you neither rise again, nor do you live in the meanwhile. 
Therefore, if you have any wisdom or modesty, cease from prying into the regions 
of the sky, and the destinies and secrets of the world: it is sufficient to look 
before your feet, especially for untaught, uncultivated, boorish, rustic people: 
they who have no capacity for understanding civil matters, are much more denied 
the ability to discuss divine. 
CHAP. XIII.--ARGUMENT: CAECILIUS AT LENGTH CONCLUDES THAT THE NEW RELIGION IS 
TO BE REPUDIATED; AND THAT WE MUST NOT RASHLY PRONOUNCE UPON DOUBTFUL MATTERS. 
"However, if you have a desire to philosophize, let any one of you who is 
sufficiently great, imitate, if he can, Socrates the prince of wisdom. The 
answer of that man, whenever he was asked about celestial matters, is well 
known: 'What is above us is nothing to us.' Well, therefore, did he deserve from 
the oracle the testimony of singular wisdom, which oracle he himself had a 
presentiment of, that he had been preferred to all men for the reason, not that 
he had discovered all things, but because he had learnt that he knew nothing. 
And thus the confession of ignorance is the height of wisdom. From this source 
flowed the safe doubting of Arcesilas, and long after of Carneades, and of very 
many of the Academics, in questions of the highest moment, in which species of 
philosophy the unlearned can do much with caution, and the learned can do 
gloriously. What! is not the hesitation of Simonides the lyric poet to be 
admired and followed by all? Which Simonides, when he was asked by Hiero the 
tyrant what, and what like he thought the gods to be, asked first of all for a 
day to deliberate; then postponed his reply for two days; and then, when 
pressed, he added only another; and finally, when the tyrant inquired into the 
causes of such a long delay, he replied that, the longer his research continued, 
the obscurer the truth became to him. In my opinion also, things which are 
uncertain ought to be left as they are. Nor, while so many and so great men are 
deliberating, should we rashly and boldly give an opinion in another direction, 
lest either a childish superstition should be introduced, or all religion should 
be overthrown." 
CHAP. XIV.--ARGUMENT: WITH SOMETHING OF THE PRIDE OF SELF-SATISFACTION, 
CAeCILIUS URGES OCTAVIUS TO REPLY TO HIS ARGUMENTS; AND MINUCIUS WITH MODESTY 
ANSWERS HIM, THAT HE MUST NOT EXULT AT HIS OWN BY NO MEANS ORDINARY ELOQUENCE, 
AND AT THE HARMONIOUS VARIETY OF HIS ADDRESS. 
Thus far Caecilius; and smiling cheerfully (for the vehemence of his 
prolonged discourse had relaxed the ardour of his indignation), be added "And 
what does Octavius venture to reply to this, a man of the race of Plautus, who, 
while he was chief among the millers, was still the lowest of philosophers?" 
"Restrain," said I, "your self-approval against him; for it is not worthy of you 
to exult at the harmony of your discourse, before the subject shall have been 
more fully argued on both sides; especially since your reasoning is striving 
after truth, not praise. And in however great a degree your discourse has 
delighted me by its subtile variety, yet I am very deeply moved, not concerning 
the present discussion, but concerning the entire kind of disputation--that for 
the most part the condition of truth should be changed according to the powers 
of discussion, and even the faculty of perspicuous eloquence. This is very well 
known to occur by reason of the facility of the hearers, who, being distracted 
by the allurement of words from attention to things, assent without distinction 
to everything that is said, and do not separate falsehood from truth; unaware 
that even in that which is incredible them is often truth, and in verisimilitude 
falsehood. Therefore the oftener they believe bold assertions, the more 
frequently they are convinced by those who are more clever, and thus are 
continually deceived by their temerity. They transfer the blame of the judge to 
the complaint of uncertainty; so that, everything being condemned, they would 
rather that all things should be left in suspense, than that they should decide 
about matters of doubt. Therefore we must take care that we do not in such sort 
suffer from the hatred at once of all discourses, even as very many of the more 
simple kind are led to execration and hatred of men in general. For those who 
are carelessly credulous are deceived by those whom they thought worthy; and by 
and by, by a kindred error, they begin to suspect every one as wicked, and dread 
even those whom they might have regarded as excellent. Now therefore we are 
anxious--because in everything there may be argument on both sides; and on the 
one hand, the truth is for the most part obscure; and on the other side there is 
a marvellous subtlety, which sometimes by its abundance of words imitates the 
confidence of acknowledged proof--as carefully as possible to weigh each 
particular, that we may, while ready to applaud acuteness, yet elect, approve, 
and adopt those things which are right." 
CHAP. XV.--ARGUMENT: CAeCILIUS RETORTS UPON MINUCIUS, WITH SOME LITTLE 
APPEARANCE OF BEING HURT, THAT HE IS FOREGOING THE OFFICE OF A RELIGIOUS UMPIRE, 
WHEN HE IS WEAKENING THE FORCE OF HIS ARGUMENT. HE SAYS THAT IT SHOULD BE LEFT 
TO OCTAVIUS TO CONFUTE ALL THAT HE HAD ADVANCED. 
"You are withdrawing," says Caecilius, "from the office of a religious judge; 
for it is very unfair for you to weaken the force of my pleading by the 
interpolation of a very important argument, since Octavius has before him each 
thing that I have said, sound and unimpaired, if he can refute it." "What you 
are reproving," said I, "unless I am mistaken, I have brought forward for the 
common advantage, so that by a scrupulous examination we might weigh our 
decision, not by the pompous style of the eloquence, but by the solid character 
of the matter itself. Nor must our attention, as you complain, be any longer 
called away, but with absolute silence let us listen to the reply of our friend 
Januarius, who is now beckoning to us." 
CHAP. XVI.--ARGUMENT: OCTAVIUS ARRANGES HIS REPLY, AND TRUSTS THAT HE SHALL 
BE ABLE TO DILUTE THE BITTERNESS OF REPROACH WITH THE RIVER OF TRUTHFUL WORDS. 
HE PROCEEDS TO WEAKEN THE INDIVIDUAL ARGUMENTS OF CAeCILIUS. NOBODY NEED 
COMPLAIN THAT THE CHRISTIANS, UNLEARNED THOUGH THEY MAY BE, DISPUTE ABOUT 
HEAVENLY THINGS BECAUSE IT IS NOT THE AUTHORITY OF HIM WHO ARGUES, BUT THE TRUTH 
OF THE ARGUMENT ITSELF, THAT SHOULD BE CONSIDERED. 
And thus Octavius began: "I will indeed speak as I shall be able to the best 
of my powers, and you must endeavour with me to dilute the very offensive strain 
of recriminations in the river of veracious words. Nor will I disguise in the 
outset, that the opinion of my friend Natalis has swayed to and fro in such an 
erratic, vague, and slippery manner, that we are compelled to doubt whether your 
information was confused, or whether it wavered backwards and forwards by mere 
mistake. For he varied at one time from believing the gods, at another time to 
being in a state of hesitation on the subject; so that the direct purpose of my 
reply was established with the greater uncertainty, by reason of the uncertainty 
of his proposition. But in my friend Natalis--I will not allow, I do not believe 
in, any chicanery--far from his simplicity is crafty trickery. What then? As he 
who knows not the right way, when as it happens one road is separated into many, 
because he knows not the way, remains in anxiety, and dares neither make choice 
of particular roads, nor try them all; so, if a man has no stedfast judgment of 
truth, even as his unbelieving suspicion is scattered, so his doubting opinion 
is unsettled. It is therefore no wonder if Caecilius in the same way is cast 
about by the tide, and tossed hither and thither among things contrary and 
repugnant to one another; but that this may no longer be the case, I will 
convict and refute all that has been said, however diverse, confirming and 
approving the truth alone; and for the future he must neither doubt nor waver. 
And since my brother broke out in such expressions as these, that he was 
grieved, that he was vexed, that he was indignant, that he regretted that 
illiterate, poor, unskilled people should dispute about heavenly things; let him 
know that all men are begotten alike, with a capacity and ability of reasoning 
and feeling, without preference of age, sex, or dignity. Nor do they obtain 
wisdom by fortune, but have it implanted by nature; moreover, the very 
philosophers themselves, or any others who have gone forth unto celebrity as 
discoverers of arts, before they attained an illustrious name by their mental 
skill, were esteemed plebeian, untaught, half-naked. Thus it is, that rich men, 
attached to their means, have been accustomed to gaze more upon their gold than 
upon heaven, while our sort of people, though poor, have both discovered wisdom, 
and have delivered their teaching to others; whence it appears that intelligence 
is not given to wealth, nor is gotten by study, but is begotten with the very 
formation of the mind. Therefore it is nothing to be angry or to be grieved 
about, though any one should inquire, should think, should utter his thoughts 
about divine things; since what is wanted is not the authority of the arguer, 
but the truth of the argument itself: and even the more unskilled the discourse, 
the more evident the reasoning, since it is not coloured by the pomp of 
eloquence and grace; but as it is, it is sustained by the rule of right. 
CHAP. XVII.--ARGUMENT: MAN OUGHT INDEED TO KNOW HIMSELF, BUT THIS KNOWLEDGE 
CANNOT BE ATTAINED BY HIM UNLESS HE FIRST OF ALL ACKNOWLEDGES THE ENTIRE SCOPE 
OF THINGS, AND GOD HIMSELF. AND FROM THE CONSTITUTION AND FURNITURE OF THE WORLD 
ITSELF, EVERY ONE ENDOWED WITH REASON HOLDS THAT IT WAS ESTABLISHED BY GOD, AND 
IS GOVERNED AND ADMINISTERED BY HIM. 
"Neither do I refuse to admit what Caecilius earnestly endeavoured to 
maintain among the chief matters, that man ought to know himself, and to took 
around and see what he is, whence he is, why he is; whether collected together 
from the elements, or harmoniously formed of atoms, or rather made, formed, and 
animated by God. And it is this very thing which we cannot seek out and 
investigate without inquiry into the universe; since things are so coherent, so 
linked and associated together, that unless you diligently examine into the 
nature of divinity, you must be ignorant of that of humanity. Nor can you well 
perform your social duty unless you know that community of the world which is 
common to all, especially since in this respect we differ from the wild beasts, 
that while they are prone and tending to the earth, and are born to look upon 
nothing but their food, we, whose countenance is erect, whose look is turned 
towards heaven, as is our converse and reason, whereby we recognise, feel, and 
imitate God, have neither right nor reason to be ignorant of the celestial glory 
which forms itself into our eyes and senses. For it is as bad as the grossest 
sacrilege even, to seek on the ground for what you ought to find on high. 
Wherefore the rather, they who deny that this furniture of the whole world was 
perfected by the divine reason, and assert that it was heaped together by 
certain fragments casually adhering to each other, seem to me not to have either 
mind or sense, or, in fact, even sight itself. For what can possibly be so 
manifest, so confessed, and so evident, when you lift your eyes up to heaven, 
and look into the things which are below and around, than that there is some 
Deity of most excellent intelligence, by whom all nature is inspired, is moved, 
is nourished, is governed? Behold the heaven itself, how broadly it is expanded, 
how rapidly it is whirled around, either as it is distinguished in the night by 
its stars, or as it is lightened in the day by the sun, and you will know at 
once how the marvellous and divine balance of the Supreme Governor is engaged 
therein. Look also on the year, how it is made by the circuit of the sun; and 
look on the month, how the moon drives it around in her increase, her decline, 
and decay. What shall I say of the recurring changes of darkness and light; how 
there is thus provided for us an alternate restoration of labour and rest? Truly 
a more prolix discourse concerning the stars must be left to astronomers, 
whether as to how they govern the course of navigation, or bring on the season 
of ploughing or of reaping, each of which things not only needed a Supreme 
Artist and a perfect intelligence, nor only to create, to construct, and to 
arrange; but, moreover, they cannot be felt, peceived and understood without the 
highest intelligence and reason. What! when the order of the seasons and of the 
harvests is distinguished by stedfast variety, does it not attest its Author and 
Parent? As well the spring with its flowers, and the summer with its harvests, 
and the grateful maturity of autumn, and the wintry olive-gathering, are 
needful; and this order would easily be disturbed unless it were established by 
the highest intelligence. Now, how great is the providence needed, lest there 
should be nothing but winter to blast with its frost, or nothing but summer to 
scorch with its heat, to interpose the moderate temperature of autumn and 
spring, so that the unseen and harmless transitions of the year returning on its 
footsteps may glide by! Look attentively at the sea; it is bound by the law of 
its shore. Wherever there are trees, look how they are animated from the bowels 
of the earth! Consider the ocean; it ebbs and flows with alternate tides. Look 
at the fountains, how they gush in perpetual streams! Gaze on the rivers; they 
always roll on in regular courses. Why should I speak of the aptly ordered peaks 
of the mountains, the slopes of the hills, the expanses of the plains? Wherefore 
should I speak of the multiform protection provided by animated creatures 
against one another?--some armed with horns, some hedged with teeth, and shod 
with claws, and barbed with stings, or with freedom obtained by swiftness of 
feet, or by the capacity of soaring furnished by wings? The very beauty of our 
own figure especially confesses God to be its artificer: our upright stature, 
our uplooking countenance, our eyes placed at the top, as it were, for outlook; 
and all the rest of our senses as if arranged in a citadel. 
CHAP. XVIII.--ARGUMENT: MOREOVER, GOD NOT ONLY TAKES CARE OF THE UNIVERSAL 
WORLD, BUT OF ITS INDiVIDUAL PARTS. THAT BY THE DECREE OF THE ONE GOD ALL THINGS 
ARE GOVERNED, IS PROVED BY THE ILLUSTRATION OF EARTHLY EMPIRES. BUT ALTHOUGH HE, 
BEING INFINITE AND IMMENSE--AND HOW GREAT HE IS, IS KNOWN TO HIMSELF 
ALONE--CANNOT EITHER BE SEEN OR NAMED BY US, YET HIS GLORY IS BEHELD MOST 
CLEARLY WHEN THE USE OF ALL TITLES IS LAID ASIDE. 
"It would be a long matter to go through particular instances. There is no 
member in man which is not calculated both for the sake of necessity and of 
ornament; and what is more wonderful still, all have the same form, but each has 
certain lineaments modified, and thus we are each found to be unlike to one 
another, while we all appear to be like in general. What is the reason of our 
being born? what means the desire of begetting? Is it not given by God, and that 
the breasts should become full of milk as the offspring grows to maturity, and 
that the tender progeny should grow up by the nourishment afforded by the 
abundance of the milky moisture? Neither does God have care alone for the 
universe as a whole, but also for its parts. Britain is deficient in sunshine, 
but it is refreshed by the warmth of the sea that flows around it. The river 
Nile tempers the dryness of Egypt; the Euphrates cultivates Mesopotamia; the 
river Indus makes up for the want of rains, and is said both to sow and to water 
the East. Now if, on entering any house, you should behold everything refined, 
well arranged, and adorned, assuredly you would believe that a master presided 
over it, and that he himself was much better than all those excellent things. So 
in this house of the world, when you look upon the heaven and the earth, its 
providence, its ordering, its law, believe that there is a Lord and Parent of 
the universe far more glorious than the stars themselves, and the parts of the 
whole world. Unless, perchance--since there is no doubt as to the existence of 
providence--you think that it is a subject of inquiry, whether the celestial 
kingdom is governed by the power of one or by the rule of many; and this matter 
itself does not involve much trouble in opening out, to one who considers 
earthly empires, for which the examples certainly are taken from heaven. When at 
any time was there an alliance in royal authority which either began with good 
faith or ceased without bloodshed? I pass over the Persians who gathered the 
augury for their chieftainship from the neighing of horses; and I do not quote 
that absolutely dead fable of the Theban brothers. The story about the twins 
(Romulus and Remus), in respect of the dominion of shepherds, and of a cottage, 
is very well known. The wars of the son-in-law and the father-in-law were 
scattered over the whole world; and the fortune of so great an empire could not 
receive two rulers. Look at other matters. The bees have one king; the flocks 
one leader; among the herds there is one ruler. Canst thou believe that in 
heaven there is a division of the supreme power, and that the whole authority of 
that true and divine empire is sundered, when it is manifest that God, the 
Parent of all, has neither beginning nor end--that He who gives birth to all 
gives perpetuity to Himself--that He who was before the world, was Himself to 
Himself instead of the world? He orders everything, whatever it is, by a word; 
arranges it by His wisdom; perfects it by His power. He can neither be seen--He 
is brighter than light; nor can be grasped--He is purer than touch; nor 
estimated; He is greater than all perceptions; infinite, immense, and how great 
is known to Himself alone. But our heart is too limited to understand Him, and 
therefore we are then worthily estimating Him when we say that He is beyond 
estimation. I will speak out in what manner I feel. He who thinks that he knows 
the magnitude of God, is diminishing it; he who desires not to lessen it, knows 
it not. Neither must you ask a name for God. God is His name. We have need of 
names when a multitude is to be separated into individuals by the special 
characteristics of names; to God, who is alone, the name God is the whole. If I 
were to call Him Father, you would judge Him to be earthly; if a King, you would 
suspect Him to be carnal; if a Lord, you will certainly understand Him to he 
mortal. Take away the additions of names, and you will behold His glory. What! 
is it not true that I have in this matter the consent of all men? I hear the 
common people, when they lift their hands to heaven, say nothing else but Oh 
God, and God is great, and God is true, and if God shall permit. Is this the 
natural discourse of the common people, or is it the prayer of a confessing 
Christian? And they who speak of Jupiter as the chief, are mistaken in the name 
indeed, but they are in agreement about the unity of the power. 
CHAP. XIX.--ARGUMENT: MOREOVER, THE POETS HAVE CALLED HIM THE PARENT OF GODS 
AND MEN, THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS, AND THEIR MIND AND SPIRIT. AND, BESIDES, 
EVEN THE MORE EXCELLENT PHILOSOPHERS HAVE COME ALMOST TO THE SAME CONCLUSION AS 
THE CHRISTIANS ABOUT THE UNITY OF GOD. 
"I hear the poets also announcing 'the One Father of gods and men;' and that 
such is the mind of mortal men as the Parent of all has appointed His day. What 
says the Mantuan Maro? Is it not even more plain, more apposite, more true? 'In 
the beginning,' says he, 'the spirit within nourishes, and the mind infused 
stirs the heaven and the earth,' and the other members 'of the world. Thence 
arises the race of men and of cattle,' and every other kind of animal. The same 
poet in another place calls that mind and spirit God. For these are his words: 
'For that God pervades all the lands, and the tracts of the sea, and the 
profound heaven, from whom are men and cattle; from whom are rain and fire.' 
What else also is God announced to be by us, but mind, and reason, and spirit? 
Let us review, if it is agreeable, the teaching of philosophers. Although in 
varied kinds of discourse, yet in these matters you will find them concur and 
agree in this one opinion. I pass over those untrained and ancient ones who 
deserved to be called wise men for their sayings. Let Thales the Milesian be the 
first of all, for he first of all disputed about heavenly things. That same 
Thales the Milesian said that water was the beginning of things, but that God 
was that mind which from water formed all things. Ah! a higher and nobler 
account of water and spirit than to have ever been discovered by man. It was 
delivered to him by God. You see that the opinion of this original philosopher 
absolutely agrees with ours. Afterwards Anaximenes, and then Diogenes of 
Apollonia, decide that the air, infinite and unmeasured, is God. The agreement 
of these also as to the Divinity is like ours. But the description of Anaxagoras 
also is, that God is said to be the motion of an infinite mind; and the God of 
Pythagoras is the soul passing to and fro and intent, throughout the universal 
nature of things, from whom also the life of all animals is received. It is a 
known fact, that Xenophanes delivered that God was all infinity with a mind; and 
Antisthenes, that there are many gods of the people, but that one God of Nature 
was the chief of all; that Xeuxippus acknowledged as God a natural animal force 
whereby all things are governed. What says Democritus? Although the first 
discoverer of atoms, does not he especially speak of nature, which is the basis 
of forms, and intelligence, as God? Strato also himself says that God is nature. 
Moreover, Epicurus, the man who feigns either otiose gods or none at all, still 
places above all, Nature. Aristotle varies, but nevertheless assigns a unity of 
power: for at one time he says that Mind, at another the World, is God; at 
another time he sets God above the world. Heraclides of Pontus also ascribes, 
although in various ways, a divine mind to God. Theophrastus, and Zeno, and 
Chrysippus, and Cleanthes are indeed themselves of many forms of opinion but 
they are all brought back to the one fact of the unity of providence. For 
Cleanthes discoursed of God as of a mind, now of a soul, now of air, but for the 
most part of reason. Zeno, his master, will have the law of nature and of God, 
and sometimes the air, and sometimes reason, to be the beginning of all things. 
Moreover, by interpreting Juno to be the air, Jupiter the heaven, Neptune the 
sea, Vulcan to be fire, and in like manner by showing the other gods of the 
common people to be elements, he forcibly denounces and overcomes the public 
error. Chrysippus says almost the same. He believes that a divine force, a 
rational nature, and sometimes the world, and a fatal necessity, is God; and he 
follows the example of Zeno in his physiological interpretation of the poems of 
Hesiod, of Homer, and of Orpheus. Moreover, the teaching of Diogenes of Babylon 
is that of expounding and arguing that the birth of Jupiter, and the origin of 
Minerva, and this kind, are names for other things, not for gods. For Xenophon 
the Socratic says that the form of the true God cannot be seen, and therefore 
ought not to be inquired after. Aristo the Stoic says that He cannot at all be 
comprehended. And both of them were sensible of the majesty of God, while they 
despaired of understanding Him. Plato has a clearer discourse about God, both in 
the matters themselves and in the names by which he expresses them; and his 
discourse would be altogether heavenly, if it were not occasionally fouled by a 
mixture of merely civil belief. Therefore in his Timoeus Plato's God is by His 
very name the parent of the world, the artificer of the soul, the fabricator of 
heavenly and earthly things, whom both to discover he declares is difficult, on 
account of His excessive and incredible power; and when you have discovered Him, 
impossible to speak of in public. The same almost are the opinions also which 
are ours. For we both know and speak of a God who is parent of all, and never 
speak of Him in public unless we are interrogated. 
CHAP. XX.--ARGUMENT: BUT IF THE WORLD IS RULED BY PROVIDENCE AND GOVERNED BY 
THE WILL OF ONE GOD, AN IGNORANT ANTIPATHY OUGHT NOT TO CARRY US AWAY INTO THE 
ERROR OF AGREEMENT WITH IT: ALTHOUGH DELIGHTED WITH ITS OWN FABLES, IT HAS 
BROUGHT IN RIDICULOUS TRADITIONS. NOR IS IT SHOWN LESS PLAINLY THAT THE WORSHIP 
OF THE GODS HAS ALWAYS BEEN SILLY AND IMPIOUS, IN THAT THE MOST ANCIENT OF MEN 
HAVE VENERATED THEIR KINGS, THEIR ILLUSTRIOUS GENERALS, AND INVENTORS OF ARTS, 
ON ACCOUNT OF THEIR REMARKABLE DEEDS, NO OTHERWISE THAN AS GODS, 
"I have set forth the opinions almost of all the philosophers whose more 
illustrious glory it is to, have pointed out that there is one God, although 
with many names; so that any one might think either that Christians are now 
philosophers, or that philosophers were then already Christians. But if the 
world is governed by providence, and directed by the will of one God, antiquity 
of unskilled people ought not, however delighted and charmed with its own 
fables, to carry us away into the mistake of a mutual agreement, when it is 
rebutted by the opinions of its own philosophers, who are supported by the 
authority both of reason and of antiquity. For our ancestors had such an easy 
faith in falsehoods, that they rashly believed even other monstrosities as 
marvellous wonders; a manifold Scylla, a Chimaera of many forms, and a Hydra 
rising again from its auspicious wounds, and Centaurs, horses entwined with 
their riders; and whatever Report was allowed to feign, they were entirely 
willing to listen to. Why should I refer to those old wives' fables, that men 
were changed from men into birds and beasts, and from men into trees and 
flowers?--which things, if they had happened at all, would happen again; and 
because they cannot happen now, therefore never happened at all. In like manner 
with respect to the gods too, our ancestors believed carelessly, credulously, 
with untrained simplicity; While worshipping their kings religiously, desiring 
to look upon them when dead in outward forms, anxious to preserve their memories 
in statues, those things became sacred which had been taken up merely as 
consolations. Thereupon, and before the world was opened up by commerce, and 
before the nations confounded their rites and customs, each particular nation 
venerated its Founder, or illustrious Leader, or modest Queen braver than her 
sex, or the discoverer of any sort of faculty or art, as a citizen of worthy 
memory; and thus a reward Was given to the deceased, and an example to those who 
were to follow. 
CHAP. XXI.--ARGUMENT: OCTAVIUS ATTESTS THE FACT THAT MEN WERE ADOPTED AS 
GODS, BY THE TESTIMONY OF EUHEMERUS, PRODICUS, PERSAEUS, AND ALEXANDER THE 
GREAT, WHO ENUMERATE THE COUNTRY, THE BIRTHDAYS, AND THE BURIAL-PLACES OF THE 
GODS. MOREOVER HE SETS FORTH THE MOURNFUL ENDINGS, MISFORTUNES, AND DEATHS OF 
THE GODS. AND, IN ADDITION, HE LAUGHS AT THE RIDICULOUS AND DISGUSTING 
ABSURDITIES WHICH THE HEATHENS CONTINUALLY ALLEGE ABOUT THE FORM AND APPEARANCE 
OF THEIR GODS. 
"Read the writings of the Stoics, or the writings of wise men, you will 
acknowledge these facts with me. On account of the merits of their virtue or of 
some gift, Euhemerus asserts that they were esteemed gods; and he enumerates 
their birthdays, their countries, their places of sepulture, and throughout 
various provinces points out these circumstances of the Dictaean Jupiter, and of 
the Delphic Apollo, and of the Pharian Isis, and of the Eleusinian Ceres. 
Prodicus speaks of men who were taken up among the gods, because they were 
helpful to the uses of men in their wanderings, by the discovery of new kinds of 
produce. Persaeus philosophizes also to the same result; and he adds thereto, 
that the fruits discovered, and the discoverers of those same fruits, were 
called by the same names; as the passage of the comic writer runs, that Venus 
freezes without Bacchus and Ceres. Alexander the Great, the celebrated 
Macedonian, wrote in a remarkable document addressed to his mother, that under 
fear of his power there had been betrayed to him by the priest the secret of the 
gods having been men: to her he makes Vulcan the original of all, and then the 
race of Jupiter. And you behold the swallow and the cymbal of Isis, and the tomb 
of your Serapis or Osiris empty, with his limbs scattered about. Then consider 
the sacred rites themselves, and their very mysteries: you will find mournful 
deaths, misfortunes, and funerals, and the griefs and wailings of the miserable 
gods. Isis bewails, laments, and seeks after her lost son, with her Cynocephalus 
and her bald priests; and the wretched Isiacs beat their breasts, and imitate 
the grief of the most unhappy mother. By and by, when the little boy is found, 
Isis rejoices, and the priests exult, Cynocephalus the discoverer boasts, and 
they do not cease year by year either to lose what they find, or to find what 
they lose. Is it not ridiculous either to grieve for what you worship, or to 
worship that over which you grieve? Yet these were formerly Egyptian rites, and 
now are Roman ones. Ceres with her torches lighted, and surrounded s with a 
serpent, with anxiety and solicitude tracks the footsteps of Proserpine, stolen 
away in her wandering, and corrupter. These are the Eleusinian mysteries. And 
what are the sacred rites of Jupiter? His nurse is a she-goat, and as an infant 
he is taken away from his greedy father, lest he should be devoured; and 
clanging uproar is dashed out of the cymbals of the Corybantes, lest the father 
should hear the infant's wailing. Cybele of Dindymus--I am ashamed to speak of 
it--who could not entice her adulterous lover, who unhappily was pleasing to 
her, to lewdness, because she herself, as being the mother of many gods, was 
ugly and old, mutilated him, doubtless that she might make a god of the eunuch. 
On account of this story, the Galli also worship her by the punishment of their 
emasculated body. Now certainly these things are not sacred rites, but tortures. 
What are the very forms and appearances (of the gods)? do they not argue the 
contemptible and disgraceful characters of your gods? Vulcan is a lame god, and 
crippled; Apollo, smooth-faced after so many ages; AEsculapius well bearded, 
notwithstanding that he is the son of the ever youthful Apollo; Neptune with 
sea-green eyes; Minerva with eyes bluish grey; Juno with ox-eyes; Mercury with 
winged feet; Pan with hoofed feet; Saturn with feet in fetters; Janus, indeed, 
wears two faces, as if that he might walk with looks turned back; Diana 
sometimes is a huntress, with her robe girded up high; and as the Ephesian she 
has many and fruitful breasts; and when exaggerated as Trivia, she is horrible 
with three heads and with many hands. What is your Jupiter himself? Now he is 
represented in a statue as beardless, now he is set up as bearded; and when he 
is called Hammon, he has horns; and when Capitolinus, then he wields the 
thunderbolts; and when Latiaris, he is sprinkled with gore; and when Feretrius, 
he is not approached; and not to mention any further the multitude of Jupiters, 
the monstrous appearances of Jupiter are as numerous as his names. Erigone was 
hanged from a noose, that as a virgin she might be glowing among the stars. The 
Castors die by turns, that they may live. AEsculapius, that he may rise into a 
god, is struck with a thunderbolt. Hercules, that he may put off humanity, is 
burnt up by the fires of OEta. 
CHAP. XXII.--ARGUMENT: MOREOVER, THESE FABLES, WHICH AT FIRST WERE INVENTED 
BY IGNORANT MEN, WERE AFTERWARDS CELEBRATED BY OTHERS, AND CHIEFLY BY POETS, WHO 
DID NO LITTLE MISCHIEF TO THE TRUTH BY THEIR AUTHORITY. BY FICTIONS OF THIS 
KIND, AND BY FALSEHOODS OF A YET MORE ATTRACTIVE NATURE, THE MINDS OF YOUNG 
PEOPLE ARE CORRUPTED, AND THENCE THEY MISERABLY GROW OLD IN THESE BELIEFS, 
ALTHOUGH, ON THE OTHER HAND, THE TRUTH IS OBVIOUS TO THEM IF THEY WILL ONLY SEEK 
AFTER IT. 
"These fables and errors we both learn from ignorant parents, and, what is 
more serious still, we elaborate them in our very studies and instructions, 
especially in the verses of the poets, who as much as possible have prejudiced 
the truths by their authority. And for this reason Plato rightly expelled from 
the state which he had founded in his discourse, the illustrious Homer whom he 
had praised and crowned. For it was he especially who in the Trojan was allowed 
your gods, although he made jests of them, still to interfere in the affairs and 
doings of men: he brought them together in contest; he wounded Venus; he bound, 
wounded, and drove away Mars. He relates that Jupiter was set free by Briareus, 
so as not to be bound fast by the rest of the gods; and that he bewailed in 
showers of blood his son Sarpedon, because he could not snatch him from death; 
and that, enticed by the girdle of Venus, he lay more eagerly with his wife Juno 
than he was accustomed to do with his adulterous loves. Elsewhere Hercules threw 
out dung, and Apollo is feeding cattle for Admetus. Neptune, however, builds 
walls for Laomedon, and the unfortunate builder did not receive the wages for 
his work. Then Jupiter's thunderbolt is fabricated on the anvil with the arms of 
AEneas, although there were heaven, and thunderbolts, and lightnings long before 
Jupiter was born in Crete; and neither could the Cyclops imitate, nor Jupiter 
himself help fearing, the flames of the real thunderbolt. Why should I speak of 
the detected adultery of Mars and Venus, and of the violence of Jupiter against 
Ganymede,--a deed consecrated, (as you say,) in heaven? And all these things 
have been put forward with this view, that a certain authority might be gained 
for the vices s of men. By these fictions, and such as these, and by lies of a 
more attractive kind, the minds of boys are corrupted; and with the same fables 
clinging to them, they grow up even to the strength of mature age; and, poor 
wretches, they grow old in the same beliefs, although the truth is plain, if 
they will only seek after it. For all the writers of antiquity, both Greek and 
Roman, have set forth that Saturn, the beginner of this race and multitude, was 
a man. Nepos knows this, and Cassius in his history; and Thallus and Diodorus 
speak the same thing. This Saturn then, driven from Crete, by the fear of his 
raging son, had come to Italy, and, received by the hospitality of Janus, taught 
those unskilled and rustic men many things,--as, being something of a Greek, and 
polished,--to print letters for instance, to coin money, to make instruments. 
Therefore he preferred that his hiding-place, because he had been safely hidden 
(latent) there, should be called Latium; and he gave a city, from his own name, 
the name of Saturnia, and Janus, Janiculum, so that each of them left their 
names to the memory of posterity. Therefore it was certainly a man that fled, 
certainly a man who was concealed, and the father of a man, and sprung from a 
man. He was declared, however, to be the son of earth or of heaven, because 
among the Italians he was of unknown parents; as even to this day we call those 
who appear unexpectedly, sent from heaven, those who are ignoble and unknown, 
sons of the earth. His son Jupiter reigned at Crete after his father was driven 
out. There he died, there he had sons. To this day the cave of Jupiter is 
visited, and his sepulchre is shown, and he is convicted of being human by those 
very sacred rites of his. 
CHAP. XXIII.--ARGUMENT: ALTHOUGH THE HEATHENS ACKNOWLEDGE THEIR KINGS TO BE 
MORTAL, YET THEY FEIGN THAT THEY ARE GODS EVEN AGAINST THEIR OWN WILL, NOT 
BECAUSE OF THEIR BELIEF IN THEIR DIVINITY, BUT IN HONOUR OF THE POWER THAT THEY 
HAVE EXERTED. YET A TRUE GOD HAS NEITHER RISING NOR SETTING. THENCE OCTAVIUS 
CRITICISES THE IMAGES AND SHRINES OF THE GODS. 
"It is needless to go through each individual case, and to develope the 
entire series of that race, since in its first parents their mortality is 
proved, and must have flowed down into the rest by the very law of their 
succession, unless perhaps you fancy that they were gods after death; as by the 
perjury of Proculus, Romulus became a god; and by the good-will of the 
Mauritanians, Juba is a god; and other kings are divine who are consecrated, not 
in the faith of their divinity, but in honour of the power that they exercised. 
Moreover, this name is ascribed to those who are unwilling to bear it. They 
desire to persevere in their human condition. They fear that they may be made 
gods; although they are already old men, they do not wish it. Therefore neither 
are gods made from dead people, since a god cannot die; nor of people that are 
born, since everything which is born dies. But that is divine which has neither 
rising nor setting. For why, if they were born, are they not born in the present 
day also?--unless, perchance, Jupiter has already grown old, and child-bearing 
has failed in Juno, and Minerva has grown grey before she has borne children. Or 
has that process of generation ceased, for the reason that no assent is any 
longer yielded to fables of this kind? Besides, if the gods could create, they 
could not perish: we should have more gods than all men together; so that now, 
neither would the heaven contain them, nor the air receive them, nor the earth 
bear them. Whence it is manifest, that those were men whom we both read of as 
having been born, and know to have died. Who therefore doubts that the common 
people pray to and publicly worship the consecrated images of these men; in that 
the belief and mind of the ignorant is deceived by the perfection of art, is 
blinded by the glitter of gold, is dimmed with the shining of silver and the 
whiteness of ivory? But if any one were to present to his mind with what 
instruments and with what machinery every image is formed, he would blush that 
he had feared matter, treated after his fancy by the artificer to make a god. 
For a god of wood, a portion perhaps of a pile, or of an unlucky log, is hung 
up, is cut, is hewn, is planed; and a god of brass or of silver, often from an 
impure vessel, as was done by the Egyptian king, is fused, is beaten with 
hammers and forged on anvils; and the god of stone is cut, is sculptured, and is 
polished by some abandoned man, nor feels the injury done to him in his 
nativity, any more than afterwards it feels the worship flowing from your 
veneration; unless perhaps the stone, or the wood, or the silver is not yet a 
god. When, therefore, does the god begin his existence? Lo, it is reeked, it is 
wrought, it is sculptured--it is not yet a god; lo, it is soldered, it is built 
together--it is set up, and even yet it is not a god; lo, it is adorned, it is 
consecrated, it is prayed to--then at length it is a god, when man has chosen it 
to be so, and for the purpose has dedicated it. 
CHAP. XXIV.--ARGUMENT: HE BRIEFLY SHOWS, MOREOVER, WHAT RIDICULOUS, OBSCENE, 
AND CRUEL RITES WERE OBSERVED IN CELEBRATING THE MYSTERIES OF CERTAIN GODS. 
"How much more truly do dumb animals naturally judge concerning your gods? 
Mice, swallows, kites, know that they have no feeling: they gnaw them, they 
trample on them, they sit upon them; and unless you drive them off, they build 
their nests in the very mouth of your god. Spiders, indeed, weave their webs 
over his face, and suspend their threads from his very head. You wipe, cleanse, 
scrape, and you protect and fear those whom you make; while not one of you 
thinks that he ought to know God before he worships Him; desiring without 
consideration to obey their ancestors, choosing rather to become an addition to 
the error of others, than to trust themselves; in that they know nothing of what 
they fear. Thus avarice has been consecrated in gold and silver; thus the form 
of empty statues has been established; thus has arisen Roman superstition. And 
if you reconsider the rites of these gods, how many things are laughable, and 
how many also pitiable! Naked people run about in the raw winter; some walk 
bonneted, and carry around old bucklers, or beat drums, or lead their gods 
a-begging through the streets. Some fanes it is permitted to approach once a 
year, some it is forbidden to visit at all. There is one place where a man may 
not go, and there are some that are sacred from women: it is a crime needing 
atonement for a slave even to be present at some ceremonies. Some sacred places 
are crowned by a woman having one husband, some by a woman with many; and she 
who can reckon up most adulteries is sought after with most religious zeal. 
What! would not a man who makes libations of his own blood, and supplicates (his 
god) by his own wounds, be better if he were altogether profane, than religious 
in such a way is this? And he whose shameful parts are cut off, how greatly does 
he wrong God in seeking to propitiate Him in this manner! since, if God wished 
for eunuchs, He could bring them as such into existence, and would not make them 
so afterwards. Who does not perceive that people of unsound mind, and of weak 
and degraded apprehension, are foolish in these things, and that the very 
multitude of those who err affords to each of them mutual patronage? Here the 
defence of the general madness is the multitude of the mad people. 
CHAP. XXV.--ARGUMENT: THEN HE SHOWS THAT CAECILIUS HAD BEEN WRONG IN 
ASSERTING THAT THE ROMANS HAD GAINED THEIR POWER OVER THE WHOLE WORLD BY MEANS 
OF THE DUE OBSERVANCE OF SUPERSTITIONS OF THIS KIND. RATHER THE ROMANS IN THEIR 
ORIGIN WERE COLLECTED BY CRIME, AND GREW BY THE TERRORS OF THEIR FEROCITY. AND 
THEREFORE THE ROMANS WERE NOT SO GREAT BECAUSE THEY WERE RELIGIOUS, BUT BECAUSE 
THEY WERE SACRILEGIOUS WITH IMPUNITY. 
"Nevertheless, you will say that that very superstition itself gave, 
increased, and established their empire for the Romans, since they prevailed not 
so much by their valour as by their religion and piety. Doubtless the 
illustrious and noble justice of the Romans had its beginning from the very 
cradle of the growing empire. Did they not in their origin, when gathered 
together and fortified by crime, grow by the terror of their own fierceness? For 
the first people were assembled together as to an asylum. Abandoned people, 
profligate, incestuous, assassins, traitors, had flocked together; and in order 
that Romulus himself, their commander and governor, might excel his people in 
guilt, he committed fratricide. These are the first auspices of the religious 
state! By and by they carried off, violated, and ruined foreign virgins, already 
betrothed, already destined for husbands, and even some young women from their 
marriage vows--a thing unexampled--and then engaged in war with their parents, 
that is, with their fathers-in-law, and shed the blood of their kindred. What 
more irreligious, what more audacious, what could be safer than the very 
confidence of crime? Now, to drive their neighbours from the land, to overthrow 
the nearest cities, with their temples and altars, to drive them into captivity, 
to grow up by the losses of others and by their own crimes, is the course of 
training common to the rest of the kings and the latest leaders with Romulus. 
Thus, whatever the Romans hold, cultivate, possess, is the spoil of their 
audacity. All their temples are built from the spoils of violence, that is, from 
the ruins of cities, from the spoils of the gods, from the murders of priests. 
This is to insult and scorn, to yield to conquered religions, to adore them when 
captive, after having vanquished them. For to adore what you have taken by 
force, is to consecrate sacrilege, not divinities. As often, therefore, as the 
Romans triumphed, so often they were polluted; and as many trophies as they 
gained from the nations, so many spoils did they take from the gods. Therefore 
the Romans were not so great because they were religious, but because they were 
sacrilegious with impunity. For neither were they able in the wars themselves to 
have the help of the gods against whom they took up arms; and they began to 
worship those when they were triumphed over, whom they had previously 
challenged. But what avail such gods as those on behalf of the Romans, who had 
had no power on behalf of their own worshippers against the Roman arms? For we 
know the indigenous gods of the Romans--Romulus, Picus, Tiberinus, and Consus, 
and Pilumnus, and Picumnus. Tatius both discovered and worshipped Cloacina; 
Hostilius, Fear and Pallor. Subsequently Fever was dedicated by I know not whom: 
such was the superstition that nourished that city,--diseases and ill states of 
health. Assuredly also Acca Laurentia, and Flora, infamous harlots, must be 
reckoned among the diseases and the gods of the Romans. Such as these doubtless 
enlarged the dominion of the Romans, in opposition to others who were worshipped 
by the nations: for against their own people neither did the Thracian Mars, nor 
the Cretan Jupiter, nor Juno, now of Argos, now of Samos, now of Carthage, nor 
Diana of Tauris, nor the Idaean Mother, nor those Egyptian--not deities, but 
monstrosities--assist them; unless perchance among the Romans the chastity of 
virgins was greater, or the religion of the priests more holy: though absolutely 
among very many of the virgins unchastity was punished, in that they, doubtless 
without the knowledge of Vesta, had intercourse too carelessly with men; and for 
the rest their impunity arose not from the better protection of their chastity, 
but from the better fortune of their immodesty. And where are adulteries better 
arranged by the priests than among the very altars and shrines? where are more 
panderings debated, or more acts of violence concerted? Finally, burning lust is 
more frequently gratified in the little chambers of the keepers of the temple, 
than in the brothels themselves. And still, long before the Romans, by the 
ordering of God, the Assyrians held dominion, the Medes, the Persians, the 
Greeks also, and the Egyptians, although they had not any Pontiffs, nor Arvales, 
nor Salii, nor Vestals, nor Augurs, nor chickens shut up in a coop, by whose 
feeding or abstinence the highest concerns of the state were to be governed. 
CHAP. XXVI.--ARGUMENT: THE WEAPON THAT CAECILIUS HAD SLIGHTLY BRANDISHED 
AGAINST HIM, TAKEN FROM THE AUSPICES AND AUGURIES OF BIRDS, OCTAVIUS RETORTS BY 
INSTANCING THE CASES OF REGULUS, MANCINUS, PAULUS, AND CAESAR. AND HE SHOWS BY 
OTHER EXAMPLES, THAT THE ARGUMENT FROM THE ORACLES IS OF NO GREATER FORCE THAN 
THE OTHERS. 
"And now I come to those Roman auspices and auguries which you have collected 
with extreme pains, and have borne testimony that they were both neglected with 
ill consequences, and observed with good fortune. Certainly Clodius, and 
Flaminius, and Junius lost their armies on this account, because they did not 
judge it well to wait for the very solemn omen given by the greedy pecking of 
the chickens. But what of Regulus? Did he not observe the auguries, and was 
taken captive? Mancinus maintained his religious duty, and was sent under the 
yoke, and was given up. Paulus also had greedy chickens at Cannae, yet he was 
overthrown with the greater part of the republic. Caius Caesar despised the 
auguries and auspices that resisted his making his voyage into Africa before the 
winter, and thus the more easily he both sailed and conquered. But what and how 
much shall I go on to say about oracles? After his death Amphiaraus answered as 
to things to come, though he knew not (while living) that he should be betrayed 
by his wife on account of a bracelet. The blind Tiresias saw the future, 
although he did not see the present. Ennius invented the replies of the Pythian 
Apollo concerning Pyrrhus, although Apollo had already ceased to make verses; 
and that cautious and ambiguous oracle of his, failed just at the time when men 
began to be at once more cultivated and less credulous. And Demosthenes, because 
he knew that the answers were feigned, complained that the Pythia philippized. 
But sometimes, it is true, even auspices or oracles have touched the truth. 
Although among many falsehoods chance might appear as if it imitated 
forethought; yet I will approach the very source of error and perverseness, 
whence all that obscurity has flowed, and both dig into it more deeply, and lay 
it open more manifestly. There are some insincere and vagrant spirits degraded 
from their heavenly vigour by earthly stains and lusts. Now these spirits, after 
having lost the simplicity of their nature by being weighed down and immersed in 
vices, for a solace of their calamity, cease not, now that they are ruined 
themselves, to ruin others; and being depraved themselves, to infuse into others 
the error of their depravity and being themselves alienated from God, to 
separate others from God by the introduction of degraded superstitions. The 
poets know that those spirits are demons; the philosophers discourse of them; 
Socrates knew it, who, at the nod and decision of a demon that was at his side, 
either declined or undertook affairs. The Magi, also, not only know that there 
are demons, but, moreover, whatever miracle they affect to perform, do it by 
means of demons; by their aspirations and communications they show their 
wondrous tricks, making either those things appear which are not, or those 
things not to appear which are. Of those magicians, the first both in eloquence 
and in deed, Sosthenes, not only describes the true God with fitting majesty, 
but the angels that are the ministers and messengers of God, even the true God. 
And he knew that it enhanced His veneration, that in awe of the very nod and 
glance of their Lord they should tremble. The same man also declared that demons 
were earthly, wandering, hostile to humanity. What said Plato, who believed that 
it was a hard thing to find out God? Does not he also, without hesitation, tell 
of both angels and demons? And in his Symposium also, does not he endeavour to 
explain the nature of demons? For he will have it to be a substance between 
mortal and immortal--that is, mediate between body and spirit, compounded by 
mingling of earthly weight and heavenly lightness; whence also he warns us of 
the desire of love, and he says that it is moulded and glides into the human 
breast, and stirs the senses, and moulds the affections, and infuses the ardour 
of lust. 
CHAP. XXVII.--ARGUMENT: RECAPITULATION. DOUBTLESS HERE IS A SOURCE OF ERROR: 
DEMONS LURK UNDER THE STATUES AND IMAGES, THEY HAUNT THE FANES, THEY ANIMATE THE 
FIBRES OF THE ENTRAILS, DIRECT THE FLIGHTS OF BIRDS, GOVERN THE LOTS, POUR FORTH 
ORACLES INVOLVED IN FALSE RESPONSES. THESE THINGS NOT FROM GOD; BUT THEY ARE 
CONSTRAINED TO CONFESS WHEN THEY ARE ADJURED IN THE NAME OF THE TRUE GOD, AND 
ARE DRIVEN FROM THE POSSESSED BODIES. HENCE THEY FLEE HASTILY FROM THE 
NEIGHBOURHOOD OF CHRISTIANS, AND STIR UP A HATRED AGAINST THEM IN THE MINDS OF 
THE GENTILES WHO BEGIN TO HATE THEM BEFORE THEY KNOW THEM. 
"These impure spirits, therefore--the demons--as is shown by the Magi, by the 
philosophers, and by Plato, consecrated under statues and images, lurk there, 
and by their afflatus attain the authority as of a present deity; while in the 
meantime they are breathed into the prophets, while they dwell in the shrines, 
while sometimes they animate the fibres of the entrails, control the flights of 
birds, direct the lots, are the cause of oracles involved in many falsehoods. 
For they are both deceived, and they deceive; inasmuch as they are both ignorant 
of the simple truth, and for their own ruin they confess not that which they 
know. Thus they weigh men downwards from heaven, and call them away from the 
true God to material things: they disturb the life, render all men unquiet; 
creeping also secretly into human bodies, with subtlety, as being spirits, they 
feign diseases, alarm the minds, wrench about the limbs; that they may constrain 
men to worship them, being gorged with the fumes of altars or the sacrifices of 
cattle, that, by remitting what they had bound, they may seem to have cured it. 
These raging maniacs also, whom you see rush about in public, are moreover 
themselves prophets without a temple; thus they rage, thus they rave, thus they 
are whirled around. In them also there is a like instigation of the demon, but 
there is a dissimilar occasion for their madness. From the same causes also 
arise those things which were spoken of a little time ago by you, that Jupiter 
demanded the restoration of his games in a dream, that the Castors appeared with 
horses, and that a Small ship was following the leading of the matron's girdle. 
A great many, even some of your own people, know all those things that the 
demons themselves confess concerning themselves, as often as they are driven by 
us from bodies by the torments of our words and by the fires of our prayers. 
Saturn himself, and Serapis, and Jupiter, and whatever demons you worship, 
overcome by pain, speak out what they are; and assuredly they do not lie to 
their own discredit, especially when any of you are standing by. Since they 
themselves are the witnesses that they are demons, believe them when they 
confess the truth of themselves; for when abjured by the only and true God, 
unwillingly the wretched beings shudder in their bodies, and either at once leap 
forth, or vanish by degrees, as the faith of the sufferer assists or the grace 
of the healer inspires. Thus they fly from Christians when near at hand, whom at 
a distance they harassed by your means in their assemblies. And thus, introduced 
into the minds of the ignorant, they secretly sow there a hatred of us by means 
of fear. For it is natural both to hate one whom you fear, and to injure one 
whom you have feared, if you can. Thus they take possession of the minds and 
obstruct the hearts, that men may begin to hate us before they know us; lest, if 
known, they should either imitate us, or not be able to condemn us. 
CHAP. XXVIII.--ARGUMENT: NOR IS IT ONLY HATRED THAT THEY AROUSE AGAINST THE 
CHRISTIANS, BUT THEY CHARGE AGAINST THEM HORRID CRIMES, WHICH UP TO THIS TIME 
HAVE BEEN PROVED BY NOBODY. THIS IS THE WORK OF DEMONS. FOR BY THEM A FALSE 
REPORT IS BOTH SET ON FOOT AND PROPAGATED. THE CHRISTIANS ARE FALSELY ACCUSED OF 
SACRILEGE, OF INCEST, OF ADULTERY, OF PARRICIDE; AND, MOREOVER, IT IS CERTAIN 
AND TRUE THAT THE VERY SAME CRIMES, OR CRIMES LIKE TO OR GREATER THAN THESE, ARE 
IN FACT COMMITTED BY THE GENTILES THEMSELVES. 
"BUT how unjust it is, to form a judgment on things unknown and unexamined, 
as you do! Believe us ourselves when penitent, for we also were the same as you, 
and formerly, while yet blind and obtuse, thought the same things as you; to 
wit, that the Christians worshipped monsters, devoured infants, mingled in 
incestuous banquets. And we did not perceive that such fables as these were 
always set afloat by those (newsmongers), and were never either inquired into 
nor proved; and that in so long a time no one had appeared to betray (their 
doings), to obtain not only pardon for their crime, but also favour for its 
discovery: moreover, that it was to this extent not evil, that a Christian, when 
accused, neither blushed nor feared, and that he only repented that he had not 
been one before. We, however, when we undertook to defend and protect some 
sacrilegious and incestuous persons, and even parricides, did not think that 
these (Christians) were to be heard at all. 
Sometimes even, when we affected to pity them, we were more cruelly violent 
against them, so as to torture them when they confessed, that they might deny, 
to wit, that they might not perish; making use of a perverse inquisition against 
them, not to elicit the truth, but to compel a falsehood. And if any one, by 
reason of greater weakness, overcome with suffering, and conquered, should deny 
that he was a Christian, we showed favour to him, as if by forswearing that name 
he had at once atoned for all his deeds by that simple denial. Do not you 
acknowledge that we felt and did the same as you feel and do? when, if reason 
and not the instigation of a demon were to judge, they should rather have been 
pressed not to disavow themselves Christians, but to confess themselves guilty 
of incests, of abominations, of sacred rites polluted, of infants immolated. For 
with these and such as these stories, did those same demons fill up the ears of 
the ignorant against us, to the horror of their execration. Nor yet was it 
wonderful, since the common report of men, which is, always fed by the 
scattering of falsehoods, is wasted away when the truth is brought to light. 
Thus this is the business of demons, for by them false rumours are both sown and 
cherished. Thence arises what you say that you hear, that an ass's head is 
esteemed among us a divine thing. Who is such a fool as to worship this? Who is 
so much more foolish as to believe that it is an object of worship? unless that 
you even consecrate whole asses in your stables, together with your Epona, and 
religiously devours those same asses with Isis. Also you offer up and worship 
the heads of oxen and of wethers, and you dedicate gods mingled also of a goat 
and a man, and gods with the faces of dogs and lions. Do you not adore and feed 
Apis the ox, with the Egyptians? And you do not condemn their sacred rites 
instituted in honour of serpents, and crocodiles, and other beasts, and birds, 
and fishes, of which if any one were to kill one of these gods, he is even 
punished with death. These same Egyptians, together with very many of you, are 
not more afraid of Isis than they are of the pungency of onions, nor of Serapis 
more than they tremble. at the basest noises produced by the foulness of their 
bodies. He also who fables against us about our adoration of the members of the 
priest, tries to confer upon us what belongs really to himself. (Ista enim 
impudicitae eorum forsitan sacra sint, apud quos sexus omnis membris omnibus 
prostat, apud quos iota impudicitia vocatur urbanitas; qui scortorum licentiae 
invident, qui medios viros lambunt, libidinoso ore inguinibus inhaerescunt, 
homines malae linguae etiam si tacerent, quos prius taedescit impudicitiae suae 
quam pudescit.) Abomination! they suffer on themselves such evil deeds, as no 
age is so effeminate as to be able to bear, and no slavery so cruel as to be 
compelled to endure. 
CHAP. XXIX.--ARGUMENT: NOR IS IT MORE TRUE THAT A MAN FASTENED TO A CROSS ON 
ACCOUNT OF HIS CRIMES IS WORSHIPPED BY CHRISTIANS, FOR THEY BELIEVE NOT ONLY 
THAT HE WAS INNOCENT, BUT WITH REASON THAT HE WAS GOD. BUT, ON THE OTHER HAND, 
THE HEATHENS INVOKE THE DIVINE POWERS OF KINGS RAISED INTO GODS BY THEMSELVES; 
THEY PRAY TO IMAGES, AND BESEECH THEIR GENII. 
"These, and such as these infamous things, we are not at liberty even to 
hear; it is even disgraceful with any more words to defend ourselves from such 
charges. For you pretend that those things are done by chaste and modest 
persons, which we should not believe to be done at all, unless you proved that 
they were true concerning yourselves. For in that you attribute to our religion 
the worship of a criminal and his cross, you wander far from the neighbourhood 
of the truth, in thinking either that a criminal deserved, or that an earthly 
being was able, to be believed God. Miserable indeed is that man whose whole 
hope is dependent on mortal man, for all his help is put an end to with the 
extinction of the man. The Egyptians certainly choose out a man for themselves 
whom they may worship; him alone they propitiate; him they consult about all 
things; to him they slaughter victims; and he who to others is a god, to himself 
is certainly a man whether he will or no, for he does not deceive his own 
consciousness, if he deceives that of others. "Moreover, a false flattery 
disgracefully caresses princes and kings, not as great and chosen men, as is 
just, but as gods; whereas honour is more truly rendered to an illustrious man, 
and love is more pleasantly given to a very good man. Thus they invoke their 
deity, they supplicate their images, they implore their Genius, that is, their 
demon; and it is safer to swear falsely by the genius of Jupiter than by that of 
a king. Crosses, moreover, we neither worship nor wish for. You, indeed, who 
consecrate gods of wood, adore wooden crosses perhaps as parts of your gods. For 
your very standards, as well as your banners; and flags of your camp, what else 
are they but crosses glided and adorned? Your victorious trophies not only 
imitate the appearance of a simple cross, but also that of a man affixed to it. 
We assuredly see the sign of a cross, naturally, in the ship when it is carried 
along with swelling sails, when it glides forward with expanded oars; and when 
the military yoke is lifted up, it is the sign of a cross; and when a man adores 
God with a pure mind, with handsoutstretched. Thus the sign of the cross either 
is sustained by a natural reason, or your own religion is formed with respect to 
it. 
XXX.--ARGUMENT: THE STORY ABOUT CHRISTIANS DRINKING THE BLOOD OF AN INFANT 
THAT THEY HAVE MURDERED, IS a BAREFACED CALUMNY'. BUT THE GENTILES, BOTH CRUELLY 
EXPOSE THEIR CHILDREN NEWLY BORN, AND BE FORE THEY ARE BORN DESTROY THEM BY A 
CRUEL ABORTION. CHRISTIANS ARE NEITHER ALLOWED TO SEE NOR TO HEAR OF 
MANSLAUGHTER. 
"And now I should wish to meet him who says or believes that we are initiated 
by the slaughter and blood of an infant. Think you that it can be possible for 
so tender, so little a body tO receive those fatal wounds; for any one to shed, 
pour forth, and drain that new blood of a youngling, and of a man scarcley come 
into existence? No one can believe this, except one who can dare to do it. And I 
see that you at one time expose your begotten children to wild beasts and to 
birds; at another, that you crush them when strangled with a miserable kind of 
death. There are some women who, by drinking medical preparations, extinguish 
the source of the future man in their very bowels, and thus commit a parricide 
before they bring forth. And these things assuredly come don from the teaching 
of your gods. For Saturn did not expose his children, but devoured them. With 
reason were infants sacrificed to him by parents in some parts of Africa, 
caresses and kisses repressing their crying, that a weeping victim might not be 
sacrificed. Moreover, among the Tauri of Pontus, and to the Egyptian Busiris, it 
was a sacred rite to immolate their guests, and for the Galli to slaughter to 
Mercury human, or rather inhuman, sacrifices. The Roman sacrificers buried 
living a Greek man and a Greek woman, a Gallic man and a Gallic woman; and to 
this day, Jupiter Latiaris is worshipped by them with murder; and, what is 
worthy of the son of Saturn, he is gorged with the blood of an evil and criminal 
man. I believe that he himself taught Catiline to conspire under a compact of 
blood, and Bellona to steep her sacred rites with a draught of human gore, and 
taught men to heal epilepsy with the blood of a man, that is, with a worse 
disease. They also are not unlike to him who devour the wild beasts from the 
arena, besmeared and stained with blood, or fattened with the limbs or the 
entrails of men. To us it is not lawful either to see or to hear of homicide; 
and so much do we shrink from human blood, that we do not use the blood even of 
eatable animals in our food. 
CHAP. XXXI.--ARGUMENT: THE CHARGE OF OUR ENTERTAINMENTS BEING POLLUTED WITH 
INCEST, IS ENTIRELY OPPOSED TO ALL PROBABILITY, WHILE IT IS PLAIN THAT GENTILES 
ARE ACTUALLY GUILTY OF INCEST. THE BANQUETS OF CHRISTIANS ARE NOT ONLY MODEST, 
BUT TEMPERATE. IN FACT, INCESTUOUS LUST IS SO UNHEARD OF, THAT WITH MANY EVEN 
THE MODEST ASSOCIATION OF THE SEXES GIVES RISE TO A BLUSH. 
"And of the incestuous banqueting, the plotting of demons has falsely devised 
an enormous fable against us, to stain the glory of our modesty, by the loathing 
excited by an outrageous infamy, that before inquiring into the truth it might 
turn men away from us by the terror of an abominable charge. It was thus your 
own Fronto acted in this respect: he did not produce testimony, as one who 
alleged a charge, but he scattered reproaches as a rhetorician. For these things 
have rather originated from your own nations. Among the Persians, a promiscuous 
association between sons and mothers is allowed. Marriages with sisters are 
legitimate among the Egyptians and in Athens. Your records and your tragedies, 
which you both read and hear with pleasure, glory in incests: thus also you 
worship incestuous gods, who have intercourse with mothers, with daughters, with 
sisters. With reason, therefore, is incest frequently detected among you, and is 
continually permitted. Miserable men, you may even, without knowing it, rush 
into what is unlawful: since you scatter your lusts promiscuously, since you 
everywhere beget children, since you frequently expose even those who are born 
at home to the mercy of others, it is inevitable that you must come back to your 
own children, and stray to your own offspring. Thus you continue the story of 
incest, even although you have no consciousness of your crime. But we maintain 
our modesty not in appearance, but in our heart we gladly abide by the bond of a 
single marriage; in the desire of procreating, we know either one wife, or none 
at all. We practise sharing in banquets, which are not only modest, but also 
sober: for we do not indulge in entertainments nor prolong our feasts with wine; 
but we temper our joyousness with gravity, with chaste discourse, and with body 
even more chaste (divers of us unviolated) enjoy rather than make a boast of a 
perpetual virginity of a body. So far, in fact, are they from indulging in 
incestuous desire, that with some even the (idea of modest intercourse of the 
sexes causes a blush. Neither do we at once stand on the level of the lowest of 
the people, if we refuse your honours and purple robes; and we are not 
fastidious, if we all have a discernment of one good, but are assembled together 
with the same quietness with which we live as individuals; and we are not 
garrulous in corners, although you either blush or are afraid to hear us in 
public. And that day by day the number of us is increased, is not a ground for a 
charge of error, but is a testimony which claims praise; for, in a fair mode of 
life, our actual number both continues and abides undiminished, and strangers 
increase it. Thus, in short, we do not distinguish our people by some small 
bodily mark, as you suppose, but easily enough by the sign of innocency and 
modesty. Thus we love one another, to your regret, with a mutual love, because 
we do not know how to hate. Thus we call one another, to your envy, brethren: as 
being men born of one God and Parent, and companions in faith, and as 
fellow-heirs in hope. You, however, do not recognise one another, and you are 
cruel in your mutual hatreds; nor do you acknowledge one another as brethren, 
unless indeed for the purpose of fratricide. 
CHAP. XXXII.--ARGUMENT: NOR CAN IT BE SAID THAT THE CHRISTIANS CONCEAL WHAT 
THEY WORSHIP BECAUSE THEY HAVE NO TEMPLES AND NO ALTARS, INASMUCH AS THEY ARE 
PERSUADED THAT GOD CAN BE CIRCUMSCRIBED BY NO TEMPLE, AND THAT NO LIKENESS OF 
HIM CAN BE MADE. BUT HE IS EVERYWHERE PRESENT, SEES ALL THINGS, EVEN THE MOST 
SECRET THOUGHTS OF OUR HEARTS; AND WE LIVE NEAR TO HIM, AND IN HIS PROTECTION. 
"But do you think that we conceal what we worship, if we have not temples and 
altars? And yet what image of God shall I make, since, if you think rightly, man 
himself is the image of God? What temple shall I build to Him, when this whole 
world fashioned by His work cannot receive Him? And when I, a man, dwell far and 
wide, shall I shut up the might of so great majesty within one little building? 
Were it not better that He should be dedicated in our mind, consecrated in our 
inmost heart? Shall I offer victims and sacrifices to the Lord, such as He has 
produced for my use, that I should throw back to Him His own gift? It is 
ungrateful when the victim fit for sacrifice is a good disposition, and a pure 
mind, and a sincere judgment. Therefore he who cultivates innocence supplicates 
God; he who cultivates justice makes offerings to God; he who abstains from 
fraudulent practices propitiates God; he who snatches man from danger slaughters 
the most acceptable victim. These are our sacrifices, these are our rites of 
God's worship; thus, among us, he who is most just is he who is most religious. 
But certainly the God whom we worship we neither show nor see. Verily for this 
reason we believe Him to be God, that we can be conscious of Him, but cannot see 
Him; for in His works, and in all the movements of the world, we behold His 
power ever present when He thunders, lightens, darts His bolts, or when He makes 
all bright again. Nor should you wonder if you do not see God. By the wind and 
by the blasts of the storm all things are driven on and shaken, are agitated, 
and yet neither wind nor tempest comes under our eyesight. Thus we cannot look 
upon the sun, which is the cause of seeing to all creatures: the pupil of the 
eye is with drawn from his rays, the gaze of the beholder is dimmed; and if you 
look too long, all power of sight is extinguished. What! can you sustain the 
Architect of the sun Himself, the very source of light, when you turn yourself 
away from His lightnings, and hide yourself from His thunderbolts? Do you wish 
to see God with your carnal eyes, when you are neither able to behold nor to 
grasp your own soul itself, by which you are enlivened and speak? But, moreover, 
it is said that God is ignorant of man's doings; and being established in 
heaven, He can neither survey all nor know individuals. Thou errest, O man, and 
art deceived; for from where is God afar off, when all things heavenly and 
earthly, and which are beyond this province of the universe, are known to God, 
are full of God? Everywhere He is not only very near to us, but He is infused 
into us. Therefore once more look upon the sun: it is fixed fast in the heaven, 
yet it is diffused over all lands equally; present everywhere, it is associated 
and mingled with all things; its brightness is never violated. How much more 
God, who has made all things, and looks upon all things, from whom there can be 
nothing secret, is present in the darkness, is present in our thoughts, as if in 
the deep darkness. Not only do we act in Him, but also, I had almost said, we 
live with Him, 
CHAP. XXXIII.--ARGUMENT: THAT EVEN' IF GOD BE SAID TO HAVE NOTHING AVAILED 
THE JEWS, CERTAINLY THE WRITERS OF THE JEWISH ANNALS ARE THE MOST SUFFICIENT 
WITNESSES THAT THEY FORSOOK GOD BEFORE THEY WERE FORSAKEN BY HIM. 
"Neither let us flatter ourselves concerning our multitude. We seem many to 
ourselves, but to God we are very few. We distinguish peoples and nations; to 
God this whole world is one family. Kings only know all the matters of their 
kingdom by the ministrations of their servants: God has no need of information. 
We not only live in His eyes, but also in His bosom. But it is objected that it 
availed the Jews nothing that they themselves worshipped the one God with altars 
and temples, with the greatest superstition. You are guilty of ignorance if you 
are recalling later events while you are forgetful or unconscious of former 
ones. For they themselves also, as long as they worshipped our God--and He is 
the same God of all--with chastity, innocency, and religion, as long as they 
obeyed His wholesome precepts, from a few became innumerable, from poor became 
rich, from being servants became kings; a few overwhelmed many; unarmed men 
overwhelmed armed ones as they fled from them, following them up by God's 
command, and with the elements striving on their behalf. Carefully read over 
their Scriptures, or if you are better pleased with the Roman writings, inquire 
concerning the Jews in the books (to say nothing of ancient documents) of 
Flavius Josephus or Antoninus Julianus, and you shall know that by their 
wickedness they deserved this fortune, and that nothing happened which had not 
before been predicted to them, if they should persevere in their obstinacy. 
Therefore you will understand that they forsook before they were forsaken, and 
that they were not, as you impiously say, taken captive with their God, but they 
were given up by God as deserters from His discipline. 
CHAP. XXXIV.--ARGUMENT: MOREOVER, IT IS NOT AT ALL TO BE WONDERED AT IF THIS 
WORLD IS TO BE CONSUMED BY FIRE, SINCE EVERYTHING WHICH HAS A BEGINNING HAS ALSO 
AN END. AND THE ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS ARE NOT AVERSE FROM THE OPINION OF THE 
PROBABLE BURNING UP OF THE WORLD. YET IT IS EVIDENT THAT GOD, HAVING MADE MAN 
FROM NOTHING, CAN RAISE HIM UP FROM DEATH INTO LIFE. AND ALL NATURE SUGGESTS A 
FUTURE RESURRECTION. 
"Further, in respect of the burning up of the world, it is a vulgar error not 
to believe either that fire will fall upon it in an unforeseen way, or that the 
world will be destroyed by it. For who of wise men doubts, who is ignorant, that 
all things which have had a beginning perish, all things which are made come to 
an end? The heaven also, with all things which are contained in heaven, will 
cease even as it began. The nourishment of the seas by the sweet waters of the 
springs shall pass away into the power of fire. The Stoics have a constant 
belief that, the moisture being dried up, all this world will take fire; and the 
Epicureans have the very same opinion concerning the conflagration of the 
elements and the destruction of the world. Plato speaks, saying that parts of 
the world are now inundated, and are now burnt up by alternate changes; and 
although he says that the world itself is constructed perpetual and 
indissoluble, yet he adds that to God Himself, the only artificer, it is both 
dissoluble and mortal. Thus it is no wonder if that mass be destroyed by Him by 
whom it was reared. You observe that philosophers dispute of the same things 
that we are saying, not that we are following up their tracks, but that they, 
from the divine announcements of the prophets, imitated the shadow of the 
corrupted truth. Thus also the most illustrious of the wise men, Pythagoras 
first, and Plato chiefly, have delivered the doctrine of resurrection with a 
corrupt and divided faith; for they will have it, that the bodies being 
dissolved, the souls alone both abide for ever, and very often pass into other 
new bodies. To these things they add also this, by way of misrepresenting the 
truth, that the souls of men return into cattle, birds, and beasts. Assuredly 
such an opinion as that is not worthy of a philosopher's inquiry, but of the 
ribaldry of a buffoon. But for our argument it is sufficient, that even in this 
your wise men do in some measure harmonize with us. But who is so foolish or so 
brutish as to dare to deny that man, as he could first of all be formed by God, 
so can again be re-formed; that he is nothing after death, and that he was 
nothing before he began to exist; and as from nothing it was possible for him to 
be born, so from nothing it may be possible for him to be restored? Moreover, it 
is more difficult to begin that which is not, than to repeat that which has 
been. Do you think that, if anything is withdrawn from our feeble eyes, it 
perishes to God? Every body, whether it is dried up into dust, or is dissolved 
into moisture, or is compressed into ashes, or is attenuated into smoke, is 
withdrawn from us, but it is reserved for God in the custody of the elements. 
Nor, as you believe, do we fear any loss from sepulture, but we adopt the 
ancient and better custom of burying in the earth. See, therefore, how for our 
consolation all nature suggests a future resurrection. The sun sinks down and 
arises, the stars pass away and return, the flowers die and revive again, after 
their win-try decay the shrubs resume their leaves, seeds do not flourish again. 
unless they are rotted: thus the body in the sepulchre is like the trees which 
in winter hide their verdure with a deceptive dryness. 
Why are you in haste for it to revive and return, while the winter is still 
raw? We must wait also for the spring-time of the body. And I am not ignorant 
that many, in the consciousness of what they deserve, rather desire than believe 
that they shall be nothing after death; for they would prefer to be altogether 
extinguished, rather than to be restored for the purpose of punishment. And 
their error also is enhanced, both by the liberty granted them in this life, and 
by God's very great patience, whose judgment, the more tardy it is, is so much 
the more just. 
CHAP. XXXV.--ARGUMENT: RIGHTEOUS AND PIOUS MEN SHALL BE REWARDED WITH 
NEVER-ENDING FELICITY, BUT UNRIGHTEOUS MEN SHALL BE VISITED WITH ETERNAL 
PUNISHMENT. THE MORALS OF CHRISTIANS ARE FAR MORE HOLY THAN THOSE OF THE 
GENTILES. 
"And yet men are admonished in the books and poems of the most learned poets 
of that fiery river, and of the heat flowing in manifold turns from the Stygian 
marsh,--things which, prepared for eternal torments, and known to them by the 
information of demons and from the oracles of their prophets, they have 
delivered to us. And therefore among them also even king Jupiter himself swears 
religiously by the parching banks and the black abyss; for, with foreknowledge 
of the punishment destined to him, with his worshippers, he shudders. Nor is 
there either measure termination to these torments. There the intelligent fire 
burns the limbs and restores them, feeds on them and nourishes them. As the 
fires of the thunderbolts strike upon the bodies, and do not consume them; as 
the fires of Mount AEtna and of Mount Vesuvius, and of burning where, glow, but 
are not wasted; so that penal fire is not fed by the waste of those who burn, 
but is nourished by the unexhausted eating away of their bodies. But that they 
who know not God are deservedly tormented as impious, as unrighteous persons, no 
one except a profane man hesitates to believe, since it is not less wicked to be 
ignorant of, than to offend the Parent of all, and the Lord of all. And although 
ignorance of God is sufficient for punishment, even as knowledge of Him is of 
avail for pardon, yet if we Christians be compared with you, although in some 
things our discipline is inferior, yet we shall be found much better than you. 
For you forbid, and yet commit, adulteries; we are born men only for our own 
wives: you punish crimes when committed; with us, even to think of crimes is to 
sin: you are afraid of those who are aware of what you do; are even afraid of 
our own conscience alone, without which we cannot exist: finally, from your 
numbers the prison boils over; but there is no Christian there, unless he is 
accused on account of his religion, or a deserter. 
CHAP. XXXVI.--ARGUMENT: FATE IS NOTHING, EXCEPT SO FAR AS FATE IS GOD. MAN'S 
MIND IS FREE, AND THEREFORE SO IS HIS ACTION: HIS BIRTH IS NOT BROUGHT INTO 
JUDGMENT. IT IS NOT A MATTER OF INFAMY, BUT OF GLORY, THAT CHRISTIANS ARE 
REPROACHED FOR THEIR POVERTY; AND THE FACT THAT THEY SUFFER BODILY EVILS IS NOT 
AS A PENALTY, BUT AS A DISCIPLINE. 
"Neither let any one either take comfort from, or apologize for what happens 
from fate. Let what happens be of the disposition of fortune, yet the mind is 
free; and therefore man's doing, not his dignity, is judged. For what else is 
fate than what God has spoken of each one of us? who, since He can foresee our 
constitution, determines also the fates for us, according to the deserts and the 
qualities of individuals. Thus in our case it is not the star under which we are 
born that is punished, but the particular nature of our disposition is blamed. 
And about fate enough is said; or if, in consideration of the time, we have 
spoken too little, we shall argue the matter at another time more abundantly and 
more fully. But that many of us are called poor, this is not our disgrace, but 
our glory; for as our mind is relaxed by luxury, so it is strengthened by 
frugality. And yet who can be poor if he does not want, if he does not crave for 
the possessions of others, if he is rich towards God? He rather is poor, who, 
although he has much, desires more. Yet I will speak according as I feel. No one 
can be so poor as he is born. Birds live without any patrimony, and day by day 
the cattle are fed; and yet these creatures are born for us--all of which 
things, if we do not lust after, we possess. Therefore, as he who treads a road 
is the happier the lighter he walks, so happier is he in this journey of life 
who lifts himself along in poverty, and does not breathe heavily under the 
burden of riches. And yet even if we thought wealth useful to us, we should ask 
it of God. Assuredly He might be able to indulge us in some measure, whose is 
the whole; but we would rather despise riches than possess them: we desire 
rather innocency, we rather entreat for patience, we prefer being good to being 
prodigal; and that we feel and suffer the human mischiefs of the body is not 
punishment --it is warfare. For fortitude is strengthened by infirmities, and 
calamity is very often the discipline of virtue; in addition, strength both of 
mind and of body grows torpid without the exercise of labour. Therefore all your 
mighty men whom you announce as an example have flourished illustriously by 
their afflictions. And thus God is neither unable to aid us, nor does He despise 
us, since He is both the ruler of all men and the lover of His own people. But 
in adversity He looks into and searches out each one; He weighs the disposition 
of every individual in dangers, even to death at last; He investigates the will 
of man, certain that to Him nothing can perish. Therefore, as gold by the fires, 
so are we declared by critical moments. 
CHAP. XXXVII.--ARGUMENT: TORTURES MOST UNJUSTLY INFLICTED FOR THE CONFESSION 
OF CHRIST'S NAME ARE SPECTACLES WORTHY OF GOD. A COMPARISON INSTITUTED BETWEEN 
SOME OF THE BRAVEST OF THE HEATHENS AND THE HOLY MARTYRS. HE DECLARES THAT 
CHRISTIANS DO NOT PRESENT THEMSELVES AT PUBLIC SHOWS AND PROCESSIONS, BECAUSE 
THEY KNOW THEM, WITH THE GREATEST CERTAINTY, TO BE NO LESS IMPIOUS THAN CRUEL. 
"How beautiful is the spectacle to God when a Christian does battle with 
pain; when he is drawn up against threats, and punishments, and tortures; when, 
mocking the noise of death, he treads under foot the horror of the executioner; 
when he raises up his liberty against kings and princes, and yields to God 
alone, whose he is; when, triumphant and victorious, he tramples upon the very 
man who has pronounced sentence against him! For he has conquered who has 
obtained that for which he contends. What soldier would not provoke peril with 
greater boldness under the eyes of his general? For no one receives a reward 
before his trial, and yet the general does not give what he has not: he cannot 
preserve life, but he can make the warfare glorious. But God's solidier is 
neither forsaken in suffering, nor is brought to an end by death. Thus the 
Christian may seem to be miserable; he cannot be really found to be so. You 
yourselves extol unfortunate men to the skies; Mucius Scaevola, for instance, 
who, when he had failed in his attempt against the king, would have perished 
among the enemies unless he had sacrificed his right hand. And how many of our 
people have borne that not their right hand only, but their whole body, should 
be burned--burned up without any cries of pain, especially when they had it in 
their power to be sent away! Do I compare men with Mucius or Aquilius, or with 
Regulus? Yet boys and young women among us treat with contempt crosses and 
tortures, wild beasts, and all the bugbears of punishments, with the inspired 
patience of suffering. And do you not perceive, O wretched men, that there is 
nobody who either is willing without reason to undergo punishment, or is able 
without God to bear tortures? Unless, perhaps, the fact has deceived you, that 
those who know not God abound in riches, flourish in honours, and excel in 
power. Miserable men! in this respect they are lifted up the higher, that they 
may fall down lower. For these are fattened as victims for punishment, as 
sacrifices they are crowned for the slaughter. Thus in this respect some are 
lifted up to empires and dominations, that the unrestrained exercise of power 
might make a market of their spirit to the unbridled licence that is 
Characteristic of a ruined soul. For, apart from the knowledge of God, what 
solid happiness can there be, since death must come? Like a dream, happiness 
slips away before it is grasped. Are you a king? Yet you fear as much as you are 
feared; and however you may be surrounded with abundant followers, yet you are 
alone in the presence of danger. Are you rich? But fortune is ill trusted; and 
with a large travelling equipage the brief journey of life is not furnished, but 
burdened. Do you boast of the fasces and the magisterial robes? It is a vain 
mistake of man, and an empty worship of dignity, to glitter in purple and to be 
sordid in hind. Are you elevated by nobility of birth? do you praise your 
parents? Yet we are all born with one lot; it is only by virtue that we are 
distinguished. We therefore, who are estimated by our character and our modesty, 
reasonably abstain from evil pleasures, and from your pomps and exhibitions, the 
origin of which in connection with sacred things we know, and condemn their 
mischievous enticements. For in the chariot games who does not shudder at the 
madness of the people brawling among themselves? or at the teaching of murder in 
the gladiatorial games? In the scenic games also the madness is not less, but 
the debauchery is more prolonged: for now a mimic either expounds or shows forth 
adulteries; now nerveless player, while he feigns lust, suggests it; the same 
actor disgraces your gods by attributing to them adulteries, sighs, hatreds; the 
same provokes your tears with pretended sufferings, with vain gestures and 
expressions. Thus you demand murder, in fact, while you weep at it in fiction. 
CHAP. XXXVIII.--ARGUMENT: CHRISTIANS ABSTAIN FROM THINGS CONNECTED WITH IDOL 
SACRIFICES, LEST ANY ONE SHOULD THINK EITHER THAT THEY YIELD TO DEMONS, OR THAT 
THEY ARE ASHAMED OF THEIR RELIGION. THEY DO NOT INDEED THE COLOUR AND SCENT OF 
FLOWERS, FOR THEY ARE ACCUSTOMED TO USE THEM SCATTERED ABOUT LOOSELY AND 
NEGLIGENTLY, AS WELL AS TO ENTWINE THEIR NECKS WITH GARLANDS; BUT TO CROWN THE 
HEAD OF A CORPSE THEY THINK SUPERFLUOUS AND USELESS. MOREOVER, WITH THE SAME 
TRANQUILLITY WITH WHICH THEY LWE THEY BURY THEIR DEAD, WAITING WITH A VERY 
CERTAIN HOPE THE CROWN OF ETERNAL FELICITY. THEREFORE THEIR RELIGION, REJECTING 
ALL THE SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GENTILES, SHOULD BE ADOPTED AS TRUE BY ALL MEN. 
"But that we despise the leavings of sacrifices, and the cups out of which 
libations have been poured, is not a confession of fear, but an assertion of our 
true liberty. For although nothing which comes into existence as an inviolable 
gift of God is corrupted by any agency, yet we abstain, lest any should think 
either that we are submitting to demons, to whom libation has been made, or that 
we are ashamed of our religion. But who is he who doubts of our indulging 
ourselves in spring flowers, when we gather both the rose of spring and the 
lily, and whatever else is of agreeable colour and odour among the flowers? For 
these we both use scattered loose and free, and we twine our necks with them in 
garlands. Pardon us, forsooth, that we do not crown our heads; we are accustomed 
to receive the scent of a sweet flower in our nostrils, not to inhale it with 
the back of our head or with our hair. Nor do we crown the dead. And in this 
respect I the more wonder at you, in the way in which you apply to a lifeless 
person, or to one who does not feel, a torch; or a garland to one who does not 
smell it, when either as blessed he does not want, or, being miserable, he has 
no pleasure in, flowers. Still we adorn our obsequies with the same tranquillity 
with which we live; and we do not bind to us a withering garland, but we wear 
one living with eternal flowers from God, since we, being both ate and secure in 
the liberality of our God, are animated to the hope of future felicity by the 
confidence of His present majesty. Thus we both rise again in blessedness, and 
are already living in contemplation of the future. Then let Socrates the 
Athenian buffoon see to it, confessing that he knew nothing, although boastful 
in the testimony of a most deceitful demon; let Arcesilaus also, and Carneades, 
and Pyrrho, and all the multitude of the Academic philosophers, deliberate; let 
Simonides also for ever put off the decision of his opinion. We despise the bent 
brows of the philosophers, whom we know to be corrupters, and adulterers, and 
tyrants, and ever eloquent against their own vices. We who bear wisdom not in 
our dress, but in our mind we do not speak meat things, but we live them we 
boast that we have attained what they have sought for with the utmost eagerness, 
and have not been able to find. Why are we ungrateful? why do we grudge if the 
truth of divinity has ripened in the age of our time? Let us enjoy our benefits, 
and let us in rectitude moderate our judgments; let superstition be restrained; 
let impiety be expiated; let true religion be preserved. 
CHAP. XXXIX.--ARGUMENT: WHEN OCTAVIUS HAD FINISHED THIS ADDRESS, MINUCIUS AND 
CAECILIUS SATE FOR SOME TIME IN ATTENTIVE AND SILENT WONDER. AND MINUCIUS INDEED 
KEPT SILENCE IN ADMIRATION OF OCTAVIUS, SILENTLY REVOLVING WHAT HE HAD HEARD. 
When Octavius had brought his speech to a close, for some time we were struck 
into silence, and held our countenances fixed in attention and as for me, I was 
lost in the greatness of my admiration, that he had so adorned those things 
which it is easier to feel than to say, both by arguments and by examples, and 
by authorities derived from reading; and that he had repelled the malevolent 
objectors with the very weapons of the philosophers with which they are armed, 
and had moreover shown the truth not only as easy, but also as agreeable. 
CHAP. XL.--ARGUMENT: THEN CAECILIUS EXCLAIMS THAT HE IS VANQUISHED BY 
OCTAVIUS; AND THAT, BEING NOW CONQUEROR OVER ERROR, HE PROFESSES THE CHRISTIAN 
RELIGION. HE POST PONES, HOWEVER, TILL THE MORROW HIS TRAINING IN THE FULLER 
BELIEF OF ITS MYSTERIES. 
While, therefore, I was silently turning over these things in my own 'mind, 
Caecilius broke forth: "I congratulate as well my Octavius as myself, as much as 
possible on that tranquillity in which we live, and I do not wait for the 
decision. Even thus we have conquered: not unjustly do I assume to myself the 
victory. For even as he is my conqueror, so I am triumphant over error. 
Therefore, in what belongs to the substance of the question, I both confess 
concerning providence, and I yield to God; and I agree concerning the sincerity 
of the way of life which is now mine. Yet even still some things remain in my 
mind, not as resisting the truth, but as necessary to a perfect training of 
which on the morrow, as the sun is already sloping to his setting, we shall 
inquire at length in a more fitting and ready manner." 
CHAP. XLI.--ARGUMENT:FINALLY, ALL ARE PLEASED, AND JOYFULLY DEPART: 
CAECILIUS, THAT HE HAD BELIEVED; OCTAVIUS, THAT HE HAD CONQUERED; AND MINUCIUS, 
THAT THE FORMER HAD BELIEVED, AND THE LATTER HAD CONQUERED. 
"But for myself," said I, "I rejoice more fully on behalf of all of us; 
because also Octavius has conquered for me, in that the very great invidiousness 
of judging is taken away from me. Nor can I acknowledge by my praises the merit 
of his words: the testimony both of man, and of one man only, is weak. He has an 
illustrious reward from God, inspired by whom he has pleaded, and aided by whom 
he has gained the victory." 
After these things we departed, glad and cheerful: Caecilius, to rejoice that 
he had believed; Octavius, that he had succeeded; and I, that the one had 
believed, and the other had conquered. 

