
Origen












Origen. Commentary on John
Book X 
1. JESUS COMES TO CAPERNAUM. STATEMENTS OF THE FOUR EVANGELISTS REGARDING 
THIS. 
"After this He went down to Capernaum, He and His mother and His brothers and 
His disciples; and there they abode not many days. And the passover of the Jews 
was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and He found in the temple those 
that sold oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting, and He 
made a sort of scourge of cords, and cast them all out of the temple, and the 
sheep and the oxen, and He poured out the small money of the changers and 
overthrew their tables, and to those that sold the doves He said, Take these 
things hence; make not My Father's house a house of merchandize. Then His 
disciples remembered that it was written, that the zeal of thy house shall eat 
me up. The Jews therefore answered and said unto Him, What sign showest Thou 
unto us, that Thou doest such things? Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy 
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. The Jews therefore answered, 
Forty-six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou raise it up in three 
days? But He spoke of the temple of His body. When therefore He rose from the 
dead, His disciples remembered that He said this, and they believed the 
Scripture and the word which Jesus said. Now when He was at Jerusalem at the 
passover at the feast, many believed in His name, beholding His signs which He 
did. But Jesus Himself did not trust Himself to them, for that He knew all men, 
and because He had no need that any should bear witness concerning man. For He 
Himself knew what was in man." 
The numbers which are recorded in the book of that name obtained a place in 
Scripture in accordance with some principle which determines their proportion to 
each thing. We ought therefore to enquire whether the book of Moses which is 
called Numbers teaches us, should we be able to trace it out, in some special 
way, the principle with regard to this matter. This remark I make to you at the 
outset of my tenth book, for in many passages of Scripture I have observed the 
number ten to have a peculiar privilege, and you may consider carefully whether 
the hope is justified that this volume will bring you from God some special 
benefit. That this may prove to be the case, we will seek to yield ourselves as 
fully as we can to God, who loves to bestow His choicest gifts. The book begins 
at the words: "After this He went down to Capernaum, He and His mother and His 
brothers and His disciples, and there they abode not many days." The other three 
Evangelists say that the Lord, after His conflict with the devil, departed into 
Galilee. Matthew and Luke represent that he was first at Nazara, and then left 
them and came and dwelt in Capernaum. Matthew and Mark also state a certain 
reason why He departed thither, namely, that He had heard that John was cast 
into prison. The words are as follows: Matthew says, "Then the devil leaveth 
Him, and behold, angels came and ministered unto Him. But when He heard that 
John was delivered up, He departed into Galilee, and leaving Nazareth He came 
and dwelt at Capernaum on the seashore in the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali, 
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying, The 
land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali;" and after the quotation from Isaiah: 
"From that time Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent ye; for the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand." Mark has the following: "And He was in the desert forty days 
and forty nights tempted by Satan, and He was with the wild beasts; and the 
angels ministered unto Him. But after John was delivered up Jesus came into 
Galilee, preaching the Gospel of God, that the time is fulfilled and the kingdom 
of God is at hand; repent ye, and believe in the Gospel." Then after the 
narrative about Andrew and Peter and James and John, Mark writes: "And He 
entered into Capernaum, and straightway on the Sabbath He was teaching in 
thesynagogue." Luke has, "And having finished the temptation the devil departed 
from Him for a season. And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into 
Galilee, and a fame went out concerning Him into all the region round about, and 
He taught in their synagogues being glorified of all. And He came to Nazara, 
where He had been brought up, and He entered as His custom was into the 
synagogue on the Sabbath day." Then Luke gives what He said at Nazara, and how 
those in the synagogue were enraged at Him and cast Him out of the city and 
brought Him to the brow of the hill on which their cities were built, to cast 
Him down headlong, and how going through the midst of them the Lord went His 
way; and with this he connects the statement, "And He came down to Capernaum, a 
city of Galilee, and He was teaching them on the Sabbath day." 
2. THE DISCREPANCY BETWEEN JOHN AND THE FIRST THREE GOSPELS AT THIS PART OF 
THE NARRATIVE, LITERALLY READ, THE NARRATIVES CANNOT BE HARMONIZED: THEY MUST BE 
INTERPRETED SPIRITUALLY. 
The truth of these matters must lie in that which is seen by the mind. If the 
discrepancy between the Gospels is not solved, we must give up our trust in the 
Gospels, as being true and written by a divine spirit, or as records worthy of 
credence, for both these characters are held to belong to these works. Those who 
accept the four Gospels, and who do not consider that their apparent discrepancy 
is to be solved anagogically (by mystical interpretation), will have to clear up 
the difficulty, raised above, about the forty days of the temptation, a period 
for which no room can be found in any way in John's narrative; and they will 
also have to tell us when it was that the Lord came to Capernaum. If it was 
after the six days of the period of His baptism, the sixth being that of the 
marriage at Cans of Galilee, then it is clear that the temptation never took 
place, and that He never was at Nazara, and that John was not yet delivered up. 
Now, after Capernaum, where He abode not many days, the passover of the Jews was 
at hand, and He went up to Jerusalem, where He cast the sheep and oxen out of 
the temple, and poured out the small change of the bankers. In Jerusalem, too, 
it appears that Nicodemus, the ruler and Pharisee, first came to Him by night, 
and heard what we may read in the Gospel. "After these things, Jesus came, and 
His disciples, into the land of Judaea, and there He tarried with them and 
baptized, at the same time at which John also was baptizing in AEnon near Salim, 
because there were many waters there, and they came and were baptized; for John 
was not yet cast into prison." On this occasion, too, there was a questioning on 
the part of John's disciples with the Jews about purification, and they came to 
John, saying of the Saviour. "Behold, He baptizeth, and all come to Him." They 
had heard words from the Baptist, the exact tenor of which it is better to take 
from Scripture itself. Now, if we ask when Christ was first in Capernaum, our 
respondents, if they follow the words of Matthew, and of the other two, will 
say, After the temptation, when, "leaving Nazareth, He came and dwelt in 
Capernaum by the sea." But how can they show both the statements to be true, 
that of Matthew and Mark, that it was because He heard that John was delivered 
up that He departed into Galilee, and that of John, found there, after a number 
of other transactions, subsequent to His stay at Capernaum, after His going to 
Jerusalem, and His journey from there to Judaea, that John was not yet cast into 
prison, but was baptizing in AEnon near Salim? There are many other points on 
which the careful student of the Gospels will find that their narratives do not 
agree; and these we shall place before the reader, according to our power, as 
they occur. The student, staggered at the consideration of these things, will 
either renounce the attempt to find all the Gospels true, and not venturing to 
conclude that all our information about our Lord is untrustworthy, will choose 
at random one of them to be his guide; or he will accept the four, and will 
consider that their truth is not to be sought for in the outward and material 
letter. 
3. WHAT WEARE TO THINK OF THE DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT GOSPELS. 
We must, however, try to obtain some notion of the intention of the 
Evangelists in such matters, and we direct ourselves to this. Suppose there are 
several men who, by the spirit, see God, and know His words addressed to His 
saints, and His presence which He vouchsafes to them, appearing to them at 
chosen times for their advancement. There are several such men, and they are in 
different places, and the benefits they receive from above vary in shape and 
character. And let these men report, each of them separately, what he sees in 
spirit about God and His words, and His appearances to His saints, so that one 
of them speaks of God's appearances and words and acts to one righteous man in 
such a place, and another about other oracles and great works of the Lord, and a 
third of something else than what the former two have dealt with. And let there 
be a fourth, doing with regard to some particular matter something of the same 
kind as these three. And let the four agree with each other about something the 
Spirit has suggested to them all, and let them also make brief reports of other 
matters besides that one; then their narratives will fall out something on this 
wise: God appeared to such a one at such a time and in such a place, and did to 
him thus and thus; as if He had appeared to him in such a form, and had led him 
by the hand to such a place, and then done to him thus and thus. The second will 
report that God appeared at the very time of the foresaid occurrences, in a 
certain town, to a person who is named, a second person, and in a place far 
removed from that of the former account, and he will report a different set of 
words spoken at the same time to this second person. And let the same be 
supposed to be the case with the third and with the fourth. And let them, as we 
said, agree, these witnesses who report true things about God, and about His 
benefits conferred on certain men, let them agree with each other in some of the 
narratives they report. He, then, who takes the writings of these men for 
history, or for a representation of real things by a historical image, and who 
supposes God to be within certain limits in space, and to be unable to present 
to several persons in different places several visions of Himself at the same 
time, or to be making several speeches at the same moment, he will deem it 
impossible that our four writers are all speaking truth. To him it is impossible 
that God, who is in certain limits in space, could at the same set time be 
saying one thing to one man and another to another, and that He should be doing 
a thing and the opposite thing as well, and, to put it bluntly, that He should 
be both sitting and standing, should one of the writers represent Him as 
standing at the time, and making a certain speech in such a place to such a man, 
while a second writer speaks of Him as sitting. 
4. SCRIPTURE CONTAINS MANY CONTRADICTIONS, AND MANY STATEMENTS WHICH ARE NOT 
LITERALLY TRUE, BUT MUST BE READ SPIRITUALLY AND MYSTICALLY. 
In the case I have supposed where the historians desire to teach us by an 
image what they have seen in their mind, their meaning would be found, if the 
four were wise, to exhibit no disagreement; and we must understand that with the 
four Evangelists it is not otherwise. They made full use for their purpose of 
things done by Jesus in the exercise of His wonderful and extraordinary power; 
they use in the same way His sayings, and in some places they tack on to their 
writing, with language apparently implying things of sense, things made manifest 
to them in a purely intellectual way. I do not condemn them if they even 
sometimes dealt freely with things which to the eye of history happened 
differently, and changed them so as to subserve the mystical aims they had in 
view; so as to speak of a thing which happened in a certain place, as if it had 
happened in another, or of what took place at a certain time, as if it had taken 
place at another time, and to introduce into what was spoken in a certain way 
some changes of their own. They proposed to speak the truth where it was 
possible both materially and spiritually, and where this was not possible it was 
their intention to prefer the spiritual to the material. The spiritual truth was 
often preserved, as one might say, in the material falsehood. As, for example, 
we might judge of the story of Jacob and Esau. Jacob says to Isaac, "I am Esau 
thy firstborn son," and spiritually he spoke the truth, for he already partook 
of the rights of the first-born, which were perishing in his brother, and 
clothing himself with the goatskins he assumed the outward semblance of Esau, 
and was Esau all but the voice praising God, so that Esau might afterward find a 
place to receive a blessing. For if Jacob had not been blessed as Esau, neither 
would Esau perhaps have been able to receive a blessing of his own. And Jesus 
too is many things, according to the conceptions of Him, of which it is quite 
likely that the Evangelists took up different notions; while yet they were in 
agreement with each other in the different things they wrote. Statements which 
are verbally contrary to each other, are made about our Lord, namely, that He 
was descended from David and that He was not descended from David. The statement 
is true, "He was descended from David," as the Apostle says, "born of the seed 
of David according to the flesh," if we apply this to the bodily part of Him; 
but the self-same statement is untrue if we understand His being born of the 
seed of David of His diviner power; for He was declared to be the Son of God 
with power. And for this reason too, perhaps, the sacred prophecies speak of Him 
now as a servant, and now as a Son. They call Him a servant on account of the 
form of a servant which he wore, and because He was of the seed of David, but 
they call Him the Son of God according to His character as first-born. Thus it 
is true to call Him man and to call Him not man; man, because He was capable of 
death; not man, on account of His being diviner than man. Marcion, I suppose, 
took sound words in a wrong sense, when he rejected His birth from Mary, and 
declared that as to His divine nature He was not born of Mary, and hence made 
bold to delete from the Gospel the passages which have this effect. And a like 
fate seems to have overtaken those who make away with His humanity and receive 
His deity alone; and also those opposites of these who cancel His deity and 
confess Him as a man to be a holy man, and the most righteous of all men. And 
those who hold the doctrine of Dokesis, not remembering that He humbled Himself 
even unto death and became obedient even to the cross, but only imagining in Him 
the absence of suffering, the superiority to all such accidents, they do what 
they can to deprive us of the man who is more just than all men, and are left 
with a figure which cannot save them, for as by one man came death, so also by 
one man is the justification of life. We could not have received such benefit as 
we have from the Logos had He not assumed the man, had He remained such as He 
was from the beginning with God the Father, and had He DOt taken up man, the 
first man of all, the man more precious than all others, purer than all others 
and capable of receiving Him. But after that man we also shall be able to 
receive Him, to receive Him so great and of such nature as He was, if we prepare 
a place in proportion to Him in our soul. So much I have said of the apparent 
discrepancies in the Gospels, and of my desire to have them treated in the way 
of spiritual interpretation. 
5. PAUL ALSO MAKES CONTRADICTORY STATEMENTS ABOUT HIMSELF, AND ACTS IN 
OPPOSITE WAYS AT DIFFERENT TIMES. 
On the same passage one may also make use of such an example as that of Paul, 
who at one place says that he is carnal, sold under sin, and thus was not able 
to judge anything, while in another place he is the spiritual man who is able to 
judge all things and himself to be judged by no man. Of the carnal one are the 
words, "Not what I would that do I practise, but what I hate that do I." And he 
too who was caught up to the third heaven and heard unspeakable words is a 
different Paul from him who says. Of such an one I will glory, but of myself I 
will not glory. If he becomes to the Jews as a Jew that he may gain the Jews, 
and to those under the law as under the law that he may gain those under the 
law, and to them that are without law as without law, not being without law to 
God, but under law to Christ, that he may gain those without law, and if to the 
weak he becomes weak that he may gain the weak, it is clear that these 
statements must be examined each by itself, that he becomes a Jew, and that 
sometimes he is under the law and at another time without law, and that 
sometimes he is weak. Where, for example, he says something by way of permission 
and not by commandment,there we may recognize that he is weak; for who, he says, 
is weak, and I am not weak? 
When he shaves his head and makes an offering, or when he circumcises 
Timothy, he is a Jew; but when he says to the Athenians, "I found an altar with 
the inscription, To the unknown God. That, then, which ye worship not knowing 
it, that declare I unto you," and, "As also some of your own poets have said, 
For we also are His offspring," then he becomes to those without the law as 
without the law, adjuring the least religious of men to espouse religion, and 
turning to his own purpose the saying of the poet, "From Love do we begin; his 
race are we." And instances might perhaps be found where, to men not Jews and 
yet under the law, he is under the law. 
6. DIFFERENT ACCOUNTS OF THE CALL OF PETER, AND OF THE IMPRISONMENT OF THE 
BAPTIST. THE MEANING OF "CAPERNAUM." 
These examples may be serviceable to illustrate statements not only about the 
Saviour, but about the disciples too, for here also there is some discrepancy of 
statement. For there is a difference in thought perhaps between Simon who is 
found by his own brother Andrew, and who is addressed "Thou shalt be called 
Cephas," and him who is seen by Jesus when walking by the sea of Galilee, along 
with his brother, and addressed conjointly with that brother, "Come after Me, 
and I will make you fishers of men." There was some fitness in the fact that the 
writer who goes more to the root of the matter and tells of the Word becoming 
flesh, and hence does not record the human generation of the Word who was in the 
beginning with God, should not tell us of Simon's being found at the seashore 
and called away from there, but of his being found by his brother who had been 
staying with Jesus at the tenth hour, and of his receiving the name Cephas in 
connection with his being thus found out. If he was seen by Jesus when walking 
by the sea of Galilee, it would scarcely be on a later occasion that he was 
addressed, "Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build My church." With John 
again the Pharisees know Jesus to be baptizing with His disciples, adding this 
to His other great activities; but the Jesus of the three does not baptize at 
all. John the Baptist, too, with the Evangelist of the same name, goes on a long 
time without being cast into prison. With Matthew, on the contrary, he is put in 
prison almost at the time of the temptation of Jesus, and this is the occasion 
of Jesus retiring to Galilee, to avoid being put in prison. But in John there is 
nothing at alI about John's being put in prison. Who is so wise and so able as 
to learn all the things that are recorded about Jesus in the four Evangelists, 
and both to understand each incident by itself, and have a connected view of all 
His sojournings and words and acts at each place? As for the passage presently 
before us, it gives in the order of events that on the sixth day the Saviour, 
after the business of the marriage at Cana of Galilee, went down with His mother 
and His brothers and His disciples to Capernaum, which means" field of 
consolation." For after the feasting and the wine it was fitting that the 
Saviour should come to the field of consolation with His mother and His 
disciples, to console those whom He was training for disciples and the soul 
which had conceived Him by the Holy Ghost, with the fruits which were to stand 
in that full field. 
7. WHY HIS BROTHERS ARE NOT CALLED TO THE WEDDING; AND WHY HE ABIDES AT 
CAPERNAUM NOT MANY DAYS. 
But we must ask why His brothers are not called to the wedding: they were not 
there, for it is not said they were; but they go down to Capernaum with Him and 
His mother and His disciples. We must also examine why on this occasion they do 
not "go in to" Capernaum, nor "go up to," but "go down to" it. Consider if we 
must not understand by His brothers here the powers which went down along with 
Him, not called to the wedding according to the explanations given above, since 
it is in lower and humbler places than those who are called disciples of Christ, 
and in another way, that these brothers receive assistance. For if His mother is 
called, then there are some bearing fruit, and even to these the Lord goes down 
with the servants and disciples of the Word, to help such persons, His mother 
also being with Him. Those indeed who are called Capernaum appear not to be able 
to allow Jesus and those who went down with Him to make a longer stay with them: 
hence they remain with them not many days. For the lower field of consolation 
does not admit the illumination of many doctrines, but is only capable of a few. 
To get a clear view of the difference between those who receive Jesus for longer 
and for shorter time, we may compare with this, "They abode there not many 
days," the words recorded in Matthew as spoken by Christ when risen from the 
dead to His disciples who were being sent out to teach all nations, "Behold, I 
am with you always, even to the end of the world." To those who are to know all 
that human nature can know while it still is here, is said with emphasis, "I am 
with you;" add as the rise of each new day upon the field of contemplation 
brings more days before the eyes of the blessed, therefore He says, "All the 
days till the end of the world." As for those in Capernaum, on the contrary, to 
whom they go down as to the more needy, not only Jesus, but also His mother and 
His brothers and His disciples "abode there not many days." 
8. HOW CHRIST ABIDES WITH BELIEVERS TO THE END OF THE AGE, AND WHETHER HE 
ABIDES WITH THEM AFTER THAT CONSUMMATION. 
Some may very likely and not unreasonably ask, whether, when all the days of 
this age are over, there will no longer be any one to say, "Lo, I am with you," 
with those, namely, who received Him till the fulfilment of the age, for the 
"until" seems to indicate a certain limit of time. To this we must say that the 
phrase, "I am with you," is not the same as "I am in you." We might say more 
properly that the Saviour was not in His disciples but with them, so long as 
they had not arrived in their minds at the consummation of the age. But when 
they see to be at hand, as far as their effort is concerned, the consummation of 
the world which is crucified to them, then Jesus will be no longer with them, 
but in them, and they will say, "It is no longer I that live but Christ that 
lives in me," and "If ye seek a proof of Christ that speaketh in me." In saying 
this we are keeping for our part also to the ordinary interpretation which makes 
the "always" the time down to the consummation of the age, and are not asking 
more than is attainable to human nature as it is here. That interpretation may 
be adhered to and justice yet be done to the "I." He who is with His disciples 
who are sent out to teach all the nations, until the consummation, may be He who 
emptied Himself and took the form of a servant, and yet afterwards may be 
another in point of state; afterwards He may be such as He was before He emptied 
Himself, until all His enemies are made by His Father the footstool of His feet; 
and after this, when the Son has delivered up the kingdom to God and the Father, 
it may be the Father who says to them, "Behold, I am with you." But whether it 
is "all the days" up to that time, or simply "all the days," or not "all days" 
but "every day," any one may consider that likes. Our plan does not allow us at 
present to digress so far. 
9. HERACLEON SAYS THAT JESUS IS NOT STATED TO HAVE DONE ANYTHING AT 
CAPERNAUM. BUT IN THE OTHER GOSPELS HE DOES MANY THINGS THERE. 
But Heracleon, dealing with the words, "After this He went down to 
Capernaum," declares that they indicate the introduction of another transaction, 
and that the word "went down" is not without significance. "Capernaum," he says, 
"means these farthest-out parts of the world, these districts of matter, into 
which He descended, and because the place was not suitable, he says, He is not 
reported either to have done anything or said anything in it." Now if the Lord 
had not been reported in the other Gospels either as having done or said 
anything at Capernaum, we might perhaps have hesitated whether this view ought 
or ought not to be received. But that is far from being the case. Matthew says 
our Lord left Nazareth and came and dwelt at Capernaum on the seaside, and that 
from that time He began to preach, saying, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven 
is at hand." And Mark, starting in his narrative from the temptation by the 
devil, relates that after John was cast into prison, Jesus came into Galilee, 
proclaiming the Gospel of God, and after the call of the four fishermen to the 
Apostleship, "they enter into Capernaum; and straightway on the Sabbath day He 
taught in the synagogue, and they were astonished at His doctrine." And Mark 
records an action of Jesus also which took place at Capernaum, for he goes on to 
say, "In their synagogue there was a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried 
out, saying, Ah! what have we to do with Thee, Thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art Thou 
come to destroy us? We know Thee who Thou art, the Son of God. And Jesus rebuked 
him, saying, Hold thy peace and come out of him; and the unclean spirit, tearing 
him and crying with a loud voice, came out of him. And they were all amazed." 
And at Capernaum Simon's mother-in-law is cured of her fever. And Mark adds that 
when evening was come all those were cured who were sick and who were possessed 
with demons. Luke's report is very like Mark's about Capernaum. He says, "And He 
came to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and He was teaching them on the Sabbath 
day, and they were astonished at His teachings, for His word was with power. And 
in the synagogue there was a man having a spirit of an unclean demon, and he 
cried out with a loud voice, Ah! what have we to do with Thee, Thou Jesus of 
Nazareth? Hast Thou come to destroy us? I know Thee who Thou art, the holy one 
of God. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace and come out of him. Then 
the demon having thrown him down in the midst, went out of him, doing him no 
harm." And then Luke reports how the Lord rose up from the synagogue and went 
into the house of Simon, and rebuked the fever in his mother-in-law, and cured 
her of her disease; and after this cure, "when the sun was setting," he says, 
"all, as many as had persons sick with divers diseases, brought them to Him, and 
He laid his hands on each one of them and cured them. And demons also went out 
from many, crying and saying, Thou art the Son of God, and He rebuked them and 
suffered them not to speak because they knew that He was the Christ." We have 
presented all these statements as to the Saviour's sayings and doings at 
Capernaum in order to refute Heracleon's interpretation of our passage, "Hence 
He is not said to have done or to have spoken anything there." He must either 
give two meanings to Capernaum, and show us his reasons for them, or if he 
cannot do this he must give up saying that the Saviour visited any place to no 
purpose. We, for our part, should we come to passages where even a comparison of 
the other Gospels fails to show that Jesus' visit to this place or that was not 
accompanied by any results, will seek with the divine assistance to make it 
clear that His coming was not in vain. 
10. SIGNIFICANCE OF CAPERNAUM. 
Matthew for his part adds, that when the Lord had entered into Capernaum the 
centurion came to him, saying, "My boy is lying in my house sick of the palsy, 
grievously tormented," and after telling the Lord some more about him, received 
the reply, "Go, and as thou hast believed, so be it unto thee." And Matthew then 
gives us the story of Peter's mother-in-law, in close agreement with the other 
two. I conceive it to be a creditable piece of work and becoming to one who is 
anxious to hear about Christ, to collect from the four Gospels all that is 
related about Capernaum, and the discourses spoken, and the works done there, 
and how many visits the Lord paid to the place, and how, at one time, He is said 
to have gone down to it, and at another to have entered into it, and where He 
came from when He did so. If we compare all these points together, we shall not 
go astray in the meaning we ascribe to Capernaum. On the one hand, the sick are 
healed, and other works of power are done there, and on the other, the 
preaching, Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, begins there, and 
this appears to be a sign, as we showed when entering on this subject, of some 
more needy place of consolation, made so perhaps by Jesus, who comforted men by 
what He taught and by what He did there, in that place of consolation. For we 
know that the names of places agree in their meaning with the things connected 
with Jesus; as Gergesa, where the citizens of these parts besought Him to depart 
out of their coasts, means, "The dwelling of the casters-out." And this, also, 
we have noticed about Capernaum, that not only did the preaching, "Repent ye, 
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand," begin there, but that according to the 
three Evangelists Jesus performed there His first miracles. None of the three, 
however, added to the first wonders which he records as done in Capernaum, that 
note attached by John the disciple to the first work of Jesus, "This beginning 
of His signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee." For that which was done in Capernaum 
was not the beginning of the signs, since the leading sign of the Son of God was 
good cheer, and in the light of human experience it is also the most 
representative of Him. For the Word of God does not show forth His own beauty so 
much in healing the sick, as in His tendering the temperate draught to make glad 
those who are in good health and are able to join in the banquet. 
11. WHY THE PASSOVER IS SAID TO BE THAT OF THE "JEWS." ITS INSTITUTION: AND 
THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN "FEASTS OF THE LORD" AND FEASTS NOT SO SPOKEN OF. 
"And the passover of the Jews was at hand." Inquiring into the accuracy of 
the most wise John (on this passage), I put myself the question, What is 
indicated by the addition "of the Jews"? Of what other nation was the passover a 
festival? Would it not have been enough to say, "And the passover was at hand"? 
It may, however, be the case that the human passover is one thing when kept by 
men not as Scripture intended, and that the divine passover is another thing, 
the true passover, observed in spirit and truth by those who worship God in 
spirit and in truth; and then the distinction indicated in the text may be that 
between the divine passover and that said to be of the Jews. We should attend to 
the passover law and observe what the Lord says of it when it is first mentioned 
in Scripture. "And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, 
saying, This month is to you the beginning of months, it is the first for you 
among the months of the year. Speak thou to all the congregation of the children 
of Israel, saying, On the tenth of this mouth shall every man take a sheep, 
according to the houses of your families;" then after some directions in which 
the word passover does not occur again, he adds, "Thus shall ye eat it, your 
loins girt and your shoes on your feet, and your staves in your hands, and ye 
shall eat it with haste. It is the passover of the Lord." He does not say, "It 
is your passover." And a little further on He names the festival again in the 
same way, "And it shall come to pass, when your sons say to you, What is this 
service? And ye shall say to them, It is the sacrifice, the passover of the 
Lord, how He guarded the houses of the children of Israel." And again, a little 
further on, "And the Lord spake to Moses and Aaron, saying, This is the law of 
the passover. No alien shall eat of it." And again in a little, "But if a 
proselyte come to you, and keep the passover of the Lord, every male of him 
shall be circumcised." Observe that in the law we never find it said, "Your 
passover;" but in all the passages quoted the phrase occurs once without any 
adjunct, while we have three times "The passover of the Lord." To make sure that 
there is such a distinction between the passover of the Lord and the passover of 
the Jews, we may consider the way in which Isaiah speaks of the matter: "Your 
new moons and your Sabbaths and your great day I cannot bear; your fast and your 
holiday and your new moons and your feasts my soul hateth." The Lord does not 
call them His own, these observances of sinners (they are hated of His soul, if 
such there be); neither the new moons, nor the Sabbaths, nor the great day, nor 
the fast, nor the festivals. And in the legislation about the Sabbath in Exodus, 
we read, "And Moses said unto them, This is the word which the Lord spake, The 
Sabbath is a holy rest unto the Lord." And a little further on, "And Moses said, 
Eat ye; for to-day is a Sabbath unto the Lord." And in Numbers, before the 
sacrifices which are offered at each festival, as if all the festivals came 
under the law of the continuous and daily sacrifice, we find it written, "And 
the Lord spake unto Moses, Announce to the children of Israel, and thus shall 
thou say unto them, My gifts, My offerings, My fruits for a smell of sweet 
savour, ye shall observe to offer unto Me at My festivals. And thou shall say 
unto them, These are the offerings which ye shall offer unto the Lord." The 
festival set forth in Scripture He calls His own, not those of the people 
receiving the law, He speaks of His gifts, His offerings. A similar way of 
speaking is that in Exodus with regard to the people; it is said by God to be 
His own people, when it does not sin; but in the section about the calf He 
abjures it and calls it the people of Moses. On the one hand, "Thou shalt say to 
Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Let My people go, that they may serve Me in the 
wilderness. But if thou wilt not let My people go, behold, I will send against 
thee and against thy servants, and against thy people and against thy houses, 
the dog-fly; and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of the dog-fly, and 
on the land on which they are, against it will I send them. And I will glorify 
on that day the land of Gesem, on which My people are; on it there shall be no 
dog-fly, that thou mayest know that I am the Lord, the Lord of all the earth. 
And I will make a distinction between My people and thy people." To Moses, on 
the other hand, He says, "Go, descend quickly, for thy people hath transgressed, 
which thou leddest out of the land of Egypt." As, then, the people when it does 
not sin is the people of God, but when it sins is no longer spoken of as His, 
thus, also, the feasts when they are hated by the Lord's soul are said to be 
feasts of sinners, but when the law is given regarding them, they are called 
feasts of the Lord. Now of these feasts passover is one, which in the passage 
before us is said to be that not of the Lord, but of the Jews. In another 
passage, too, we find it said, "These are the feasts of the Lord, which ye shall 
call chosen, holy." From the mouth of the Lord Himself, then, we see that there 
is no gainsaying our statement on this point. Some one, no doubt, will ask about 
the words of the Apostle, where he writes to the Corinthians: "For our Passover 
also was sacrified for us, namely, Christ;" he does not say, "The Passover of 
the Lord was sacrificed, even Christ." To this we must say, either that the 
Apostle simply calls the passover our passover because it was sacrificed for us, 
or that every sacrifice which is really the Lord's, and the passover is one of 
these, awaits its consummation not in this age nor upon earth, but in the coming 
age and in heaven when the kingdom of heaven appears. As for those feasts, one 
of the twelve prophets says, "What will ye do in the days of assembly, and in 
the days of the feast of the Lord?" But Paul says in the Epistle to the Hebrews: 
"But ye are come unto Mount Zion, and to the city of the living God, the 
heavenly Jerusalem, and to ten thousands of angels, the assembly and church of 
the firstborn, who are written in heaven." And in the Epistle to the Colossians: 
"Let no one judge you in meat and in drink, or in respect of a feast-day or a 
new moon, or a sabbath-day; which are a shadow of the things to come." 
12. OF THE HEAVENLY FESTIVALS, OF WHICH THOSE ON EARTH ARE TYPICAL. 
Now in what manner, in those heavenly things of which the shadow was present 
to the Jews on earth, those will celebrate festivals who have first been trained 
by tutors and governors under the true law, until the fulness of the thee should 
come, namely, above, when we shall be able to receive into ourselves the perfect 
measure of the Son of God, this it is the work of that wisdom to make plain 
which has been hidden in a mystery; and it also may show to our thought how the 
laws about meats are symbols of those things which will there nourish and 
strengthen our soul. But it is vain to think that one desiring to work out in 
his fancy the great sea of such ideas, even if he wished to show how local 
worship is still a pattern and shadow of heavenly things, and that the 
sacrifices and the sheep are full of meaning, that he should advance further 
than the Apostle, who seeks indeed to lift our minds above earthly views of the 
law, but who does not show us to any extent how these things are to be. Even if 
we look at the festivals, of which passover is one, from the point of view of 
the age to come, we have still to ask how it is that our passover is now 
sacrificed, namely, Christ, and not only so, but is to be sacrificed hereafter. 
13. SPIRITUAL MEANING OF THE PASSOVER. 
A few points may be added in connection with the doctrines now under 
consideration, though it would require a special discussion in many volumes to 
treat of all the mystical statements about the law, and specially of those 
connected with the festivals, and more particularly still with the passover. The 
passover of the Jews consists of a sheep which is sacrificed, each taking a 
sheep according to his father's house; and the passover is accompanied by the 
slaughter of thousands of rams and goats, in proportion to the number of the 
houses of the people. But our Passover is sacrificed for us, namely, Christ. 
Another feature of the Jewish festival is unleavened bread; all leaven is made 
to disappear out of their houses; but "we keep the feast not with the old 
leaven, nor with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened 
bread of sincerity and truth." Whether there be any passover and any feast of 
leaven beyond the two we have mentioned, is a point we must examine more 
carefully, since these serve for a pattern and a shadow of the heavenly ones we 
spoke of, and not only such things as food and drink and new moons and sabbaths, 
but the festivals also, are a shadow of the things to come. In the first place, 
when the Apostle says, "Our passover is sacrificed, Christ," one may feel with 
regard to this such doubts as these. If the sheep with the Jews is a type of the 
sacrifice of Christ, then one should have been offered and not a multitude, as 
Christ is one; or if many sheep were offered it is to follow out the type, as if 
many Christs were sacrificed. But not to dwell on this, we may ask how the 
sheep, which was the victim, contains an image of Christ, when the sheep was 
sacrificed by men who were observing the law, but Christ was put to death by 
transgressors of the law, and what application can be found in Christ of the 
direction, "They shall eat the flesh this night, roast with fire, and unleavened 
bread on bitter herbs shall they eat," and "Eat not of it raw, nor sodden with 
water, but roast with fire; the head with the feet and the entrails; ye shall 
not set any of it apart till the morning, and a bone thereof ye shall not break. 
But that which is left thereof till the morning ye shall burn." The sentence, "A 
bone of it ye shall not break," John appears to have made use of in his Gospel, 
as applying to the transactions connected with Christ, and connecting with them 
the occasion spoken of in the law when those eating the sheep are bidden not to 
break a bone of it. He writes as follows: "The soldiers therefore came and brake 
the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him; but when 
they came to Jesus and saw that He was already dead, they brake not His legs, 
but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His side, and straightway there 
came out blood and water. And he that hath seen hath borne witness and his 
witness is true, and he knoweth that he sayeth truth that ye also may believe. 
And these things took place that the Scripture might be fulfilled, "A bone of 
Him ye shall not break." There are a myriad other points besides this in the 
Apostle's language which would call for inquiry, both about the passover and the 
unleavened bread, but they would have to be dealt with, as we said above, in a 
special work of great length. At present we can only give an epitome of them as 
they bear on the text presently before us, and aim at a short solution of the 
principal problem. We call to mind the words, "This is the Lamb of God that 
taketh away the sin of the world," for it is said of the passover, "Ye shall 
take it of the lambs or of the goats." The Evangelist here agrees with Paul, and 
both are involved in the difficulties we spoke of above. But on the other hand 
we have to say that if the Word became flesh, and the Lord says, "Unless ye eat 
the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in you. He 
that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood, hath eternal life, and I will raise 
him up at the last day. For My flesh is meat indeed and My blood is drink 
indeed. He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood abideth in Me, and I in 
him,"--then the flesh thus spoken of is that of the Lamb that takes away the sin 
of the world; and this is the blood, some of which was to be put on the two side 
posts of the door, and on the lintels in the houses, in which we eat the 
passover. Of the flesh of this Lamb it is necessary that we should eat in the 
thee of the world, which is night, and the flesh is to be roast with fire, and 
eaten with unleavened bread; for the Word of God is not flesh and flesh only. He 
says, in fact, Himself, "I am the bread of life," and "This is the bread of life 
which came down from heaven, that a man should eat of it, and not die. I am the 
bread of life that came down from heaven; if a man eat of this bread, he shall 
live for ever." We must not overlook, however, that by a loose use of words, any 
food is called bread, as we read in Moses in Deuteronomy, "Forty days He ate no 
bread and drank no water," instead of, He took no food, either wet or dry. I am 
led to this observation by John's saying, "And the bread which I will give is My 
flesh, for the life of the world." Again, we eat the flesh of the Lamb, with 
bitter herbs, and unleavened bread, when we repent of our sins and grieve with 
the sorrow which is according to God, a repentance which operates for our 
salvation, and is not to be repented of; or when, on account of our trials, we 
turn to the speculations which are found to be those of truth, and are nourished 
by them. We are not, however, to eat the flesh of the Lamb raw, as those do who 
are slaves of the letter, like irrational animals, and those who are enraged at 
men truly reasonable, because they desire to understand spiritual things; truly, 
they share the nature of savage beasts. But we must strive to convert the 
rawness of Scripture into well-cooked food, not letting what is written grow 
flabby and wet and thin, as those do who have itching ears, and turn away their 
ears from the truth; their methods tend to a loose and flabby conduct of life. 
But let us be of a fervent spirit and keep hold of the fiery words given to us 
of God, such as Jeremiah received from Him who spoke to him, "Behold, I have 
made My words in thy mouth like fire," and let us see that the flesh of the Lamb 
be well cooked, so that those who partake of it may say, as Christ speaks in us, 
"Our heart burned by the way, as He opened to us the Scriptures." Further, if it 
is our duty to enquire into such a point as the roasting of the flesh of the 
Lamb with fire, we must not forget the parallel of what Jeremiah suffered on 
account of the words of God, as he says: "And it was as a glowing fire, burning 
in my bones, and I am without any strength, and I cannot bear it." But, in this 
eating, we must begin at the head, that is to say, at the principal and the most 
essential doctrines about heavenly things, and we must end at the feet, the last 
branches of learning which enquire as to the final nature in things, or about 
more material things, or about things under the earth, or about wicked spirits 
and unclean demons. For it may be that the account of these things is not 
obvious, like themselves, but is laid away among the mysteries of Scripture, so 
that it may be called, tropically, the feet of the Lamb. Nor must we fail to 
deal with the entrails, which are within and hidden from us; we must approach 
the whole of Scripture as one body, we must not lacerate nor break through the 
strong and well-knit connections which exist in the harmony of its whole 
composition, as those do who lacerate, so far as they can, the unity of the 
Spirit that is in all the Scriptures. But this aforesaid prophecy of the Lamb is 
to be our nourishment only during the night of this dark life of ours; what 
comes after this life is, as it were, the dawn of day, and why should we leave 
over till then the food which can only be useful to us now? But when the night 
is passed, and the day which succeeds it is at hand, then we shall have bread to 
eat which has nothing to do with the leavened bread of the older and lower state 
of things, but is unleavened, and that will serve our turn until that which 
comes after the unleavened bread is given us, the manna, which is food for 
angels rather than men. Every one of us, then, may sacrifice his lamb in every 
house of our fathers; and while one breaks the law, not sacrificing the lamb at 
all, another may keep the commandment entirely, offering his sacrifice, and 
cooking it aright, and not breaking a bone of it. This, then, in brief, is the 
interpretation of the Passover sacrificed for us, which is Christ, in accordance 
with the view taken of it by the Apostles, and with the Lamb in the Gospel. For 
we ought not to suppose that historical things are types of historical things, 
and material things of material, but that material things are typical of 
spiritual things, and historical things of intellectual. It is not necessary 
that our discourse should now ascend to that third passover which is to be 
celebrated with myriads of angels in the most perfect and most blessed exodus; 
we have already spoken of these things to a greater extent than the passage 
demands. 
14. IN THE FIRST THREE GOSPELS THE PASSOVER IS SPOKEN OF ONLY AT THE CLOSE OF 
THE MINISTRY; IN JOHN AT THE BEGINNING. REMARKS ON THIS. HERACLEON ON THE 
PASSOVER. 
We must not, however, fail to enquire into the statement that the passover of 
the Jews was at hand, when the Lord was at Capernaum with His mother and His 
brothers and His disciples. In the Gospel according to Matthew, after being left 
by the devil, and after the angels came and ministered to Him, when He heard 
that John was delivered up He withdrew into Galilee, and leaving Nazara He came 
and dwelt in Capernaum. Then He began to preach, and chose the four fishermen 
for His Apostles, and taught in the synagogues of the whole of Galilee and 
healed those who were brought to Him. Then He goes up into the mountain and 
speaks the beatitudes and what follows them; and after finishing that 
instruction He comes down from the mountain and enters Capernaum a second thee. 
Then He embarked in a ship and crossed over to the other side to the country of 
the Gergesenes. On their beseeching Him to depart out of their coasts He 
embarked in a ship and crossed over and came to His own city. Then He wrought 
certain cures and went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in their 
synagogues; after this most of the events of the Gospels take place, before 
Matthew indicates the approach of the thee of passover. With the other 
Evangelists also, after the stay at Capernaum it is long till we come to any 
mention of the passover; which may confirm in their opinion those who take the 
view about Capernaum which was set forth above. That stay, in the neighbourhood 
of the passover of the Jews, is set in a brighter light by that nearness, both 
because it was better in itself, and still more because at the passover of the 
Jews there are found in the temple those who sell oxen and sheep and doves. This 
adds emphasis to the statement that the passover was not that of the Lord but 
that of the Jews; the Father's house was made, in the eyes of those who did not 
hallow it, a house of merchandise, and the passover of the Lord became for those 
who took a low and material view of it a Jewish passover. A fitter occasion than 
the present will occur for enquiring as to the thee of the passover, which took 
place about the spring equinox, and for any other enquiry which may arise in 
connection with it. As for Heracleon, he says, "This is the great festival; for 
it was a type of the passion of the Saviour; not only was the lamb put to death, 
the eating of it afforded relaxation, the killing it pointed to what of the 
passion of the Saviour was in this world, and the eating it to the rest at the 
marriage." We have given his words, that it may be seen with what a want of 
caution and how loosely he proceeds, and with what an absence of constructive 
skill even on such a theme as this; and how little regard in consequence is to 
be paid to him. 
15. DISCREPANCY OF THE GOSPEL NARRATIVES CONNECTED WITH THE CLEANSING OF THE 
TEMPLE. 
"And Jesus went up to Jerusalem. And He found in the temple those that sold 
oxen and sheep and doves and the changers of money sitting; and He made a 
scourge of cords, and cast out of the temple the sheep and the oxen, and poured 
out the small coin of the changers, and overturned their tables, and to those 
who sold the doves He said, Take these things hence; make not My Father's house 
a house of merchandise. Then His disciples remembered that it was written, The 
zeal of thy house shall eat me up." It is to be noted that John makes this 
transaction of Jesus with those He found selling oxen and sheep and doves in the 
temple His second work; while the other Evangelists narrate a similar incident 
almost at the end and in connection with the story of the passion. Matthew has 
it thus: "At Jesus' entry into Jerusalem the whole city was stirred, saying, Who 
is this? And the multitudes said, This is Jesus the prophet, from Nazareth of 
Galilee. And Jesus went into the temple and cast out all them that sold and 
bought in the temple, and He overturned the tables of the money-changers and the 
seats of them that sold doves. And He says to them, It is written, My house 
shall be called a house of prayer, hut you make it a den of robbers." Mark has 
the following: "And they came to Jerusalem. And having entered into the temple 
He began to cast out those that sold and bought in the temple, and the tables of 
the money-changers He overthrew and the seats of them that sold doves. And He 
suffered not that any should carry a vessel through the temple; and He taught 
and said unto them, Is it not written that My house shall be called a house of 
prayer for all the nations? But you have made it a den of robbers." And Luke: 
"And when he came near, He beheld the city and wept over it, saying that, if 
thou hadst known in this day, even thou, the things that belong to peace; but 
now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, when they 
shall surround thee and shut thee in on every side, and shall dash thee to the 
ground and thy children, and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon 
another, because thou knewest not the thee of thy visitation. And He entered 
into the temple and began to cast out those that sold, saying to them, It is 
written, My house shall be a house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of 
robbers." It is further to be observed that what is recorded by the three as 
having taken place in connection with the Lord's going up to Jerusalem; when He 
did these things in the temple, is narrated in a very similar manner by John as 
taking place long after this, after another visit to Jerusalem different from 
this one. We must consider the statements, and in the first place that of 
Matthew, where we read: "When He drew nigh to Jerusalem and came to Bethphage 
over against the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, saying unto 
them, Go ye into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall fine an 
ass tied and a colt with her; loose them and bring them to Me. And if any man 
say unto you, What are you doing? you shall say, The Lord hath need of them, and 
straightway he will send them. But this was done that it might be fulfilled 
which was spoken by the prophet, saying, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, 
thy king cometh, meek and seated upon an ass and upon the colt of an ass. And 
the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them; they brought the ass and the 
foal, and they placed on them their garments, and He sat thereon. And the most 
part of the multitude spread their garments on the road, but the multitudes that 
went before Him, and they that followed, cried, Hosanna to the Son of David, 
blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest." 
After this comes, "And when He had entered into Jerusalem the whole city was 
stirred," which we cited above. Then we have Mark's account: "And when they drew 
nigh unto Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany, to the Mount of Olives, He sends 
two of His disciples and says to them, Go ye into the village over against you. 
And straightway as ye enter into it ye shall find a colt tied, on which no man 
hath ever sat, loose it and bring it. And if any one say to you, Why do ye this? 
say, Because the Lord hath need of him, and straightway he will send him back 
hither. And they went and found the colt tied at the door outside on the road, 
and they loose him. And some of them that stood there said to them, What do ye, 
loosing the colt? And they said to them as Jesus told them, and they let them 
go. And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast on it their garments. But 
others cut down branches from the field and spread them in the way. And they 
that went before and they that followed cried, Hosanna, blessed is He that 
cometh in the name of the Lord; blessed be the kingdom that cometh, of our 
father David! Hosanna in the highest! And He went into Jerusalem to the temple, 
and looked round about on all things, and as it was already evening, He went out 
to Bethany with the twelve. And on the morrow when they were come forth from 
Bethany He was hungry." Then, after the affair of the withered fig tree, "They 
came to Jerusalem. And He went into the temple and began to cast out them that 
sold." Luke narrates as follows: "And it came to pass, when He drew near to 
Bethphage and Bethany at the mount that is called the Mount of Olives, He sent 
two of his disciples, saying, Go ye into the village over against you, in which 
when ye enter, ye shall find a colt tied, on which no man ever hath sate; loose 
him and bring him. And if any man asks you, Why do ye loose him? Ye shall say 
thus, The Lord hath need of him. And the disciples went and found as He said to 
them. And when they were loosing the colt its owners said to them, Why loose ye 
the colt? And they said, Because the Lord hath need of him. And they brought him 
to Jesus, and they threw their garments on the colt, and set Jesus thereon. And 
as He went, they strewed their garments in the way. And when He was drawing 
near, being now at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of 
the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the 
mighty works which they had seen, saying, Blessed is the King in the name of the 
Lord; peace in heaven and glory in the highest. And some of the Pharisees from 
the multitude said unto Him, Master, rebuke Thy disciples. And He answered and 
said, I say unto you, If these shall hold their peace, the stones will cry out. 
And when He drew near He beheld the city and wept over it," and so on, as we 
cited above. John, on the contrary, after giving an account nearly identical 
with this, as far as, "And Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and He found in the 
temple those who were selling oxen and sheep," gives a second account of an 
ascent of the Lord to Jerusalem, and then goes on to tell of the supper in 
Bethany six days before the passover, at which Martha served and Lazarus was at 
table. "On the morrow, a great multitude that had come to the feast, having 
heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, took branches of palm trees and went 
forth to meet Him; and they cried, Hosanna, blessed be the King of Israel in the 
name of the Lord. And Jesus, having found a young ass, sat thereon, as it is 
written, Fear not, daughter of Zion; behold thy King cometh, sitting on the foal 
of an ass." I have written out long sections from the Gospels, but I have 
thought it necessary to do so, in order to exhibit the discrepancy at this part 
of our Gospel. Three of the Gospels place these incidents, which we supposed to 
be the same as those narrated by John, in connection with one visit of the Lord 
to Jerusalem. While John, on the other hand, places them in connection with two 
visits which are widely separated from each other and between which were various 
journeys of the Lord to other places. I conceive it to be impossible for those 
who admit nothing more than the history in their interpretation to show that 
these discrepant statements are in harmony with each other. If any one considers 
that we have not given a sound exposition, let him write a reasoned rejoinder to 
this declaration of ours. 
16. THE STORY OF THE PURGING OF THE TEMPLE SPIRITUALIZED. TAKEN LITERALLY, IT 
PRESENTS SOME VERY DIFFICULT AND UNLIKELY FEATURES. 
We shall, however, expound according to the strength that is given to us the 
reasons which move us to recognize here a harmony; and in doing so we entreat 
Him who gives to every one that asks and strives acutely to enquire, and we 
knock that by the keys of higher knowledge the hidden things of Scripture may be 
opened to us. And first, let us fix our attention on the words of John, 
beginning, "And Jesus went up to Jerusalem." Now Jerusalem, as the Lord Himself 
teaches in the Gospel according to Matthew, "is the city of the great King." It 
does not lie in a depression, or in a low situation, but is built on a high 
mountain, and there are mountains round about it, and the participation of it is 
to the same place, and thither the tribes of the Lord went up, a testimony for 
Israel. But that city also is called Jerusalem, to which none of those upon the 
earth ascends, nor goes in; but every soul that possesses by nature some 
elevation and some acuteness to perceive the things of the mind is a citizen of 
that city. And it is possible even for a dweller in Jerusalem to be in sin (for 
it is possible for even the acutest minds to sin), should they not turn round 
quickly after their sin, when they have lost their power of mind and are on the 
point not only of dwelling in one of those strange cities of Judaea, but even of 
being inscribed as its citizens. Jesus goes up to Jerusalem, after bringing help 
to those in Cans of Galilee, and then going down to Capernaum, that He may do in 
Jerusalem the things which are written. He found in the temple, certainly, which 
is said to be the house of the Father of the Saviour, that is, in the church or 
in the preaching of the ecclesiastical and sound word, some who were making His 
Father's house a house of merchandise. And at all times Jesus finds some of this 
sort in the temple. For in that which is called the church, which is the house 
of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth, when are there not some 
money-changers sitting who need the strokes of the scourge Jesus made of small 
cords, and dealers in small coin who require to have their money poured out and 
their tables overturned? When are there not those who are inclined to 
merchandise, but need to be held to the plough and the oxen, that having put 
their hand to it and not turning round to the things behind them, they may be 
fit for the kingdom of God? When are there not those who prefer the mammon of 
unrighteousness to the sheep which give them the material for their true 
adornment? And there are always many who look down on what is sincere and pure 
and unmixed with any bitterness or gall, and who, for the sake of miserable 
gain, betray the care of those tropically called doves. When, therefore, the 
Saviour finds in the temple, the house of His Father, those who are selling oxen 
and sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting, He drives them out, 
using the scourge of small cords which He has made, along with the sheep and 
oxen of their trade, and pours out their stock of coin, as not deserving to be 
kept together, so little is it worth. He also overturns the tables in the souls 
of such as love money, saying even to those who sell doves, "Take these things 
hence," that they may no longer traffic in the house of God. But I believe that 
in these words He indicated also a deeper truth, and that we may regard these 
occurrences as a symbol of the fact that the service of that temple was not any 
longer to be carried on by the priests in the way of material sacrifices, and 
that the thee was coming when the law could no longer be observed, however much 
the Jews according to the flesh desired it. For when Jesus casts out the oxen 
and sheep, and orders the doves to be taken away, it was because oxen and sheep 
and doves were not much longer to be sacrificed there in accordance with Jewish 
practices. And possibly the coins which bore the stamp of material things and 
not of God were poured out by way of type; because the law which appears so 
venerable, with its letter that kills, was, now that Jesus had come and had used 
His scourge to the people, to be dissolved and poured out, the sacred office 
(episcopate) being transferred to those from the Gentiles who believed, and the 
kingdom of God being taken away from the Jews and given to a nation bringing 
forth the fruits of it. But it may also be the case that the natural temple is 
the soul skilled in reason, which, because of its inborn reason, is higher than 
the body; to which Jesus ascends from Capernaum, the lower-lying place of less 
dignity, and in which, before Jesus' discipline is applied to it, are found 
tendencies which are earthly and senseless and dangerous, and things which have 
the name but not the reality of beauty, and which are driven away by Jesus with 
His word plaited out of doctrines of demonstration and of rebuke, to the end 
that His Father's house may no longer be a house of merchandize but may receive, 
for its own salvation and that of others, that service of God which is performed 
in accordance with heavenly and spiritual laws. The ox is symbolic of earthly 
things, for he is a husbandman. The sheep, of senseless and brutal things, 
because it is more servile than most of the creatures without reason. Of empty 
and unstable thoughts, the dove. Of things that are thought good but are not, 
the small change. If any one objects to this interpretation of the passage and 
says that it is only pure animals that are mentioned in it, we must say that the 
passage would otherwise have an unlikely air. The occurence is necessarily 
related according to the possibilities of the story. It could not have been 
narrated that a herd of any other animals than pure ones had found access to the 
temple, nor could any have been sold there but those used for sacrifice. The 
Evangelist makes use of the known practice of the merchants at the times of the 
Jewish feasts; they did bring in such animals to the outer court; this practice, 
with a real occurrence He knew of, were His materials. Any one, however, who 
cares to do so may enquire whether it is in agreement with the position held by 
Jesus in this world, since He was reputed to be the Son of a carpenter, to 
venture upon such an act as to drive out a crowd of merchants from the temple? 
They had come up to the feast to sell to a great number of the people, the 
sheep, several myriads in number, which they were to sacrifice according to 
their fathers' houses, To the richer Jews they had oxen to sell, and there were 
doves for those who had vowed such animals, and many no doubt bought these with 
a view to their good cheer at the festival. And did not Jesus do an 
unwarrantable thing when He poured out the money of the money-changers, which 
was their own, and overthrew their tables? And who that received a blow from the 
scourge of small cords at the hands of One held in but slight esteem, was driven 
out of the temple, would not have attacked Him and raised a cry and avenged 
himself with his own hand, especially when there was such a multitude present 
who might all feel themselves insulted by Jesus in the same way? To think, 
moreover, of the Son of God taking the small cords in His hands and plaiting a 
scourge out of them for this driving out from the temple, does it not bespeak 
audacity and temerity and even some measure of lawlessness? One refuge remains 
for the writer who wishes to defend these things and is minded to treat the 
occurrence as real history, namely, to appeal to the divine nature of Jesus, who 
was able to quench, when He desired to do so, the rising anger of His foes, by 
divine grace to get the better of myriads, and to scatter the devices of 
tumultuous men; for "the Lord scatters the counsels of the nations and brings to 
naught devices of the peoples, but the counsel of the Lord abideth for ever." 
Thus the occurrence in our passage, if it really took place, was not second in 
point of the power it exhibits to any even of the most marvellous works Christ 
wrought, and claimed no less by its divine character the faith of the beholders. 
One may show it to be a greater work than that done at Cana of Galilee in the 
turning of water into wine; for in that case it was only soulless matter that 
was changed, but here it was the soul and will of thousands of men. It is, 
however, to be observed that at the marriage the mother of Jesus is said to be 
there, and Jesus to have been invited and His disciples, but that no one but 
Jesus is said to have descended to Capernaum. His disciples, however, appear 
afterwards as present with Him; they remembered that "the zeal of thine house 
shall devour me." And perhaps Jesus was in each of the disciples as He ascended 
to Jerusalem, whence it is not said, Jesus went up to "Jerusalem and His 
disciples," but He went down to Capernaum, "He and His mother and His brothers 
and His disciples." 
17. MATTHEW'S STORY OF THE ENTRY INTO JERUSALEM. DIFFICULTIES INVOLVED IN IT 
FOR THOSE WHO TAKE IT LITERALLY. 
We have now to take into consideration the statements of the other Gospels on 
the expulsion from the temple of those who made it a house of merchandise. Take 
in the first place what we find in Matthew. On the Lord's entering Jerusalem, he 
says, "All the city was stirred, saying, Who is this?" But before this he has 
the story of the ass and the foal which were taken by command of the Lord and 
found by the two disciples whom he sent from Bethphage into the village over 
against them. These two disciples loose the ass which was tied, and they have 
orders, if any one says anything to them, to answer that "the Lord has need of 
them; and immediately he will send them." By these incidents Matthew declares 
that the prophecy was fulfilled which says, "Behold, the King cometh, meek and 
sitting on an ass and a colt the foal of an ass," which we find in Zechariah. 
When, then, the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them, they brought the 
ass and the colt, and placed on them, he says, their own garments, and the Lord 
sat upon them, clearly on the ass and the colt. Then "the most part of the 
multitude spread their garments in the way, and others cut down branches from 
the trees and strewed them in the way, and the multitudes that went before and 
that followed cried, Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is He that cometh in 
the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest." Hence it was that when He entered 
Jerusalem, the whole city was moved, saying, Who is this? "and the multitudes 
said," those obviously who went before Him and who followed Him, to those who 
were asking who He was, "This is the prophet Jesus of Nazareth of Galilee. And 
Jesus entered into the temple and cast out all those that sold and bought in the 
temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers and the seats of them 
that sold doves: and He saith unto them, It is written, My house shall be called 
a house of prayer; but ye make it a den of robbers." Let us ask those who 
consider that Matthew had nothing but the history in his mind when he wrote his 
Gospel, what necessity there was for two of the disciples to be sent to the 
village over against Bethphage, to find an ass tied and its colt with it and to 
loose them and bring them? And how did it deserve to be recorded that He sat 
upon the ass and the foal and entered into the city? And how does Zechariah 
prophesy about Christ when he says, "Rejoice greatly, thou daughter of Zion, 
proclaim it, thou daughter of Jerusalem. Behold thy king cometh unto thee, just 
is He and bringing salvation, meek and sitting on an ass and a young foal"? If 
it be the case that this prophecy predicts simply the material incident 
described by the Evangelists, how can those who stand on the letter maintain 
that this is so with regard to the following part also of the prophecy, which 
runs: "And He shall destroy chariots from Ephraim and horse from Jerusalem, and 
the bow of the warrior shall be destroyed, and a multitude and peace from the 
Gentiles, and He shall rule over the waters as far as the sea, and the rivers to 
the ends of the earth," etc. It is to be noted, too, that Matthew does not give 
the words as they are found in the prophet, for instead of "Rejoice greatly, 
thou daughter of Zion, proclaim it, thou daughter of Jerusalem," he makes it, 
"Tell ye the daughter of Zion." He curtails the prophetic utterance by omitting 
the words, "Just is He and bringing salvation," then he gives, "meek and 
sitting," as in the original, but instead of "on an ass and a young colt," he 
gives, "on an ass and a colt the foal of an ass." The Jews, examining into the 
application of the prophecy to what is recorded about Jesus, press us in a way 
we cannot overlook with the enquiry how Jesus destroyed chariots out of Ephraim 
and horse from Jerusalem, and how He destroyed the bow of the enemy and did the 
other deeds mentioned in the passage. So much with regard to the prophecy. Our 
literal interpreters, however, if there is nothing worthy of the appearance of 
the Son of God in the ass and the foal, may perhaps point to the length of the 
road for an explanation. But, in the first place, fifteen stades are not a great 
distance and afford no reasonable explanation of the matter, and, in the second 
place, they would have to tell us how two beasts of burden were needed for so 
short a journey; "He sat," it is said, "on them." And then the words: "If any 
man say aught unto you, say ye that the Lord hath need of them, and straightway 
he will send them." It does not appear to me to be worthy of the greatness of 
the Son's divinity to say that such a nature as His confessed that it had need 
of an ass to be loosed from its bonds and of a foal to come with it; for 
everything the Son of God has need of should be great and worthy of His 
goodness. And then the very great multitude strewing their garments in the way, 
while Jesus allows them to do so and does not rebuke them, as is clear from the 
words used in another passage, "If these should hold their peace, the stones 
will cry out." I do not. know if it does not indicate a certain degree of 
stupidity on the part of the writer to take delight in such things, if nothing 
more is meant by them than what lies on the surface. And the branches being cut 
down from the trees and strewn on the road where the asses go by, surely they 
are rather a hindrance to Him who is the centre of the throng than a 
well-devised reception of Him. The difficulties which met us on the part of 
those who were cast out of the temple by Jesus meet us here in a still greater 
degree. In the Gospel of John He casts out those who bought, but Matthew says 
that He cast out those who sold and those who bought in the temple. And the 
buyers would naturally be more numerous than the sellers. We have to consider if 
the casting out of buyers and sellers in the temple was not out of keeping with 
the reputation of one who was thought to be the Son of a carpenter, unless, as 
we said before, it was by a divine power that He subjected them. The words 
addressed to them, too, are harsher in the other Evangelists than in John. For 
John says that Jesus said to them, "Make not My Father's house a house of 
merchandise," while in the others they are rebuked for making the house of 
prayer a den of robbers. Now the house of His Father did not admit of being 
turned into a den of robbers, though by the acts of sinful men it was brought to 
be a house of merchandise. It was not only the house of prayer, but in fact the 
house of God, and by force of human neglect it harboured robbers, and was turned 
not only into their house but their den--a thing which no skill, either of 
architecture or of reason, could make it. 
18. THE ASS AND THE COLT ARE THE OLD AND THE NEW TESTAMENT. SPIRITUAL MEANING 
OF THE VARIOUS FEATURES OF THE STORY. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN JOHN'S NARRATIVE AND 
THAT OF THE OTHER EVANGELISTS. 
Now to see into the real truth of these matters is the part of that true 
intelligence which is given to those who can say, "But we have the mind of 
Christ that we may see those things which are freely given to us of God; "and 
doubtless it is beyond our powers. For neither is the ruling principle in our 
soul free from agitation, nor are our eyes such as those of the fair bride of 
Christ should be, of which the bridegroom says, "Thy eyes are doves," 
signifying, perhaps, in a riddle, the observant power which dwells in the 
spiritual, because the Holy Spirit came like a dove to our Lord and to the lord 
in every one. Such as we are, however, we will not delay, but will feel about 
the words of life which have been spoken to us and strive to lay hold of that 
power in them which flows to him who touches them in faith. Now Jesus is the 
word of God which goes into the soul that is called Jerusalem, riding on the ass 
freed by the disciples from its bonds. That is to say, on the simple language of 
the Old Testament, interpreted by the two disciples who loose it: in the first 
place him who applies what is written to the service of the soul and shows the 
allegorical sense of it with reference to her, and in the second place him who 
brings to light by the things which lie in shadow the good and true things of 
the future. But He also rides on the young colt, the New Testament; for in both 
alike we find the word of truth which purifies us and drives away all those 
thoughts in us which incline to selling and buying. But He does not come alone 
to Jerusalem, the soul, nor only with a few companions; for many things have to 
enter into us before the word of God which makes us perfect, and as many things 
have to come after Him, all, however, hymning and glorifying Him and placing 
under Him their ornaments and vestures, so that the beasts He rides on may not 
touch the ground, when He who descended out of heaven is seated on them. But 
that His bearers, the old and the new words of Scripture, may be raised yet 
higher above the ground, branches have to be cut down from the trees that they 
may tread on reasonable expositions. But the multitudes which go before and 
follow Him may also signify the angelic ministrations, some of which prepare the 
way for Him in our souls, and help in their adorning, while some come after His 
presence in us, of which we have often spoken, so that we need not now adduce 
testimonies about it. And perhaps it is not without reason that I have likened 
to an ass the surrounding voices which conduct the Word Himself to the soul; for 
it is a beast of burden, and many are the burdens, heavy the loads, which are 
brought into view from the text, especially of the Old Testament, as he can 
clearly see who observes what is done in this connection on the part of the 
Jews. But the foal is not a beast of burden in the same way as the ass. For 
though every lead of the latter be heavy to those who have not in themselves the 
upbearing and most lightening power of the Spirit, yet the new word is less 
heavy than the old. I know some who interpret the tied-up ass as being believers 
from the circumcision, who are freed from many bonds by those who are truly anti 
spiritually instructed in the word; and the foal they take to be those from the 
Gentiles, who before they receive the word of Jesus are free from any control 
and subject to no yoke in their unbridled and pleasure-loving existence. The 
writers I am speaking of do not say who those are that go before and who those 
follow after; but there would be no absurdity in saying that those who went 
before were like Moses and the prophets, and those who followed after the holy 
Apostles. To what Jerusalem all these go in it is now our business to enquire, 
and what is the house which has many sellers and buyers to be driven out by the 
Son of God. And perhaps the Jerusalem above to which the Lord is to ascend 
driving like a charioteer those of the circumcision and the believers of the 
Gentiles, while prophets and Apostles go before Him and follow after Him (or is 
it the angels who minister to Him, for they too may be meant by those who go 
before and those who follow), perhaps it is that city which before He ascended 
to it contained the so-called "spiritual hosts of wickedness in heavenly 
places," or the Canaanites and Hittites and Amorites and the other enemies of 
the people of god, and in a word, the foreigners. For in that region, too, it 
was possible for the prophecy to be fulfilled which says, "Your country is 
desolate, your cities are burned with fire, your land, strangers devour it in 
your presence." For these are they who defile and turn into a den of robbers, 
that is, of themselves the heavenly house of the Father, the holy Jerusalem, the 
house of prayer; having spurious money, and giving pence and small change, cheap 
worthless coinage, to all who come to them. These are they who, contending with 
the souls, take from them what is most precious, robbing them of their better 
part to return to them what is worth nothing. But the disciples go and find the 
ass tied and loose it, for it cannot have Jesus on account of the covering that 
is laid upon it by the law. And the colt is found with it, both having been lost 
till Jesus came; I mean, namely, those of the circumcision and those of the 
Gentiles who afterwards believed. But how these are sent back again after Jesus 
has ascended to Jerusalem seated upon them, it is somewhat dangerous to say; for 
there is something mystical about it, in connection with the change of saints 
into angels. After that change they will be sent back, in the age succeeding 
this one, like the ministering spirits, who are sent to do service for the sake 
of them who will thereby inherit salvation. But if the ass and the foal are the 
old and the new Scriptures, on which the Word of God rides, it is easy to see 
how, after the Word has appeared in them, they are sent back and do not wait 
after the Word has entered Jerusalem among those who have cast out all the 
thoughts of selling and buying. I consider, too, that it is not without 
significance that the place where the ass was found tied, and the foal, was a 
village, and a village without a name. For in comparison with the great world in 
heaven, the whole earth is a village where the ass is found tied and the colt, 
and it is simply called "the village" without any other designation being added 
to it. From Beth-phage Matthew says the disciples are sent out who are to fetch 
the ass and the colt; and Bethphage is a priestly place, the name of which means 
"House of Jaw-bones." So much we have said, as our power allowed, on the text of 
Matthew, reserving for a further opportunity, when we may be permitted to take 
up the Gospel of Matthew by itself, a more complete and accurate discussion of 
his statements. Mark and Luke say that the two disciples, acting on their 
Master's instructions, found a foal tied, on which no one had ever sat, and that 
they loosed it and brought it to the Lord. Mark adds that they found the foal 
tied at the door, outside on the road. But who is outside? Those of the Gentiles 
who were strangers from the covenants, and aliens to the promise of God; they 
are on the road, not resting under a roof or a house, bound by their own sins, 
and to be loosed by the twofold knowledge spoken of above, of the friends of 
Jesus. And the bonds with which the foal was tied, and the sins committed 
against the wholesome law and reproved by it,--for it is the gate of life,--in 
respect of it, I say, they were not inside but outside the door, for perhaps 
inside the door there cannot be any such bond of wickedness. But there were some 
persons standing beside the tied-up foal, as Mark says; those, I suppose, who 
had tied it; as Luke records, it was the masters of the foal who said to the 
disciples, Why loose ye the foal? For those lords who subjected and bound the 
sinner are illegal masters and cannot look the true master in the face when he 
frees the foal from its bonds. Thus when the disciples say, "The Lord hath need 
of him," these wicked masters have nothing to say in reply. The disciples then 
bring the foal to Jesus naked, and put their own dress on it, so that the Lord 
may sit on the disciples' garments which are on it, at His ease. What is said 
further will not, in the light of Matthew's statements, present any difficulty; 
how "They come to Jerusalem, and entering into the temple He began to cast out 
them that sold and bought in the temple," or how "When He drew nigh and beheld 
the city He wept over it; and entering into the temple He began to cast out them 
that sold." For in some of those who have the temple in themselves He casts out 
all that sell and buy in the temple; but in others who do not quite obey the 
word of God, He only makes a beginning of casting out the sellers and buyers. 
There is a third class also besides these, in which He began to cast out the 
sellers only, and not also the buyers. With John, on the contrary, they are all 
cast out by the scourge woven of small cords, along with the sheep and the oxen. 
It should be carefully considered whether it is possible that the changes of the 
things described and the discrepancies found in them can be satisfactorily 
solved by the anagogic method. Each of the Evangelists ascribes to the Word 
different modes of action, which produce in souls of different tempers not the 
same effects but yet similar ones. The discrepancy we noticed in respect of 
Jesus' journeys to Jerusalem, which the Gospel now in hand reports quite 
differently from the other three, as we have expounded their words, cannot be 
made good in any other way. John gives statements which are similar to those of 
the other three but not the same; instead of branches cut from the trees or 
stubble brought from the fields and strewed on the road he says they took 
branches of palm trees. He says that much people had come to the feast, and that 
these went out to meet Him, crying, "Blessed is He that cometh in the name of 
the Lord," and "Blessed is the King of Israel." He also says that it was Jesus 
Himself who found the young ass on which Christ sat, and the phrase, young ass, 
doubtless conveys some additional meaning, as the small animal afforded a 
benefit not of men, nor through men, but through Jesus Christ. John moreover 
does not, any more than the others, reproduce the prophetic words exactly; 
instead of them he gives us "Fear not, O daughter of Zion; behold thy King 
cometh sitting" (instead of "mounted") "on the foal of all ass" (for "on an ass 
and a young foal"). The words "Fear not, daughter of Zion," are not in the 
prophet at all. But as the prophetic utterance has been applied by all in this 
way, let us see if there was not a necessity that the daughter of Zion should 
rejoice greatly and that the greater than she, the daughter of Jerusalem, should 
not only rejoice greatly but should also proclaim it when her king was coming to 
her, just and bringing salvation, and meek, having mounted an ass and a young 
colt. Whoever, then, receives Him will no longer be afraid of those who are 
armed with the specious discourses of the heterodox, those chariots of Ephraim 
said to be destroyed by the Lord, nor the horse, the vain thing for safety, that 
is the mad desire which has accustomed itself to the things of sense and which 
is injurious to many of those who desire to dwell in Jerusalem and to attend to 
the sound word. It is also fitting to rejoice at the destruction by Him who 
rides on the ass and the young foal of every hostile dart, since the fiery darts 
of the enemy are no longer to prevail over him who has received Jesus to his own 
temple. And there will also be a multitude from the Gentiles with peace at the 
Saviour's coming to Jerusalem, when He rules over the waters that He may bruise 
the head of the dragon on the water, and we shall tread upon the waves of the 
sea and to the mouths of all the rivers on the earth. Mark, however, writing 
about the foal, reports the Lord to have said, "On which never man sat;" and he 
seems to me to hint at the circumstance that those who afterwards believed had 
never submitted to the Word before Jesus' coming to them. For of men, perhaps, 
no one had ever sate on the foal, but of hearts or of powers alien to the Word 
some had sate on it, since in the prophet Isaiah the wealth of opposing powers 
is said to be borne on asses and camels. "In the distress and the affliction," 
he writes, "the lion and the lion's whelp, whence also the offspring of flying 
asps, who carried their riches on asses and camels." The question occurs again, 
for those who have no mind but for the bare words, if according to their view 
the words, "on which never man sat," are not quite meaningless. For who but a 
man ever sits on a foal? So much of our views. 
19. VARIOUS VIEWS OF HERACLEON ON PURGING OF THE TEMPLE. 
Let us see what Heracleon makes of this. He says that the ascent to Jerusalem 
signifies the Lord's going up from material things to the spiritual place, which 
is a likeness of Jerusalem. And he considers that the words are, "He found in 
the temple," and not "in the sanctuary," because the Lord is not to be 
understood as instrumental in that call only, which takes place where the spirit 
is not. He considers the temple to be the Holy of Holies, into which none but 
the High-Priest enters, and there I believe he says that the spiritual go; while 
the court of the temple, where the levites also enter, is a symbol of these 
psychical ones who are saved,but outside the Pleroma. Then those who are found 
in the temple selling oxen and sheep and doves, and the money-changers sitting, 
he took to represent those who attribute nothing to grace, but regard the 
entrance of strangers to the temple as a matter of merchandise and gain, and who 
minister the sacrifices for the worship of God, with a view to their own gain 
and love of money. And the scourge which Jesus made of small cords and did not 
receive from another, he expounds in a way of his own, saying that the scourge 
is an image of the power and energy of the Holy Spirit, driving out by His 
breath those who are bad. And he declares that the scourge and the linen and the 
napkin and other things of such a kind are symbolic of the power and energy of 
the Holy Spirit. Then he assumes what is not written, as that the scourge was 
tied to a piece of wood, and this wood he takes to be a type of the cross; on 
this wood the gamblers, merchants, and all evil was nailed up and done away. In 
searching into the act of Jesus, and discussing the composition of the scourge 
out of two substances, he romances in an extraordinary way; He did not make it, 
he says, of dead leather. He wished to make the Church no longer a den of 
robbers, but the house of His Father. We must here say what is most necessary on 
the divinity, as referred to in Heracleon's text. If Jesus calls the temple at 
Jerusalem the house of His Father. and that temple was made in honour of Him who 
made heaven and earth, why are we not at once told that He is the Son of no one 
else than the Maker of heaven and earth, that He is the Son of God? To this 
house of the Father of Jesus, as being the house of prayer, the Apostles of 
Christ also. as we find in their "Acts," are told by the angel to go and to 
stand there and preach all the words of this life. But they came to the house of 
prayer, through the Beautiful Gate, to pray there, a thing they would not have 
done had they not known Him to be the same with the God worshipped by those who 
had dedicated that temple. Hence, too, they say, those who obeyed God rather 
than men, Peter and the Apostles, "The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom 
ye slew, hanging Him on a tree;" for they know that by no other God was Jesus 
raised from the dead but the God of the fathers, whom Jesus also extols as the 
God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, who are not dead but living. How, too, could 
the disciples, if the house was not that of the same God with the God of Christ, 
have remembered the saying in the sixty-ninth Psalm, "The zeal of thy house 
shall devour Me;" for thus it is found in the prophet, and not "hath devoured 
Me." Now Christ is zealous principally for that house of God which is in each of 
us; He does not wish that it should be a house of merchandise, nor that the 
house of prayer should be a den of robbers; for He is the Son of a jealous God. 
We ought to give a liberal intepretation to such utterances of Scripture; they 
speak of human things, but in the way of metaphor, to show that God desires that 
nothing foreign should be mixed up with His will in the soul of all men, indeed, 
but principally of those who are minded to accept the message of our most divine 
faith. But we must remember that the sixty-ninth Psalm, which contains the 
words, "The zeal of thy house shall devour me," and a little further on, "They 
gave Me gall for My drink and for My thirst they gave Me vinegar," both texts 
being recorded in the Gospels, that that Psalm is spoken in the person of the 
Christ, and nowhere shows any change of person. It shows a great want of 
observation on Heracleon's part that he considers the words, "The zeal of thy 
house shall devour Me," to be spoken in the person of those powers which were 
cast out and destroyed by the Saviour; he fails to see the connection of the 
prophecy in the Psalm. For if these words are understood as spoken by the 
expelled and destroyed powers, it follows that he must take the words, "They 
gave Me vinegar to drink," which are a part of the same psalm, to be also spoken 
by those powers. What misled him was probably that he could not understand how 
the "shall devour Me" could be spoken by Christ, since He did not appreciate the 
way in which anthropopathic statements are applied to God and to Christ. 
20.THE TEMPLEWHICH CHRIST SAYS HE WILL RAISE UP IS THE CHURCH. HOW THE 
DRYBONES WILL BEMADE TO LIVE AGAIN. 
"The Jews then answered and said unto Him, What sign showest Thou unto us, 
seeing that Thou doest these things? Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy 
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up." Those of the body, and those 
who incline to material things, seem to me to be meant by the Jews, who, after 
Jesus has driven out those who make God's house a house of merchandise, are 
angry at Him for treating these matters in such a way, and demand a sign, a sign 
which will show that the Word, whom they do not receive, has a right to do such 
things. The Saviour joins on to His statement about the temple a statement which 
is really one with the former, about His own body, and to the question, What 
sign doest Thou, seeing that Thou doest such things? answers, "Destroy this 
temple, and in three days I will raise it up." He could have exhibited a 
thousand other signs, but to the question, "Seeing that Thou doest such things," 
He could not answer anything else; He fittingly gave the answer about the sign 
connected with the temple, and not about signs unconnected with the temple. Now, 
both of these two things, the temple and the body of Jesus, appear to me, in one 
interpretation at least, to be types of the Church, and to signify that it is 
built of living stones, a spiritual house for a holy priesthood, built on the 
foundation of the Apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus being the head 
corner-stone; and it is, therefore, called a temple. Now, from the text, "Ye are 
the body of Christ, and members each in his part," we see that even though the 
harmonious fitting of the stones of the temple appear to be dissolved and 
scattered, as it is written in the twenty-second Psalm that all the bones of 
Christ are, by the plots made against it in persecutions and afflictions, on the 
part of those who war against the unity of the temple in persecutions, yet the 
temple will be raised again, and the body will rise again on the third day after 
the day of evil which threatens it, and the day of consummation which follows. 
For the third day will rise on the new heaven and the new earth, when these 
bones, the whole house of Israel, will rise in the great Lord's day, death 
having been overcome. And thus the resurrection of the Saviour from the passion 
of the cross contains the mystery of the resurrection of the whole body of 
Christ. But as that material body of Jesus was sacrificed for Christ, and was 
buried, and was afterwards raised, so the whole body of Christ's saints is 
crucified along with Him, and now lives no longer; for each of them, like Paul, 
glories in nothing but the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which He is 
crucified to the world, and the world to Him. Not only, therefore, is it 
crucified with Christ, and crucified to the world; it is also buried with 
Christ, for we were buried with Christ, Paul says. And then he says, as if 
enjoying some earnest of the resurrection, "We rose with Him," because He walks 
in a certain newness of life, though not yet risen in that blessed and perfect 
resurrection which is hoped for. Either, then, he is now crucified, and 
afterwards is buried, or he is now buried and taken down from the cross, and, 
being now buried, is to rise at some future time. But to most of us the mystery 
of the resurrection is a great one, and difficult of contemplation; it is spoken 
of in many other passages of Scripture, and is specially announced in the 
following passage of Ezekiel: "And the hand of the Lord was upon me, and He led 
me out in the Spirit of the Lord, and set me in the midst of the plain, and it 
was full of human bones. And He led me round about them in a circle, and behold 
there were very many on the face of the plain, and behold they were very dry. 
And He said to me, Son of man, shall these bones live? And I said, Lord, Lord, 
Thou knowest. And He said to me, Prophesy to these bones, and thou shall say to 
them, Hear the word of the Lord, ye dry bones;" and a little further on, "And 
the Lord spake to me, saying, Son of man, these bones are the house of Israel. 
And they say, Our bones are become dry, our hope is lost, we have breathed our 
last." For what bones are these which are addressed, "Hear ye the word of the 
Lord," as if they heard the word of the Lord? They belong to the house of 
Israel, or to the body of Christ, of which the Lord says, "All My bones are 
scattered," although the bones of His body were not scattered, and not even one 
of them was broken. But when the resurrection itself takes place of the true and 
more perfect body of Christ, then those who are now the members of Christ, for 
they will then be dry bones, will be brought together, bone to bone, and fitting 
to fitting (for none of those who are destitute of fitting armonia) will 
come to the perfect man), to the measure of the stature of the fulness of the 
body of Christ. And then the many members will be the one body, all of them, 
though many, becoming members of one body. But it belongs to God alone to make 
the distinction of foot and hand and eye and hearing and smelling, which in one 
sense fill up the head, but in another the feet and the rest of the members, and 
the weaker and humbler ones, the more and the less honourable. God will temper 
the body together, and then, rather than now, He will give to that which lacks 
the more abundant honour, that there may be, by no means, any schism in the 
body, but that the members may have the same care for one another, and, if any 
member be well off, all the members may share in its good things, or if any 
member be glorified, all the members may rejoice with it. 
21. WHAT THE SON WAS RAISED UP BY THE FATHER. THE CHARGE BROUGHT AGAINST 
JESUS AT HIS TRIAL WAS BASED ON THE INCIDENT NOW BEFORE US. 
What I have said is not allen to the passage now engaging us, dealing as it 
does with the temple and those cast out from it, of which the Saviour says, "The 
zeal of thy house shall devour Me;" and with the Jews who asked that a sign 
should be showed them, and the Saviour's answer to them, in which He combines 
the discourse on the temple with that on His own body, and says, "Destroy this 
temple and in three days I will raise it up." For from this temple, which is the 
body of Christ, everything that is irrational and savours of merchandise must be 
driven away, that it may no longer be a house of merchandise. And this temple 
must be destroyed by those who plot against the Word of God, and after its 
destruction be raised again on that third day which we discussed above; when the 
disciples also will remember what He, the Word, said before the temple of God 
was destroyed, and will believe, not only their knowledge but their faith also 
being then made perfect, and that by the word which Jesus spoke. And every one 
who is of this nature, Jesus purifying him, puts away things that are irrational 
and things that savour of selling, to be destroyed on account of the zeal of the 
Logos that is in Him. But they are destroyed to be raised again by Jesus, not on 
the third day, if we attend to the exact words before us, but "in three days." 
For the rising again of the temple takes place on the first day after it has 
been destroyed and on the second day, and its resurrection is accomplished in 
all the three days. Hence a resurrection both has been and is to be, if indeed 
we were buried with Christ, and rose with Him. And since the word, "We rose with 
Him," does not cover the whole of the resurrection, "in Christ shall all be made 
alive, but every one in his own order, Christ the first fruits, then they that 
are Christ's at His coming, and then the end." It belongs to the resurrection 
that one should be on the first day in the paradise of God, and it belongs to 
the resurrection when Jesus appears and says, "Touch Me not; for I am not yet 
ascended to My Father," but the perfection of the resurrection was when He came 
to the Father. Now there are some who fall into confusion on this head of the 
Father and the Son, and we must devote a few words to them. They quote the text, 
"Yea, and we are found false witnesses for God, because we testified against God 
that He raised up Christ, whom He raised not up," and other similar texts which 
show the raiser-up to be another person than He who was raised up; and the text, 
"Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up," as if it resulted 
from these that the Son did not differ in number from the Father, but that both 
were one, not only in point of substance but in point of subject, and that the 
Father and the Son were said to be different in some of their aspects but not in 
their hypostases. Against such views we must in the first place adduce the 
leading texts which prove the Son to be another than the Father, and that the 
Son must of necessity be the son of a Father, and the Father, the father of a 
Son. Then we may very properly refer to Christ's declaration that He cannot do 
anything but what He sees the Father doing and saying, because whatever the 
Father does that the Son also does in like manner, and that He had raised the 
dead, i.e., the body, the Father granting Him this, who must be said to have 
been the principal agent in raising up Christ from the dead. But Heracleon says, 
"In three days," instead of "On the third day," not having examined the point 
(and yet having noted the words "in three"), that the resurrection is brought 
about in three days. But he also calls the third the spiritual day, in which 
they consider the resurrection of the Church to be indicated. It follows from 
this that the first day is to be called the "earthly" day, and the second the 
psychical, the resurrection of the Church not having taken place on them. Now 
the statements of the false witnesses, recorded in the Gospel according to 
Matthew and Mark towards the end of the Gospel, and the accusation they brought 
against our Lord Jesus Christ, appear to have reference to this utterance of 
His, "Destroy this temple, and I will build it up in three days." For He was 
speaking of the temple of His body, but they supposed His words to refer to the 
temple of stone, and so they said when accusing Him, "This man said, I am able 
to destroy the temple of God and to build it up in three days," or, as Mark has 
it, "We heard Him say, that I will destroy this temple made with hands, and in 
three days I will build up another temple not made with hands." Here the 
high-priest stood up and said to Him, "Answerest Thou nothing? What do these 
witness against Thee? But Jesus held His peace." Or, as Mark says, "And the 
high-priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus saying, Answerest Thou 
nothing? What do these witness against Thee? But He held His peace and answered 
nothing." These words must, I think, necessarily have reference to the text now 
before us. 
22. THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON DID NOT TAKE FORTY-SIX YEARS TO BUILD. WITH REGARD 
TO THAT OF EZRA WE CANNOT TELL HOW LONG IT TOOK. SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NUMBER 
FORTY-SIX. 
The Jews therefore said, "Forty and six years was this temple in building, 
and wilt thou raise it up in three days?" How the Jews said that the temple had 
been forty-six years building, we cannot tell, if we adhere to the history. For 
it is written in the third Book of Kings, that they prepared the stones and the 
wood three years, and in the fourth year, in the second month, when Solomon was 
king over Israel, the king commanded, and they brought great precious stones for 
the foundation of the house, and unhewn stones. And the sons of Solomon and the 
sons of Hiram hewed the stones and laid them in the fourth year, and they 
founded the house of the Lord in the month Nisan and the second month: in the 
tenth year in the month Baal, which was the eighth month, the house was finished 
according to the whole count and the whole plan of it. Thus comparing the time 
of its completion with the period of building, the building of it occupies less 
than eleven years. How, then, do the Jews come to say that the temple was 
forty-six years in building? One might, indeed, do violence to the words and 
make out the period of forty-six years at all costs, by counting from the time 
when David, after planning about the building of the temple, said to Nathan the 
prophet, "Behold I dwell in a house of cedar, and the ark of God dwelleth in the 
midst of the tent," for though it is true that he was prevented, as being a man 
of blood, from carrying out the building, he seems to have busied himself in 
collecting materials for it. In the first Book of Chronicles, certainly, David 
the king says to all the congregation, "Solomon my son, whom the Lord hath 
chosen, is young and tender, and the work is great, because he is not to build 
for man but for the Lord God. According to my whole power I have prepared for 
the house of my God, gold, silver, brass, and iron, wood, stones of Soom, and 
stones for filling up, and precious stones of many kinds, and all sorts of 
precious wood, and a large quantity of Pariah marble. And besides this, for the 
pleasure I have taken in the house of my God. the gold and the silver I possess, 
lo, I have given it for the house of my Lord, to the full; from such supplies I 
prepared for the house of the saints, three thousand talents of gold from 
Suphir, and seven thousand talents of stamped silver. that the houses of God may 
be overlaid with them by the hands of artifiers." For David reigned seven years 
in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem; so that if it could be shown that 
the beginning of the preparations for the temple and of David's collecting the 
necessary material, was in the fifth year of his reign, then, with some forcing, 
the statement about forty-six years might stand. But some one else will say that 
the temple spoken of was not that built by Solomon, for that it was destroyed at 
the period of the captivity, but the temple built at the time of Ezra, with 
regard to which the forty-six years can be shown to be quite accurate. But in 
this Maccabean period things were very unsettled with regard to the people and 
the temple, and I do not know if the temple was really built in that number of 
years. Heracleon pays no attention to the history, but says that in that he was 
forty-six years preparing the temple, Solomon was an image of the Saviour. 
The number six he connects with matter, that is, the image, and the number 
forty, which he says is the tetrad, not admitting of combination, he connects 
with the inspiration and the seed in the inspiration. Consider if the forty 
cannot be taken as due to the four elements of the world arranged in the 
building of the temple at the points at issue, and the six to the fact that man 
was created on the sixth day. 
23. THE TEMPLE SPOKEN OF BY CHRIST IS THE CHURCH. APPLICATION TO THE CHURCH 
OF THE STATEMENTS REGARDING THE BUILDING OF SOLOMON'S TEMPLE, AND THE NUMBERS 
STATED IN THAT NARRATIVE. 
"But He spake of the temple of His body. When, therefore, He was raised from 
the dead, His disciples remembered that He said this, and they believed the 
Scripture and the word which Jesus had said." This refers to the statement that 
the body of the Son is His temple. It may be asked whether this is to be taken 
in its plain sense, or whether we should try to connect each statement that is 
recorded about the temple, with the view we take about the body of Jesus, 
whether the body which He received from the Virgin, or that body of Christ which 
the Church is said to be, as we are said by the Apostle to be all members of His 
body. One may, on the one hand, suppose it to be hopeless to get everything that 
is said about the temple properly connected with the body, in whatever sense the 
body be taken, and one may have recourse to a simpler explanation, and say that 
the body (in either of these senses) is called the temple, because as the temple 
had the glory of God dwelling ill it, so He who was the image and glory of God, 
the first-born of every creature, could rightly be called, in respect of His 
body or the Church, the temple containing the image. We, for our part, see it to 
be a hard task to expound every particular of what is said about the temple in 
the third Book of Kings, and far beyond our powers of language, and we defer it 
in the meantime, as a thing beyond the scale of the present work. We also have a 
strong conviction that in such matters, which transcend human nature, it must be 
the work of divine wisdom to make plain the m cabin g of inspired Scripture, of 
that wisdom which is hidden in a mystery, which none of the rulers of this world 
knew. We are well aware, too, that we need the assistance of that excellent 
Spirit of wisdom, in order to understand such matters, as they should be 
understood by ministers of sacred things; and in this connection we will attempt 
to describe, as shortly as we may, our view of what belongs to this subject. The 
body is the Church, and we learn from Peter that it is a house of God, built of 
living stones, a spiritual house for a holy priesthood. Thus the son of David, 
who builds this house, is a type of Christ. He builds it when his wars are at an 
end, and a period of profound peace has arrived; he builds the temple for the 
glory of God in the Jerusalem on earth, so that worship may no longer be 
celebrated in a moveable erection like the tabernacle. Let us seek to find in 
the Church the truth of each statement made about the temple. If all Christ's 
enemies are made the footstool of His feet, and Death, the last enemy, is 
destroyed, then there will be the most perfect peace. Christ will be Solomon, 
which means "Peaceful," and the prophecy will find its fulfilment in Him, which 
says, "With those who hated peace I was peaceful." And then each of the living 
stones will be, according to the work of his life here, a stone of that temple, 
one, at the foundation, an apostle or a prophet, bearing those placed upon him, 
and another, after those in the foundation, and supported by the Apostles, will 
himself, with the Apostles, help to bear those in more need. One will be a stone 
of the inmost parts, where the ark is, and the cherubim, slid the mercy-seat; 
another will be on the outer wall, and another even outside the outer wall of 
the levites and priests, a stone of the altar of whole burnt offerings. And the 
management and service of these things will be entrusted to holy powers, angels 
of God, being, respectively, lordships, thrones, dominions, or powers; and there 
will be others subject to these, typified by three thousand six hundred chief 
officers, who were appointed over the works of Solomon, and the seventy thousand 
of those who bore burdens, and the eighty thousand stone-cutters in the 
mountain, who wrought in the work, and prepared the stones and the wood. It is 
to be remarked that those reported as bearing burdens are related to the 
Hebdomad. The quarrymen and stone-cutters, who make the stones fitted for the 
temple, have some kinship to the ogdoad. And the officers, who are six hundred 
in number, are connected with the perfect number six multiplied into itself. The 
preparation of the stones, as they are taken out and fitted for the building, 
extends over three years; this appears to me to point solely to the time of the 
eternal interval which is akin to the triad. This will come to pass when peace 
is consummated after the number of years of the transaction of the matters 
connected with the exodus from Egypt, namely, three hundred and forty, and of 
what took place in Egypt four hundred and thirty years after the covenant made 
by God with Abraham. Thus, from Abraham to the beginning of the building of the 
temple, there are two sabbatic numbers, the 700 and the 70; and at that time, 
too, our King Christ will command the seventy thousand burden-bearers not to 
take any chance stones for the foundation of the temple, but great stones, 
precious, unhewn, that they may be hewn, not by any chance workmen, but by the 
sons of Solomon; for so we find it written in the third Book of Kings. Then, 
too, on account of the profound peace, Hiram, king of Tyre, cooperates in the 
building of the temple, and gives his own sons to the sons of Solomon, to hew, 
in company with them, the great and precious stones for the holy place, which, 
in the fourth year, are placed in the foundation of the house of the Lord. But 
in an ogdoad of years the house is finished in the eighth month of the eighth 
year after its foundation. 
24. THE ACCOUNT OF THE BUILDING OF SOLOMON'S TEMPLE CONTAINS SERIOUS 
DIFFICULTIES AND IS TO BE INTERPRETED SPIRITUALLY. 
For the sake of those, however, who consider that nothing further than the 
narrative itself is meant to be indicated in these words, it may not be 
unfitting to introduce at this point some considerations which they can scarcely 
withstand, to show that the words ought to be regarded as those of the Spirit, 
and that the mind of the Spirit should be sought for in them. Did the sons of 
the kings really spend their time in hewing the great and precious stones, and 
practise a craft so little in keeping with royal birth And the number of the 
burden-bearers and of the stone-cutters and of the officers, the duration, too, 
of the period of preparing the stones and marking them, is all this recorded as 
it really was? The holy house, too, was got ready in peace and was to be built 
for God without hammer or axe or any iron tool, that there might be no 
disturbance in the house of God. And again I would ask those who are in bondage 
to the letter how it is possible that there should be eighty thousand 
stone-cutters and that the house of God should be built out of hard white stones 
without the noise of hammer or axe or any iron tool being heard in His house 
while the building was going on? Is it not living stones that are hewn without 
any noise or tumult somewhere outside the temple, so that they are brought ready 
prepared to the place which awaits them in the building? And there is some sort 
of an ascent about the temple of God, not with angles, but with bends of 
straight lines. For it is written, "And there was a winding staircase to the 
middle, and from the middle to the third floor;" for the staircase in the house 
of God had to be spiral, thus imitating in its ascent the circle, which is the 
most perfect figure. But that this house might be secure five ties are built in 
it. as fair as possible, a cubit high, that on looking up one might see it to be 
suggested how we rise from sensible things to the so-called divine perceptions, 
and so be brought to perceive those things which are seen only by the mind. But 
the place of the happier stones appears to be that called Dabir, where the ark 
of the covenant of the Lord was, and, as I may say, the handwriting of God, the 
tables written with His own finger. And the whole house is overlaid with gold; 
"the whole house," we read, "he overlaid with gold until all the house was 
finished." But there were two cherubim in Dabir, a word which the translators of 
the Hebrew Bible into Greek failed to render satisfactorily. Some, failing to do 
justice to the language, render it the temple; but it is more sacred than the 
temple. Now everything about the house was made golden, for a sign that the mind 
which is quite made perfect estimates accurately the things perceived by the 
intellect. But it is not given to all to approach and know them; and hence the 
veil of the court is erected, since to most of the priests add levites the 
things in the inmost part of the temple are not revealed. 
25. FURTHER SPIRITUALIZING OF SOLOMON'S TEMPLE-BUILDING. 
It is worthwhile to enquire how, on the one hand, Solomon the king is said to 
have built the temple, and on the other the master-builder whom Solomon sent and 
fetched, "Hiram of Tyre, the son of a woman who was a widow; and he was of the 
tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass, and 
filled with wisdom and understanding, to work all works in brass; and he was 
brought in to King Solomon and wrought all his works." Here I ask whether 
Solomon can be taken for the first-born of all creation, and Hiram for the alan 
whom he assumed, from the constraint of men--for the word Tyrians means" 
constrainers "--the man who derived his birth from nature, and being filled with 
all manner of art and wisdom and understanding, was brought in to cooperate with 
the first-born of all creation, add to build the temple. In this temple there 
are also windows, placed obliquely and out of sight, so that the illumination of 
the divine light may enter for salvation, and--why should I go into 
particulars?--that the body of Christ, the Church, may be found having the plan 
of the spiritual house and temple of God. As I said before, we require that 
wisdom which is hidden in a mystery, and which he alone can apprehend who is 
able to say, "But we have the mind of Christ, "--we require that wisdom to 
interpret spiritually each detail of what is said in accordance with the will of 
Him who caused it to be written. To enter into these details is not in 
accordance with our present subject. What has been said may suffice to let us 
understand how "He spake about the temple of His body." 
26. THE PROMISES ADDRESSED TO JERUSALEM IN THE PROPHETS REFER TO THE CHURCH, 
AND ARE STILL TO BE FULFILLED. 
After all this it is proper to ask whether what is narrated as having taken 
place about the temple has ever taken place or ever will take place about the 
spiritual house. The argument may seem to pinch in whichever way we take it. If 
we say that it is possible that something like what is told about the temple may 
take place with regard to the spiritual house, or has already taken place in it, 
then those who hear us will, with difficulty, be brought to admit that a change 
can take place in such good things as these, firstly, because they do not wish 
it, and secondly, because of the incongruity of thinking that such things admit 
of change. If, on the other hand, We seek to maintain the unchangeableness of 
the good things once given to the saints, then we cannot apply to them what we 
find in the history, and we shall seem to be doing what those of the heresies 
do, who fail to maintain the unity of the narrative of Scripture from beginning 
to end. If we are not to take the view proper to old wives or Jews, of the 
promises recorded in the prophets, and especially in Isaiah, if, that is to say, 
we are to look for their fulfilment in connection with the Jerusalem on earth, 
then, as certain remarkable things connected with the building of the temple and 
the restoration of the people from the captivity are spoken of as happening 
after the captivity and the destruction of the temple, we must say that we are 
now the temple and the people which was carried captive, but is to come up again 
to Judaea and Jerusalem, and to be built with the precious stones of Jerusalem. 
But I cannot tell if it be possible that, at the revolution of long periods of 
time, things of the same nature should take place again, but in a worse way. The 
prophecies of Isaiah which we mentioned are the following: "Behold I prepare for 
thy stone carbuncle and for thy foundation sapphire; and I will make thy 
battlements jasper, and thy gates stones of crystal, and thy outer wall choice 
stones; and all thy sons shall be taught of the Lord, and in great peace shall 
thy children be, and in righteousness shall thou be built." And a little further 
on, to the same Jerusalem: "And the glory of Lebanon shall come to thee with 
cypress, and pine, and cedar, along with those who will glorify My holy place. 
And the sons of them that humbled thee and insulted thee shall come to thee in 
fear; and thou shalt be called the city of the Lord, Sion of holy Israel, 
because thou weft desolate and hated, and there was none to help thee. And I 
will make thee an eternal delight, a joy of generations of generations. And thou 
shall suck the milk of the Gentiles and shall eat the riches of kings, and thou 
shall know that I am the Lord that saveth thee and the God of Israel that 
chooseth thee. And instead of brass I will bring thee gold, and instead of iron 
I will bring thee silver, and for wood I will bring thee brass, and for stones 
iron. And I will establish thy rulers in peace and thy overseers in 
righteousness. And wickedness shall no more be heard in thy land, nor affliction 
and distress in thy borders, but thy walls shall be called salvation and thy 
gates sculpture. And the sun shall no longer be to thee for light by day, nor 
shall the rising of the moon give light to thee by night, but Christ shall be to 
thee an everlasting light and thy God thy glory. For thy sun shall no more go 
down, and thy moon shall not fail, for thy Lord shall be to thee an everlasting 
light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ful-filled." These prophecies 
clearly refer to the age still to come, and they are addressed to the children 
of Israel in their captivity, to whom He was sent and came, who said, "I am not 
sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." Such things, though they are 
captives, they are to receive in their Own land; and proselytes also are to come 
to them at that time through Christ, and are to fly to them, according to the 
saying, "Behold, proselytes shall come to thee through Me, and shall flee to 
thee for refuge." And if all this is to take place with the captives, then it is 
plain that they must be about their temple, and that they must go up there again 
to be built up, having become the most precious of stones. For we find with John 
in his Apocalyse, the promise made to him that overcomes, that he will be a 
pillar in the temple of God, and will go no more out. All this I have said with 
a view to our obtaining a cursory view at least of the matters pertaining to the 
temple, and the house of God, and the Church and Jerusalem, which we cannot now 
take up systematically. Those, however, who, in their reading of the prophets, 
do not shrink from the labour of seeking after their spiritual meaning, must 
enquire into these matters with the greatest particularity, and must take 
account of every possibility. So her of "the temple of His body." 
27. OF THE BELIEF THE DISCIPLES AFTERWARDS ATTAINED IN THE WORDS OF JESUS. 
"When He was raised from the dead. His disciples remembered that He spake 
this, and they believed the Scripture and the word which Jesus had said." This 
tells us that after Jesus' resurrection from the dead His disciples saw that 
what He had said about the temple had a higher application to His passion and 
His resurrection; they remembered that the words, "In three days I will raise it 
up," pointed to the resurrection; "And they believed the Scripture and the word 
which Jesus had said." We are not told that they believed the Scripture or the 
word which Jesus said, before. For faith in its full sense is the act of him who 
accepts with his whole soul what is pro fessed at baptism. As for the higher 
sense, as we have already spoken of the resurrection from the dead of the whole 
body of the Lord, we have now to note that the disciples were put in mind by the 
fulfilment of the Scripture which when they were in life they had not fully 
understood; its meaning was now brought under their eyes and made quite clear to 
them, and they knew of what heavenly things it was the pattern and shadow. Then 
they believed the Scripture who formerly did not believe it, and believed the 
word of Jesus which, as the speaker means to convey, they had not believed 
before the resurrection. For how can any one be said in the full sense to 
believe the Scripture when he does not see in it the mind of the Holy Spirit, 
which God would have us to believe rather than the literal meaning? From this 
point of view we must say that none of those who walk according to the flesh 
believe the spiritual things of the law, of the very beginnings of which they 
have no conception. But, they say, those are more blessed who have not seen and 
yet believe, than those who have seen and have believed, and for this they quote 
the saying to Thomas at the end of the Gospel of John, "Blessed are they that 
have not seen and yet have believed." But it is not said here that those who 
have not seen and yet have believed are more blessed than those who have seen 
and believed. According to their view those after the Apostles are more blessed 
than the Apostles; than which nothing can be more foolish. He who is to be 
blessed must see in his mind the things which he believes, and must be able with 
the Apostles to hear the words spoken to him, "Blessed are your eyes, for they 
see, and your ears, for they hear," and "Many prophets and righteous men have 
desired to see the things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear the 
things which ye hear, and have not heard them." Yet he may be content who only 
receives the inferior beatitude, which says: "Blessed are they who have not seen 
and yet have believed." But how much more blessed are those eyes which Jesus 
calls blessed for the things which they have seen, than those which have not 
attained to such a vision; Simeon is content to take into his arms the salvation 
of God, and after seeing it, he says, "Now, O Lord, lettest Thou Thy servant 
depart in peace, according to Thy word; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation." 
We must strive, therefore, as Solomon says, to open our eyes that we may be 
satisfied with bread; "Open thine eyes," he says, "and be satisfied with bread." 
What I have said on the text, "They believe the Scripture and the word which 
Jesus had said unto them," may lead us to understand, after discussing the 
subject of faith, that the perfection of our faith will be given us at the great 
resurrection from the dead of the whole body of Jesus which is His Holy Church. 
For what is said about knowledge, "Now I know in part," that, I think, may be 
said in the same way of every other good; and one of these others is faith. "Now 
I believe in part," we may say, "but when that which is perfect is come, then 
the faith which is in part will be done away." As with knowledge, so with faith, 
that which is through sight is far better, if I may say so, than that which is 
through a glass and in an enigma. 
28.THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BELIEVING IN THE NAME OF JESUS AND BELIEVING IN 
JESUS HIMSELF. 
"Now, when He was in Jerusalem at the passover, during the feast, many 
believed in His name, beholding His signs which He did. But He, Jesus, did not 
trust Himself to them, because He knew all (men) and because He needed not that 
any should testify of man, for he Himself knew what was in man." One might ask 
how Jesus did not Himself believe in those of whom we are told that they 
believed. To this we must say it was not those who believed in Him that Jesus 
did not trust, but those who believed in His name; for believing in His name is 
It different thing from believing in Him. He who will not be judged because of 
his faith is exempted from the judgment, not for believing in His name, but for 
believing in Him; for the Lord says, "He that believeth in Me is not judged," 
not, "He who believes in My name is not judged;" the latter believes, and hence 
he is not worthy to be condemned already, but he is inferior to the other who 
believes in Him. Hence it is that Jesus does not trust Himself to him who 
believes in His name. We must, therefore, cleave to Him rather than to His name, 
test after we have done wonders in His name, we should hear these words 
addressed to us which He will speak to those who boast of His name alone. With 
the Apostle Paul let us seek joyfully to say, "I can do all things in Christ 
Jesus strengthening me." We have also to notice that in a former passage the 
Evangelist calls the passover that of the Jews, while here he does not say that 
Jesus was at the passover of the Jews, but at the passover at Jerusalem; and in 
the former case when the passover is called that of the Jews, it is not said to 
be a feast; but here Jesus is recorded to have been at the feast; when at 
Jerusalem He was at the passover during the feast, and many believed, even 
though only in His name. We ought to notice certainly that "many" are said to 
believe, not in Him, but in His name. Now, those who believe in Him are those 
who walk in the straight and narrow way, which leads to life, and which is found 
by few. It may well be, however, that many of those who believe in His name will 
sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, the Father's 
house, in which are many mansions. And it is to be noted that the many who 
believe in His name do not believe in the same way as Andrew does, and Peter, 
and Nathanael, and Philip. These believe the testimony of John when he says, 
"Behold the Lamb of God," or they believe in Christ as found by Andrew, or Jesus 
saying to Philip, "Follow Me," or Philip saying, "We have found Him of whom 
Moses and the prophets did write, Jesus the Son of Joseph from Nazareth." Those, 
on the other hand, of whom we now speak, "believed in His name, beholding His 
signs which He did." And as they believe the signs and not in Him but in His 
name, Jesus "did not trust Himself to them, because He knew all men, and needed 
not that any should testify of man, because He knew what is in every man." 
29. ABOUT WHAT BEINGS JESUS NEEDED TESTIMONY. 
The words, "He needed not that any should testify of man," may fitly be used 
to show that the Son of God is able of Himself to see the truth about each man 
and is in no need of such testimony as any other could supply. The words, 
however, "He had no need that any should testify of man," are not equivalent to 
"He had no need of testimony about any being." If we take the word "man" to 
include every being who is according to the image of God, or every reasonable 
creature, then He will have no need that any should testify to Him of any 
reasonable being whatever, since He Himself, by the power given Him by the 
Father, knows them all. But if the term "man" be restricted to mortal animated 
reasonable beings, then it might be said, on the one hand, that He had need of 
testimony respecting the beings above man, and while His knowledge was adequate 
with regard to man it did not extend to those other beings. On the other hand, 
however, it might be said that He who humbled Himself had no need that any 
should testify to Him concerning man, but that He had such need in respect of 
beings higher than men. 
30. HOW JESUS KNEW THE POWERS, BETTER OR WORSE, WHICH RESIDE IN MAN. 
It may also be asked what signs those many saw Him do who believed on Him, 
for it is not recorded that He did any signs at Jerusalem, though some may have 
been done which are not recorded. One may, however, consider if what He did may 
be called signs, when He made a scourge of small cords, and cast them all out of 
the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen, and poured out the changers' money, and 
overthrew the tables. As for those who suppose that it was only about men that 
He had no need of witnesses, it has to be said that the Evangelist attributes to 
Him two things. that He knew all beings, and that He had no need that any one 
should testify of man. If He knew all beings, then He knew not only men but the 
beings above men, all beings who are without such bodies as ours; and He knew 
what was in man, since He was greater than those who reproved and judged by 
prophesying, and who brought to the light the secret things of the hearts of 
those whom the Spirit suggested to them to be thus dealt with. The words, "He 
knew what was in man," could also be taken as referring to the powers, better or 
worse, which work in men. For if any one gives place to the devil, Satan enters 
into him; thus did Judas give place, and thus did the devil put it in his heart 
to betray Jesus, and "after the sop," therefore," the devil entered into him." 
But if any one gives place to God, he becomes blessed; for blessed is the man 
whose help is from God, and the ascent is in his heart from God. Thou knowest 
what is in man, Thou who knowest all things, O Son of God. And now that our 
tenth book has come to be large enough we will here pause in our theme. 

