
Origen












Origen. Contra Celsus
BOOK VI. 
CHAP. I. 
IN beginning this our sixth book, we desire, my reverend Ambrosius, to answer 
in it those accusations which Celsus brings against the Christians, not, as 
might be supposed, those objections which he has adduced from writers on 
philosophy. For he has quoted a considerable number of passages, chiefly from 
Plato, and has placed alongside of these such declarations of holy Scripture as 
are fitted to impress even the intelligent mind; subjoining the assertion that 
"these things are stated much better among the Greeks (than in the Scriptures). 
and in a manner which is free from all exaggerations and promises on the part of 
God, or the Son of God." Now we maintain, that if it is the object of the 
ambassadors of the truth to confer benefits upon the greatest possible number, 
and, so far as they can, to win over to its side, through their love to men, 
every one without exception--intelligent as well as simple--not Greeks only, but 
also Barbarians (and great, indeed, is the humanity which should succeed in 
converting the rustic and the ignorant), it is manifest that they must adopt a 
style of address fitted to do good to all, and to gain over to them men of every 
sort. Those, on the other hand, who turn away from the ignorant as being mere 
slaves, and unable to understand the flowing periods of a polished and logical 
discourse, and so devote their attention solely to such as have been brought up 
amongst literary pursuits, confine their views of the public good within very 
strait and narrow limits. 
CHAP. II. 
I have made these remarks in reply to the charges which Celsus and others 
bring against the simplicity of the language of Scripture, which appears to be 
thrown into the shade by the splendour of polished discourse. For our prophets, 
and Jesus Himself, and His apostles, were careful to adopt a style of address 
which should not merely convey the truth, but which should be fitted to gain 
over the multitude, until each one, attracted and led onwards, should ascend as 
far as he could towards the comprehension of those mysteries which are contained 
in these apparently simple words. For, if I may venture to say so, few have been 
benefited (if they have indeed been benefited at all) by the beautiful and 
polished style of Plato, and those who have written like him; while, on the 
contrary, many have received advantage from those who wrote and taught in a 
simple and practical manner, and with a view to the wants of the multitude. 
It is easy, indeed, to observe that Plato is found only in the hands of those 
who profess to be literary men; while Epictetus is admired by persons of 
ordinary capacity, who have a desire to be benefited, and who perceive the 
improvement which may be derived from his writings. Now we make these remarks, 
not to disparage Plato (for the great world of men has found even him useful), 
but to point out the aim of those who said: "And my speech and my preaching was 
not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and 
of power, that our faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power 
of God." For the word of God declares that the preaching (although in itself 
true and most worthy of belief) is not sufficient to reach the human heart, 
unless a certain power be imparted to the speaker from God, and a grace appear 
upon his words; and it is only by the divine agency that this takes place in 
those who speak effectually. The prophet says in the sixty-seventh Psalm, that 
"the Lord will give a word with great power to them who preach." If, then, it 
should be granted with respect to certain points, that the same doctrines are 
found among the Greeks as in our own Scriptures, yet they do not possess the 
same power of attracting and disposing the souls of men to follow them. And 
therefore the disciples of Jesus, men ignorant so far as regards Grecian 
philosophy, yet traversed many countries of the world, impressing, agreeably to 
the desire of the Logos, each one of their hearers according to his deserts, so 
that they received a moral amelioration in proportion to the inclination of 
their will to accept of that which is good. 
CHAP. III. 
Let the ancient sages, then, make known their sayings to those who are 
capable of understanding them. Suppose that Plato, for example, the son of 
Ariston, in one of his Epistles, is discoursing about the "chief good," and that 
he says, "The chief good can by no means be described in words, but is produced 
by long habit, and bursts forth suddenly as a light in the soul, as from a fire 
which had leapt forth." We, then, on hearing these words, admit that they are 
well said, for it is God who revealed to men these as well as all other noble 
expressions. And for this reason it is that we maintain that those who have 
entertained correct ideas regarding God, but who have not offered to Him a 
worship in harmony with the truth, are liable to the punishments which fall on 
sinners. For respecting such Paul says in express words: "The wrath of God is 
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who 
hold the truth in unrighteousness; because that which may be known of God is 
manifest in them; for God hath showed it unto them. For the invisible things of 
Him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the 
things that are made, even His eternal power and Godhead; so that they are 
without excuse: because that, when they knew God, they glorified Him not as God, 
neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish 
heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and 
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to 
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-looted beasts, and creeping things." The 
truth, then, is verily held (in unrighteousness), as our Scriptures testify, by 
those who are of opinion that "the chief good cannot be described in words," but 
who assert that, "after long custom and familiar usage, a light becomes suddenly 
kindled in the soul, as if by a fire springing forth, and that it now supports 
itself alone." 
CHAP. IV. 
Notwithstanding, those who have written in this manner regarding the "chief 
good" will go down to the Piraeus and offer prayer to Artemis, as if she were 
God, and will look (with approval) upon the solemn assembly held by ignorant 
men; and after giving utterance to philosophical remarks of such profundity 
regarding the soul, and describing its passage (to a happier world) after a 
virtuous life, they pass from those great topics which God has revealed to them, 
and adopt mean and trifling thoughts, and offer a cock to AEsculapius! And 
although they had been enabled to form representations both of the "invisible 
things" of God and of the "'archetypal forms" of things from the creation of the 
world, and from (the contemplation of) sensible things, from which they ascend 
to those objects which are comprehended by the understanding alone,--and 
although they had no mean glimpses of His "eternal power and Godhead," they 
nevertheless became "foolish in their imaginations," and their "foolish heart" 
was involved in darkness and ignorance as to the (true) worship of God. 
Moreover, we may see those who greatly pride themselves upon their wisdom and 
theology worshipping the image of a corruptible man, in honour, they say, of 
Him, and sometimes even descending, with the Egyptians, to the worship of birds, 
and four-footed beasts, and creeping things! And although some may appear to 
have risen above such practices, nevertheless they will be found to have changed 
the truth of God into a lie, and to worship and serve the "creature more than 
the Creator." As the wise and learned among the Greeks, then, commit errors in 
the service which they render to God, God "chose the foolish things of the world 
to confound the wise; and base things of the world, and things that are weak, 
and things which are despised, and things which are nought, to bring to nought 
things that are;" and this, truly, "that no flesh should glory in the presence 
of God." Our wise men, however,--Moses, the most ancient of them all, and the 
prophets who followed him,--knowing that the chief good could by no means be 
described in words, were the first who wrote that, as God manifests Himself to 
the deserving, and to those who are qualified to behold Him, He appeared to 
Abraham, or to Isaac, or to Jacob. But who He was that appeared, and of what 
form, and in what manner, and like to which of mortal beings, they have left to 
be investigated by those who are able to show that they resemble those persons 
to whom God showed Himself: for He was seen not by their bodily eyes, but by the 
pure heart. For, according to the declaration of our Jesus, "Blessed are the 
pure in heart, for they shall see God." 
CHAP. V. 
But that a light is suddenly kindled in the soul, as by a fire leaping forth, 
is a fact known long ago to our Scriptures; as when the prophet said, "Light ye 
for yourselves the light of knowledge." John also, who lived after him, said, 
"That which was in the Logos was life, and the life was the light of men;" which 
"true light lighteneth every man that cometh into the world" (i.e., the true 
world, which is perceived by the understanding), and maketh him a light of the 
world: "For this light shone in our hearts, to give the light of the glorious 
Gospel of God in the face of Christ Jesus." And therefore that very ancient 
prophet, who prophesied many generations before the reign of Cyrus (for he was 
older than he by more than fourteen generations), expressed himself in these 
words: "The LORD is my light and my salvation: whom shall I fear?" and, "Thy law 
is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path;" and again, "The light of Thy 
countenance, O LORD, was manifested towards us;" and, "In Thy light we shall see 
light." And the Logos, exhorting us to come to this light, says, in the 
prophecies of Isaiah: "Enlighten thyself, enlighten thyself, O Jerusalem; for 
thy light is come, and the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee." The same 
prophet also, when predicting the advent of Jesus, who was to turn away men from 
the worship of idols, and of images, and of demons, says, "To those that sat in 
the land and shadow of death, upon them hath the light arisen;" and again, "The 
people that sat in darkness saw a great light." Observe now the difference 
between the fine phrases of Plato respecting the "chief good," and the 
declarations of our prophets regarding the "light" of the blessed; and notice 
that the truth as it is contained in Plato concerning this subject did not at 
all help his readers to attain to a pure worship of God, nor even himself, who 
could philosophize so grandly about the "chief good," whereas the simple 
language of the holy Scriptures has led to their honest readers being filled 
with a divine spirit; and this light is nourished within them by the oil, which 
in a certain parable is said to have preserved the light of the torches of the 
five wise virgins. 
CHAP. VI. 
Seeing, however, that Celsus quotes from an epistle of Plato another 
statement to the following effect, viz.: "If it appeared to me that these 
matters could be adequately explained to the multitude in writing and in oral 
address, what nobler pursuit in life could have been followed by me, than to 
commit to writing what was to prove of such advantage to human beings, and to 
lead the nature of all men onwards to the light?"--let us then consider this 
point briefly, viz., whether or not Plato were acquainted with any doctrines 
more profound than are contained in his writings, or more divine than those 
which he has left behind him, leaving it to each one to investigate the subject 
according to his ability, while we demonstrate that our prophets did know of 
greater things than any in the Scriptures, but which they did not commit to 
writing. Ezekiel, e.g., received a roll, written within and without, in which 
were contained "lamentations," and "songs," and "denunciations;" but at the 
command of the Logos he swallowed the book, in order that its contents might not 
be written, and so made known to unworthy persons. John also is recorded to have 
seen and done a similar thing. Nay, Paul even heard "unspeakable words, which it 
is not lawful for a man to utter." And it is related of Jesus, who was greater 
than all these, that He conversed with His disciples in private, and especially 
in their sacred retreats, concerning the Gospel of God; but the words which He 
uttered have not been preserved, because it appeared to the evangelists that 
they could not be adequately conveyed to the multitude in writing or in speech. 
And if it were not tiresome to repeat the truth regarding these illustrious 
individuals, I would say that they saw better than Plato (by means of the 
intelligence which they received by the grace of God), what things were to be 
committed to writing, and how this was to be done, and what was by no means to 
be written to the multitude, and what was to be expressed in words, and what was 
not to be so conveyed. And once more, John, in teaching us the difference 
between what ought to be committed to writing and what not, declares that he 
heard seven thunders instructing him on certain matters, and forbidding him to 
commit their words to writing. 
CHAP. VII. 
There might also be found in the writings of Moses and of the prophets, who 
are older not only than Plato, but even than Homer and the invention of letters 
among the Greeks, passages worthy of the grace of God bestowed upon them, and 
filled with great thoughts, to which they gave utterance, but not because they 
understood Plato imperfectly, as Celsus imagines. For how was it possible that 
they should have heard one who was not yet born? And if any one should apply the 
words of Celsus to the apostles of Jesus, who were younger than Plato, say 
whether it is not on the very face of it an incredible assertion, that Paul the 
tentmaker, and Peter the fisherman, and John who left his father's nets, should, 
through misunderstanding the language of Plato in his Epistles, have expressed 
themselves as they have done regarding God? But as Celsus now, after having 
often required of us immediate assent (to his views), as if he were babbling 
forth something new in addition to what he has already advanced, only repeats 
himself, what we have said in reply may suffice. Seeing, however, he produces 
another quotation from Plato, in which he asserts that the employment of the 
method of question and answer sheds light on the thoughts of those who 
philosophize like him, let us show from the holy Scriptures that the word of God 
also encourages us to the practice of dialectics: Solomon, e.g., declaring in 
one passage, that "instruction unquestioned goes astray;" and Jesus the son of 
Sirach, who has left us the treatise called "Wisdom," declaring in another, that 
"the knowledge of the unwise is as words that will not stand investigation." Our 
methods of discussion, however, are rather of a gentle kind; for we have learned 
that he who presides over the preaching of the word ought to be able to confute 
gainsayers. But if some continue indolent, and do not train themselves so as to 
attend to the reading of the word, and "to search the Scriptures," and, 
agreeably to the command of Jesus, to investigate the meaning of the sacred 
writings, and to ask of God concerning them, and to keep "knocking" at what may 
be closed within them, the Scripture is not on that account to be regarded as 
devoid of wisdom. 
CHAP. VIII. 
In the next place, after other Platonic declarations, which demonstrate that 
"the good" can be known by few, he adds: "Since the multitude, being puffed up 
with a contempt for others, which is far from right, and being filled with vain 
and lofty hopes, assert that, because they have come to the knowledge of some 
venerable doctrines, certain things are true." "Yet although Plato predicted 
these things, he nevertheless does not talk marvels, nor shut the mouth of those 
who wish to ask him for information on the subject of his promises; nor does he 
command them to come at once and believe that a God of a particular kind exists, 
and that he has a son of a particular nature, who descended (to earth) and 
conversed with me." Now, in answer to this we have to say, that with regard to 
Plato, it is Aristander, I think, who has related that he was not the son of 
Ariston, but of a phantom, which approached Amphictione in the guise of Apollo. 
And there are several other of the followers of Plato who, in their lives of 
their master, have made the same statement. What are we to say, moreover, about 
Pythagoras, who relates the greatest possible amount of wonders, and who, in a 
general assembly of the Greeks, showed his ivory thigh, and asserted that he 
recognised the shield which he wore when he was Euphorbus, and who is said to 
have appeared on one day in two different cities! He, moreover, who will declare 
that what is related of Plato and Socrates belongs to the marvellous, will quote 
the story of the swan which was recommended to Socrates while he was asleep, and 
of the master saying when he met the young man, "This, then, was the swan!" Nay, 
the third eye which Plato saw that he himself possessed, he will refer to the 
category of prodigies. But occasion for slanderous accusations will never be 
wanting to those who are ill-disposed, and who wish to speak evil of what has 
happened to such as are raised above the multitude. Such persons will deride as 
a fiction even the demon of Socrates. We do not, then, relate marvels when we 
narrate the history of Jesus, nor have His genuine disciples recorded any such 
stories of Him; whereas this Celsus, who professes universal knowledge, and who 
quotes many of the sayings of Plato, is, 
I think, intentionally silent on the discourse concerning the Son of God 
which is related in Plato's Epistle to Hermeas and Coriscus. Plato's words are 
as follows: "And calling to witness the God of all things--the ruler both of 
things present and things to come, father and lord both of the ruler and 
cause--whom, if we are philosophers indeed, we shall all clearly know, so far as 
it is possible for happy human beings to attain such knowledge." 
CHAP. IX. 
Celsus quotes another saying of Plato to the following effect: "It has 
occurred to me to speak once more upon these subjects at greater length, as 
perhaps I might express myself about them more clearly than I have already done 
for there is a certain 'real' cause, which proves a hindrance in the way of him 
who has ventured, even to a slight extent, to write on such topics; and as this 
has been frequently mentioned by me on former occasions, it appears to me that 
it ought to be stated now. In each of existing things, which are necessarily 
employed in the acquisition of knowledge, there are three elements; knowledge 
itself is the fourth; and that ought to be laid down as the fifth which is both 
capable of being known and is true. Of these, one is 'name;' the second is 
'word;' the third, 'image;' the fourth, 'knowledge.'" Now, according to this 
division, John is introduced before Jesus as the voice of one crying in the 
wilderness, so as to correspond with the "name" of Plato; and the second after 
John, who is pointed out by him, is Jesus, with whom agrees the statement, "The 
Word became flesh;" and that corresponds to the "word" of Plato. Plato terms the 
third "image;" but we, who apply the expression "image" to something different, 
would say with greater precision, that the mark of the wounds which is made in 
the soul by the word is the Christ which is in each one of us and this mark is 
impressed by Christ the Word. And whether Christ, the wisdom which is in those 
of us who are perfect, correspond to the "fourth" element--knowledge--will 
become known to him who has the capacity to ascertain it. 
CHAP. X. 
He next continues: "You see how Plato, although maintaining that (the chief 
good) cannot be described, in words, yet, to avoid the appearance of retreating 
to an irrefutable position, subjoins a reason in explanation of this difficulty, 
as even 'nothing' might perhaps be explained in words." But as Celsus adduces 
this to prove that we ought not to yield a simple assent, but to furnish a 
reason for our belief, we shall quote also the words of Paul, where he says, in 
censuring the hasty believer, "unless ye have believed inconsiderately." Now, 
through his practice of repeating himself, Celsus, so far as he can, forces us 
to be guilty of tautology, reiterating, after the boastful language which has 
been quoted, that "Plato is not guilty of boasting and falsehood, giving out 
that he has made some new discovery, or that he has come down from heaven to 
announce it, but acknowledges whence these statements are derived." Now, if one 
wished to reply to Celsus, one might say in answer to such assertions, that even 
Plato is guilty of boasting, when in the Timoeus he puts the following language 
in the month of Zeus: "Gods of gods, whose creator and father I am," and so on. 
And if any one will defend such language on account of the meaning which is 
conveyed under the name of Zeus, thus speaking in the dialogue of Plato, why 
should not he who investigates the meaning of the words of the Son of God, or 
those of the Creator ( in the prophets, express a profounder meaning than any 
conveyed by the words of Zeus in the Timoeus? For the characteristic of divinity 
is the announcement of future events, predicted not by human power, but shown by 
the result to be due to a divine spirit in him who made the announcement. 
Accordingly, we do not say to each of our hearers, "Believe, first of all, that 
He whom I introduce to thee is the Son of God;" but we put the Gospel before 
each one, as his character and disposition may fit him to receive it, inasmuch 
as we have learned to know "how we ought to answer every man." And there are 
some who are capable of receiving nothing more than an exhortation to believe, 
and to these we address that alone; while we approach others, again, as far as 
possible, in the way of demonstration, by means of question and answer. Nor do 
we at all say, as Celsus scoffingly alleges, "Believe that he whom I introduce 
to thee is the Son of God, although he was shamefully bound, and disgracefully 
punished, and very recently was most contumeliously treated before the eyes of 
all men;" neither do we add, "Believe it even the more (on that account)." For 
it is our endeavour to state, on each individual point, arguments more numerous 
even than we have brought forward in the preceding pages. 

CHAP. XI. 
After this Celsus continues: "If these (meaning the Christians) bring forward 
this person, and others, again, a different individual (as the Christ), while 
the common and ready cry of all parties is, 'Believe, if thou wilt be saved, or 
else begone,' what shall those do who are in earnest about their salvation? 
Shall they cast the dice, in order to divine whither they may betake themselves, 
and whom they shall join?" Now we shall answer this objection in the following 
manner, as the clearness of the case impels us to do. If it had been recorded 
that several individuals had appeared in human life as sons of God in the manner 
in which Jesus did, and if each of them had drawn a party of adherents to his 
side, so that, on account of the similarity of the profession (in the case of 
each individual) that he was the Son of God, he to whom his followers bore 
testimony to that effect was an object of dispute, there would have been ground 
for his saying, "If these bring forward this person, and others a different 
individual, while the common and ready cry of all parties is, 'Believe, if thou 
wilt be saved, or else begone,'" and so on; whereas it has been proclaimed to 
the entire world that Jesus Christ is the only Son of God who visited the human 
race: for those who, like Celsus, have supposed that (the acts of Jesus) were a 
series of prodigies, and who for that reason wished to perform acts of the same 
kind, that they, too, might gain a similar mastery over the minds of men, were 
convicted of being utter nonentities. Such were Simon, the Magus of Samaria, and 
Dositheus, who was a native of the same place; since the former gave out that he 
was the power of God that is called great, and the latter that he was the Son of 
God. Now Simonians are found nowhere throughout the world; and yet, in order to 
gain over to himself many followers, Simon freed his disciples from the danger 
of death, which the Christians were taught to prefer, by teaching them to regard 
idolatry as a matter of indifference. But even at the beginning of their 
existence the followers of Simon were not exposed to persecution. For that 
wicked demon who was conspiring against the doctrine of Jesus, was well aware 
that none of his own maxims would be weakened by the teaching of Simon. The 
Dositheans, again, even in former times, did not rise to any eminence, and now 
they are completely extinguished, so that it is said their whole number does not 
amount to thirty. Judas of Galilee also, as Luke relates in the Acts of the 
Apostles, wished to call himself some great personage, as did Theudas before 
him; but as their doctrine was not of God, they were destroyed, and all who 
obeyed them were immediately dispersed. We do not, then, "cast the dice in order 
to divine whither we shall betake ourselves, and whom we shall join," as if 
there were many claimants able to draw us after them by the profession of their 
having come down from God to visit the human race. On these points, however, we 
have said enough. 
CHAP. XII. 
Accordingly, let us pass on to another charge made by Celsus, who is not even 
acquainted with the words (of our sacred books), but who, from misunderstanding 
them, has said that "we declare the wisdom that is among men to be foolishness 
with God;" Paul having said that "the wisdom of the world is foolishness with 
God." Celsus says that "the reason of this has been stated long ago." And the 
reason he imagines to be, "our desire to win over by means of this saying the 
ignorant and foolish alone." But, as he himself has intimated, he has said the 
same thing before; and we, to the best of our ability, replied to it. 
Notwithstanding this, however, he wished to show that this statement was an 
invention of ours, and borrowed from the Grecian sages, who declare that human 
wisdom is of one kind, and divine of another. 
And he quotes the words of Heraclitus, where he says in one passage, that 
"man's method of action is not regulated by fixed principles, but that of God 
is;" and in another, that "a foolish man listens to a demon, as a boy does to a 
man." He quotes, moreover, the following from the Apology of Socrates, of which 
Plato was the author: "For I, O men of Athens, have obtained this name by no 
other means than by my wisdom. And of what sort is this wisdom? Such, probably, 
as is human; for in that respect I venture to think that I am in reality wise." 
Such are the passages adduced by Celsus. But I shall subjoin also the following 
from Plato's letter to Hermeas, and Erastus, and Coriscus: "To Erastus and 
Coriscus I say, although I am an old man, that, in addition to this noble 
knowledge of 'forms' (which they possess), they need a wisdom, with regard to 
the class of wicked and unjust persons, which may serve as a protective and 
repelling force against them. For they are inexperienced, in consequence of 
having passed a large portion of their lives with us, who are moderate 
individuals, and not wicked. I have accordingly said that they need these 
things, in order that they may not be compelled to neglect the true wisdom, and 
to apply themselves in a greater degree than is proper to that which is 
necessary and human." 
CHAP. XIII. 
According to the foregoing, then, the one kind of wisdom is human, and the 
other divine. Now the "human" wisdom is that which is termed by us the wisdom of 
the "world," which is "foolishness with God;" whereas the "divine"--being 
different from the "human," because it is "divine"--comes, through the grace of 
God who bestows it, to those who have evinced their capacity for receiving it, 
and especially to those who, from knowing the difference between either kind of 
wisdom, say, in their prayers to God, "Even if one among the sons of men be 
perfect, while the wisdom is wanting that comes from Thee, he shall be accounted 
as nothing." We maintain, indeed, that "human" wisdom is an exercise for the 
soul, but that "divine" wisdom is the "end," being also termed the "strong" meat 
of the soul by him who has said that "strong meat belongeth to them that are 
perfect, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern 
both good and evil." This opinion, moreover, is truly an ancient one, its 
antiquity not being referred back, as Celsus thinks, merely to Heraclitus and 
Plato. For before these individuals lived, the prophets distinguished between 
the two kinds of wisdom. It is sufficient for the present to quote from the 
words of David what he says regarding the man who is wise, according to divine 
wisdom, that "he will not see corruption when he beholds wise men dying." Divine 
wisdom, accordingly, being different from faith, is the "first" of the so-called 
"charismata" of God; and the "second" after it--in the estimation of those who 
know how to distinguish such things accurately--is what is called "knowledge;" 
and the "third"--seeing that even the more simple class of men who adhere to the 
service of God, so far as they can, must be saved--is faith. And therefore Paul 
says: "To one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of 
knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit." 
And therefore it is no ordinary individuals whom you will find to have 
participated in the "divine" wisdom, but the more excellent and distinguished 
among those who have given in their adherence to Christianity; for it is not "to 
the most ignorant, or servile, or most uninstructed of mankind," that one would 
discourse upon the topics relating to the divine wisdom. 
CHAP. XIV. 
In designating others by the epithets of "uninstructed, and servile, and 
ignorant," Celsus, I suppose, means those who are not acquainted with his laws, 
nor trained in the branches of Greek learning; while we, on the other hand, deem 
those to be "uninstructed" who are not ashamed to address (supplications) to 
inanimate objects, and to call upon those for health that have no strength, and 
to ask the dead for life, and to entreat the helpless for assistance. And 
although some may say that these objects are not gods, but only imitations and 
symbols of real divinities, nevertheless these very individuals, in imagining 
that the hands of low mechanics can frame imitations of divinity, are 
"uninstructed, and servile, and ignorant;" for we assert that the lowest among 
us have been set free from this ignorance and want of knowledge, while the most 
intelligent can understand and grasp the divine hope. We do not maintain, 
however, that it is impossible for one who has not been trained in earthly 
wisdom to receive the "divine," but we do acknowledge that all human wisdom is 
"folly" in comparison with the "divine." In the next place, instead of 
endeavouring to adduce reasons, as he ought, for his assertions, he terms us 
"sorcerers," and asserts that "we flee away with headlong speed from the more 
polished class of persons, because they are not suitable subjects for our 
impositions, while we seek to decoy those who are more rustic." Now he did not 
observe that from the very beginning our wise men were trained in the external 
branches of learning: Moses, e.g., in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; Daniel, 
and Ananias, and Azariah, and Mishael, in all Assyrian learning, so that they 
were found to surpass in tenfold degree all the wise men of that country. At the 
present time, moreover, the Churches have, in proportion to the multitudes (of 
ordinary believers), a few "wise" men, who have come over to them from that 
wisdom which is said by us to be "according to the flesh;" and they have also 
some who have advanced from it to that wisdom which is "divine." 

CHAP. XV. 
Celsus, in the next place, as one who has heard the subject of humility 
greatly talked about; but who has not been at the pains to understand it, would 
wish to speak evil of that humility which is practised among us, and imagines 
that it is borrowed from some words of Plato imperfectly understood, where he 
expresses himself in the Laws as follows: "Now God, according to the ancient 
account, having in Himself both the beginning and end and middle of all existing 
things, proceeds according to nature, and marches straight on. He is constantly 
followed by justice, which is the avenger of all breaches of the divine law: he 
who is about to become happy follows her closely in humility, and becomingly 
adorned." He did not observe, however, that in writers much older than Plato the 
following words occur in a prayer: "Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes 
lofty, neither do I walk in great matters, nor in things too wonderful for me; 
if I had not been humble," etc. Now these words show that he who is of humble 
mind does not by any means humble himself in an unseemly or inauspicious manner, 
falling down upon his knees, or casting himself headlong on the ground, putting 
on the dress of the miserable, or sprinkling himself with dust. But he who is of 
humble mind in the sense of the prophet, while "walking in great and wonderful 
things," which are above his capacity--viz., those doctrines that are truly 
great, and those thoughts that are wonderful--"humbles himself under the mighty 
hand of God." If there are some, however, who through their stupidity have not 
clearly understood the doctrine of humiliation, and act as they do, it is not 
our doctrine which is to be blamed; but we must extend our forgiveness to the 
stupidity of those who aim at higher things, and owing to their fatuity of mind 
fail to attain them. He who is "humble and becomingly adorned," is so in a 
greater degree than Plato's "humble and becomingly adorned" individual: for he 
is becomingly adorned, on the one hand, because "he walks in things great and 
wonderful," which are beyond his capacity; and humble, on the other hand, 
because, while being in the midst of such, he yet voluntarily humbles himself, 
not under any one at random, but under "the mighty hand of God," through Jesus 
Christ, the teacher of such instruction, "who did not deem equality with God a 
thing to be eagerly clung to, but made Himself of no reputation, and took on Him 
the form of a servant, and being found in fashion as a man, humbled Himself, and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross." And so great is this 
doctrine of humiliation, that it has no ordinary individual as its teacher; but 
our great Saviour Himself says: "Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, 
and ye shall find rest for your souls." 
CHAP. XVI. 
In the next place, with regard to the declaration of Jesus against rich men, 
when He said, "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than 
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God," Celsus alleges that this 
saying manifestly proceeded from Plato, and that Jesus perverted the words of 
the philosopher, which were, that "it was impossible to be distinguished for 
goodness, and at the same time for riches." Now who is there that is capable of 
giving even moderate attention to affairs--not merely among the believers on 
Jesus, but among the rest of mankind--that would not laugh at Celsus, on hearing 
that Jesus, who was born and brought up among the Jews, and was supposed to be 
the son of Joseph the carpenter, and who had not studied literature--not merely 
that of the Greeks, but not even that of the Hebrews--as the truth-loving 
Scriptures testify regarding Him, had read Plato, and being pleased with the 
opinion he expressed regarding rich men, to the effect that "it was impossible 
to be distinguished for goodness and riches at the same time," had perverted 
this, and changed it into, "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a 
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God!" Now, if Celsus 
had not perused the Gospels in a spirit of hatred and dislike, but had been 
imbued with a love of truth, he would have turned his attention to the point why 
a camel--that one of animals which, as regards its physical structure, is 
crooked--was chosen as an object of comparison with a rich man, and what 
signification the "narrow eye of a needle" had for him who saw that "strait and 
narrow was the way that leadeth unto life; and to this point also, that this 
animal. according to the law, is described as "unclean," having one element of 
acceptability, viz. that it ruminates, but one of condemnation, viz., that it 
does not divide the hoof. He would have inquired, moreover, how often the camel 
was adduced as an object of comparison in the sacred Scriptures, and in 
reference to what objects, that he might thus ascertain the mean ing of the 
Logos concerning the rich men. Nor would he have left without examination the 
fact that "the poor" are termed "blessed" by Jesus, while "the rich" are 
designated as "miserable;" and whether these words refer to the rich and poor 
who are visible to the senses, or whether there is any kind of poverty known to 
the Logos which is to be deemed "altogether blessed," and any rich man who is to 
be wholly condemned. For even a common individual would not thus 
indiscriminately have praised the poor, many of whom lead most wicked byes. But 
on this point we have said enough. 
CHAP. XVII. 
Since Celsus, moreover, from a desire to depreciate the accounts which our 
Scriptures give of the kingdom of God, has quoted none of them, as if they were 
unworthy of being recorded by him (or perhaps because he was unacquainted with 
them), while, on the other hand, he quotes the sayings of Plato, both from his 
Epistles and the Phoedrus, as if these were divinely inspired, but our 
Scriptures were not, let us set forth a few points, for the sake of comparison 
with these plausible declarations of Plato, which did not however, dispose the 
philosopher to worship in a manner worthy of him the Maker of all things. For he 
ought not to have adulterated or polluted this worship with what we call 
"idolatry," but what the many would describe by the term "superstition." Now, 
according to a Hebrew figure of speech, it is said of God in the eighteenth 
Psalm, that "He made darkness His secret place," to signify that those notions 
which should be worthily entertained of God are invisible and unknowable, 
because God conceals Himself in darkness, as it were, from those who cannot 
endure the splendours of His knowledge, or are incapable of looking at them, 
partly owing to the pollution of their understanding, which is clothed with the 
body of mortal lowliness, and partly owing to its feebler power of comprehending 
God. And in order that it may appear that the knowledge of God has rarely been 
vouch-safed to men, and has been found in very few individuals, Moses is related 
to have entered into the darkness where God was. And again, with regard to Moses 
it is said: "Moses alone shall come near the LORD, but the rest shall not come 
nigh." And again, that the prophet may show the depth of the doctrines which 
relate to God, and which is unattainable by those who do not possess the "Spirit 
which searcheth all things, even the deep things of God," he added: "The abyss 
like a garment is His covering." Nay, our Lord and Saviour, the Logos of God, 
manifesting that the greatness of the knowledge of the Father is appropriately 
comprehended and known pre-eminently by Him alone, and in the second place by 
those whose minds are enlightened by the Logos Himself and God, declares: "No 
man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father but the 
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him." For no one can worthily know 
the "uncreated" and first-born of all created nature like the Father who begat 
Him, nor any one the Father like the living Logos, and His Wisdom and Truth. By 
sharing in Him who takes away from the Father what is called "darkness," which 
He "made His secret place," and "the abyss," which is called His "covering," and 
in this way unveiling the Father, every one knows the Father who is capable of 
knowing Him. 
CHAP. XVIII. 
I thought it right to quote these few instances from a much larger number of 
passages, in which our sacred writers express their ideas regarding God, in 
order to show that, to those who have eyes to behold the venerable character of 
Scripture, the sacred writings of the prophets contain things more worthy of 
reverence than those sayings of Plato which Celsus admires. Now the declaration 
of Plato, quoted by Celsus, runs as follows: "All things are around the King of 
all, and all things exist for his sake, and he is the cause of all good things. 
With things of the second rank he is second, and with those of the third rank he 
is third. The human soul, accordingly, is eager to learn what these things are, 
looking to such things as are kindred to itself, none of which is perfect. But 
as regards the King and those things which I mentioned, there is nothing which 
resembles them." I might have mentioned, moreover, what is said of those beings 
which are called seraphim by the Hebrews, and described in Isaiah, who cover the 
face and feet of God, and of those called cherubim, whom Ezekiel has described, 
and the postures of these, and of the manner in which God is said to be borne 
upon the cherubim. But since they are mentioned in a very mysterious manner, on 
account of the unworthy and the indecent, who are unable to enter into the great 
thoughts and venerable nature of theology, I have not deemed it becoming to 
discourse of them in this treatise. 
CHAP. XIX. 
Celsus in the next place alleges, that "certain Christians, having 
misunderstood the words of Plato, loudly boast of a 'super-celestial' God thus 
ascending beyond the heaven of the Jews." By these words, indeed, he does not 
make it clear whether they also ascend beyond the God of the Jews, or only 
beyond the heaven by which they swear. It is not our purpose at present, 
however, to speak of those who acknowledge another god than the one worshipped 
by the Jews, but to defend ourselves, and to show that it was impossible for the 
prophets of the Jews, whose writings are reckoned among ours, to have borrowed 
anything from Plato, because they were older than he. They did not then borrow 
from him the declaration, that "all things are around the King of all, and that 
all exist on account of him;" for we have learned that nobler thoughts than 
these have been uttered by the prophets, by Jesus Himself and His disciples, who 
have clearly indicated the meaning of the spirit that was in them, which was 
none other than the spirit of Christ. Nor was the philosopher the first to 
present to view the "super-celestial" place; for David long ago brought to view 
the profundity and multitude of the thoughts concerning God entertained by those 
who have ascended above visible things, when he said in the book of Psalms: 
"Praise God, ye heaven of heavens and ye waters that be above the heavens, let 
them praise the name of the LORD." I do not indeed, deny that Plato learned from 
certain Hebrews the words quoted from the Phoedrus, or even, as some have 
recorded, that he quoted them from a perusal of our prophetic writings, when he 
said: "No poet here below has ever sung of the super-celestial place, or ever 
will sing in a becoming manner," and so on. And in the same passage is the 
following: "For the essence, which is both colourless and formless, and which 
cannot be touched, which really exists, is the pilot of the soul, and is beheld 
by the understanding alone; and around it the genus of true knowledge holds this 
place." Our Paul, moreover, educated by these words, and longing after things 
"supra-mundane" and "super-celestial," and doing his utmost for their sake to 
attain them, says in the second Epistle to the Corinthians: "For our light 
affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at 
the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but 
the things which are unseen are eternal." 
CHAP. XX. 
Now, to those who are capable of understanding him, the apostle manifestly 
presents to view "things which are the objects of perception," calling them 
"things seen;" while he terms "unseen," things which are the object of the 
understanding, and cognisable by it alone. He knows, also, that things "seen" 
and visible are "temporal," but that things cognisable by the mind, and "not 
seen," are "eternal;" and desiring to remain in the contemplation of these. and 
being assisted by his earnest longing for them, he deemed all affliction as 
"light" and as "nothing," and during the season of afflictions and troubles was 
not at all bowed down by them, but by his contemplation of (divine) things 
deemed every calamity a light thing, seeing we also have "a great High Priest," 
who by the greatness of His power and understanding "has passed through the 
heavens, even Jesus the Son of God," who has promised to all that have truly 
learned divine things, and have lived lives in harmony with them, to go before 
them to the things that are supra-mundane; for His words are: "That where I go, 
ye may be also." And therefore we hope, after the troubles and struggles which 
we suffer here, to reach the highest heavens, and receiving, agreeably to the 
teaching of Jesus, the fountains of water that spring up unto eternal life, and 
being filled with the rivers of knowledge, shall be united with those waters 
that are said to be above the heavens, and which praise His name. And as many of 
us as praise Him shall not be carried about by the revolution of the heaven, but 
shall be ever engaged in the contemplation of the invisible things of God, which 
are no longer understood by us through the things which He hath made from the 
creation of the world, but seeing, as it was expressed by the true disciple of 
Jesus in these words, "then face to face;" and in these, "When that which is 
perfect is come, then that which is in part will be done away." 
CHAP. XXI. 
The Scriptures which are current in the Churches of God do not speak of 
"seven" 
heavens, or of any definite number at all, but they do appear to teach the 
existence of "heavens," whether that means the "spheres" of those bodies which 
the Greeks call "planets," or something more mysterious. Celsus, too, agreeably 
to the opinion of Plato, asserts that souls can make their way to and from the 
earth through the planets; while Moses, our most ancient prophet, says that a 
divine vision was presented to the view of our prophet Jacob,--a ladder 
stretching to heaven, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon it, 
and the Lord supported upon its top,--obscurely pointing, by this matter of the 
ladder, either to the same truths which Plato had in view, or to something 
greater than these. On this subject Philo has composed a treatise which deserves 
the thoughtful and intelligent investigation of all lovers of truth. 
CHAP. XXII. 
After this, Celsus, desiring to exhibit his learning in his treatise against 
us, quotes also certain Persian mysteries, where he says: "These things are 
obscurely hinted at in the accounts of the Persians, and especially in the 
mysteries of Mithras, which are celebrated amongst them. For in the latter there 
is a representation of the two heavenly revolutions,--of the movement, viz., of 
the fixed stars, and of that which take place among the planets, and of the 
passage of the soul through these. The representation is of the following 
nature: There is a ladder with lofty gates, and on the top of it an eighth gate. 
The first gate consists of lead, the second of tin, the third of copper, the 
fourth of iron, the fifth of a mixture of metals, the sixth of silver, and the 
seventh of gold. The first gate they assign to Saturn, indicating by the 'lead' 
the slowness of this star; the second to Venus, comparing her to the splendour 
and softness of tin; the third to Jupiter, being firm and solid; the fourth to 
Mercury, for both Mercury and iron are fit to endure all things, and are 
money-making and laborious; the fifth to Mars, because, being composed of a 
mixture of metals, it is varied and unequal; the sixth, of silver, to the Moon; 
the seventh, of gold, to the Sun,--thus imitating the different colours of the 
two latter." He next proceeds to examine the reason of the stars being arranged 
in this order, which is symbolized by the names of the rest of matter. 
Musical reasons, moreover, are added or quoted by the Persian theology; and 
to these, again, he strives to add a second explanation, connected also with 
musical considerations. But it seems to me, that to quote the language of Celsus 
upon these matters would be absurd, and similar to what he himself has done, 
when, in his accusations against Christians and Jews, he quoted, most 
inappropriately, not only the words of Plato; but, dissatisfied even with these, 
he adduced in addition the mysteries of the Persian Mithras, and the explanation 
of them. Now, whatever be the case with regard to these,--whether the Persians 
and those who conduct the mysteries of Mithras give false or true accounts 
regarding them,--why did he select these for quotation, rather than some of the 
other mysteries, with the explanation of them? For the mysteries of Mithras do 
not appear to be more famous among the Greeks than those of Eleusis, or than 
those in AEgina, where individuals are initiated in the rites of Hecate. But if 
he must introduce barbarian mysteries with their explanation, why not rather 
those of the Egyptians, which are highly regarded by many, or those of the 
Cappadocians regarding the Comanian Diana, or those of the Thracians, or even 
those of the Romans themselves, who initiate the noblest members of their 
senate? But if he deemed it inappropriate to institute a comparison with any of 
these, because they furnished no aid in the way of accusing Jews or Christians, 
why did it not also appear to him inappropriate to adduce the instance of the 
mysteries of Mithras? 
CHAP. XXIII. 
If one wished to obtain means for a pro-founder contemplation of the entrance 
of souls into divine things, not from the statements of that very insignificant 
sect from which he quoted, hut from books--partly those of the Jews, which are 
read in their synagogues, and adopted by Christians, and partly from those of 
Christians alone--let him peruse, at the end of Ezekiel's prophecies, the 
visions beheld by the prophet, in which gates of different kinds are enumerated, 
which obscurely refer to the different modes in which divine souls enter into a 
better world; and let him peruse also, from the Apocalypse of John, what is 
related of the city of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and of its foundations and 
gates. And if he is capable of finding out also the road, which is indicated by 
symbols, of those who will march on to divine things, let him read the book of 
Moses entitled Numbers, and let him seek the help of one who is capable of 
initiating him into the meaning of the narratives concerning the encampments of 
the children of Israel; viz., of what sort those were which were arranged 
towards the east, as was the case with the first; and what those towards the 
south-west. and south; and what towards the sea; and what the last were, which 
were stationed towards the north. For he will see that there is in the 
respective places a meaning not to be lightly treated, nor, as Celsus imagines, 
such as calls only for silly and servile listeners: but he will distinguish in 
the encampments certain things relating to the numbers that are enumerated, and 
which are specially adapted to each tribe, of which the present does not appear 
to us to be the proper time to speak. Let Celsus know, moreover, as well as 
those who read his book, that in no part of the genuine and divinely accredited 
Scriptures are "seven" heavens mentioned; neither do our prophets, nor the 
apostles of Jesus, nor the Son of God Himself, repeat anything which they 
borrowed from the Persians or the Cabiri. 
CHAP. XXIV. 
After the instance borrowed from the Mithraic mysteries, Celsus declares that 
he who would investigate the Christian mysteries, along with the aforesaid 
Persian, will, on comparing the two together, and on unveiling the rites of the 
Christians, see in this way the difference between them. Now, wherever he was 
able to give the names of the various sects, he was nothing loth to quote those 
with which he thought himself acquainted; but when he ought most of all to have 
done this, if they were really known to him, and to have informed us which was 
the sect that makes use of the diagram he has drawn, he has not done so. It 
seems to me, however, that it is from some statements of a very insignificant 
sect called Ophites, which he has misunderstood, that, in my opinion, he has 
partly borrowed what he says about the diagram. Now, as we have always been 
animated by a love of learning, we have fallen in with this diagram, and we have 
found in it the representations of men who, as Paul says, "creep into houses, 
and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts; ever 
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." The diagram 
was, however, so destitute of all credibility, that neither these easily 
deceived women, nor the most rustic class of men, nor those who were ready to be 
led away by any plausible pretender whatever, ever gave their assent to the 
diagram. Nor, indeed, have we ever met any individual, although we have visited 
many parts of the earth, and have sought out all those who anywhere made 
profession of knowledge, that placed any faith in this diagram. 
CHAP. XXV. 
In this diagram were described ten circles, distinct from each other, but 
united by one circle, which was said to be the soul of all things, and was 
called "Leviathan." This Leviathan, the Jewish Scriptures say, whatever they 
mean by the expression, was created by God for a plaything; for we find in the 
Psalms: "In wisdom hast Thou made all things: the earth is full of Thy 
creatures; so is this great and wide sea. There go the ships; small animals with 
great; there is this dragon, which Thou hast formed to play therein." Instead of 
the word "dragon," the term "leviathan" is in the Hebrew. This impious diagram, 
then, said of this leviathan, which is so clearly depreciated by the Psalmist, 
that it was the soul which had travelled through all things! We observed, also, 
in the diagram, the being named "Behemoth," placed as it were under the lowest 
circle. The inventor of this accursed diagram had inscribed this leviathan at 
its circumference and centre, thus placing its name in two separate places. 
Moreover, Celsus says that the diagram was "divided by a thick black line, and 
this line he asserted was called Gehenna, which is Tartarus." Now as we found 
that Gehenna was mentioned in the Gospel as a place of punishment, we searched 
to see whether it is mentioned anywhere in the ancient Scriptures, and 
especially because the Jews too use the word. And we ascertained that where the 
valley of the son of Ennom was named in Scripture in the Hebrew, instead of 
"valley," with fundamentally the same meaning, it was termed both the valley of 
Ennom and also Geenna. And continuing our researches, we find that what was 
termed "Geenna," or "the valley of Ennom," was included in the lot of the tribe 
of Benjamin, in which Jerusalem also was situated. And seeking to ascertain what 
might be the inference from the heavenly Jerusalem belonging to the lot of 
Benjamin and the valley of Ennom, we find a certain confirmation of what is said 
regarding the place of punishment, intended for the purification of such souls 
as are to be purified by torments, agreeably to the saying: "The Lord cometh 
like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap: and He shall sit as a refiner and 
purifier of silver and of gold." 

CHAP. XXVI. 
It is in the precincts of Jerusalem, then, that punishments will be inflicted 
upon those who undergo the process of purification, who have received into the 
substance of their soul the elements of wickedness, which in a certain place is 
figuratively termed "lead," and on that account iniquity is represented in 
Zechariah as sitting upon a "talent of lead." But the remarks which might be 
made on this topic are neither to be made to all, nor to be uttered on the 
present occasion; for it is not unattended with danger to commit to writing the 
explanation of such subjects, seeing the multitude need no further instruction 
than that which relates to the punishment of sinners; while to ascend beyond 
this is not expedient, for the sake of those who are with difficulty restrained, 
even by fear of eternal punishment, from plunging into any degree of wickedness, 
and into the flood of evils which result from sin. The doctrine of Geenna, then, 
is unknown both to the diagram and to Celsus: for had it been otherwise, the 
framers of the former would not have boasted of their pictures of animals and 
diagrams, as if the truth were represented by these; nor would Celsus, in his 
treatise against the Christians, have introduced among the charges directed 
against them statements which they never uttered instead of what was spoken by 
some who perhaps are no longer in existence, but have altogether disappeared, or 
been reduced to a very few individuals, and these easily counted. And as it does 
not beseem those who profess the doctrines of Plato to offer a defence of 
Epicurus and his impious opinions, so neither is it for us to defend the 
diagram, or to refute the accusations brought against it by Celsus. We may 
therefore allow his charges on these points to pass as superfluous and useless, 
for we would censure more severely than Celsus any who should be carried away by 
such opinions. 
CHAP. XXVII. 
After the matter of the diagram, he brings forward certain monstrous 
statements, in the form of question and answer, regarding what is called by 
ecclesiastical writers the "seal," statements which did not arise from imperfect 
information; such as that "he who impresses the seal is called father, and he 
who is sealed is called young man and son;" and who answers, "I have been 
anointed with white ointment from the tree of life,"--things which we never 
heard to have occurred even among the heretics. In the next place, he determines 
even the number mentioned by those who deliver over the seal, as that "of seven 
angels, who attach themselves to both sides of the soul of the dying body; the 
one party being named angels of light, the others 'archontics;' " and he asserts 
that the "ruler of those named 'archontics' is termed the 'accursed' god." Then, 
laying hold of the expression, he assails, not without reason; those who venture 
to use such language; and on that account we entertain a similar feeling of 
indignation with those who censure such individuals, if indeed there exist any 
who call the God of the Jews--who sends rain and thunder, and who is the Creator 
of this world, and the God of Moses, and of the cosmogony which he records--an 
"accursed" divinity. Celsus, however, appears to have had in view in employing 
these expressions, not a rational object, but one of a most irrational kind, 
arising out of his hatred towards us, which is so unlike a philosopher. For his 
aim was, that those who are unacquainted with our customs should, on perusing 
his treatise, at once assail us as if we called the noble Creator of this world 
an "accursed divinity." He appears to me, indeed, to have acted like those Jews 
who, when Christianity began to be first preached, scattered abroad false 
reports of the Gospel, such as that "Christians offered up an infant in 
sacrifice, and partook of its flesh;" and again, "that the professors of 
Christianity, wishing to do the 'works of darkness,' used to extinguish the 
lights (in their meetings), and each one to have sexual intercourse with any 
woman whom he chanced to meet." These calumnies have long exercised, although 
unreasonably, an influence over the minds of very many, leading those who are 
aliens to the Gospel to believe that Christians are men of such a character; and 
even at the present day they mislead some, and prevent them from entering even 
into the simple intercourse of conversation with those who are Christians. 
CHAP. XXVIII. 
With some such object as this in view does Celsus seem to have been actuated, 
when he alleged that Christians term the Creator an "accursed divinity;" in 
order that he who believes these charges of his against us, should, if possible, 
arise and exterminate the Christians as the most impious Of mankind. Confusing, 
moreover, things that are distinct, he states also the reason why the God of the 
Mosaic cosmogony is termed "accursed," asserting that "such is his character, 
and worthy of execration in the opinion of those who so regard him, inasmuch as 
he pronounced a curse upon the serpent, who introduced the first human beings to 
the knowledge of good and evil." Now he ought to have known that those who have 
espoused the cause of the serpent, because he gave good advice to the first 
human beings, and who go far beyond the Titans and Giants of fable, and are on 
this account called Ophites, are so far from being Christians, that they bring 
accusations against Jesus to as great a degree as Celsus himself; and they do 
not admit any one into their assembly until he has uttered maledictions against 
Jesus. See, then, how irrational is the procedure of Celsus, who, in his 
discourse against the Christians, represents as such those who will not even 
listen to the name of Jesus, or omit even that He was a wise man, or a person of 
virtuous character! What, then, could evince greater folly or madness, not only 
on the part of those who wish to derive their name from the serpent as the 
author of good, but also on the part of Celsus, who thinks that the accusations 
with which the Ophites are charged, are chargeable also against the Christians! 
Long ago, indeed, that Greek philosopher who preferred a state of poverty, and 
who exhibited the pattern of a happy life, showing that he was not excluded from 
happiness although he was possessed of nothing, termed himself a Cynic; while 
these impious wretches, as not being human beings, whose enemy the serpent is, 
but as being serpents, pride themselves upon being called Ophites from the 
serpent, which is an animal most hostile to and greatly dreaded by man, and 
boast of one Euphrates as the introducer of these unhallowed opinions. 
CHAP. XXIX. 
In the next place, as if it were the Christians whom he was calumniating, he 
continues his accusations against those who termed the God of Moses and of his 
law an "accursed" divinity; and imagining that it is the Christians who so 
speak, he expresses himself thus: "What could be more foolish or insane than 
such senseless wisdom? For what blunder has the Jewish lawgiver committed? and 
why do you accept, by means, as you say, of a certain allegorical and typical 
method of interpretation, the cosmogony which he gives, and the law of the Jews, 
while it is with unwillingness, O most impious man, that you give praise to the 
Creator of the world, who promised to give them all things; who promised to 
multiply their race to the ends of the earth, and to raise them up from the dead 
with the same flesh and blood, and who gave inspiration to their prophets; and, 
again, you slander Him! When you feel the force of such considerations, indeed, 
you acknowledge that you worship the same God; but when your teacher Jesus and 
the Jewish Moses give contradictory decisions, you seek another God, instead of 
Him, and the Father!" Now, by such statements, this illustrious philosopher 
Celsus distinctly slanders the Christians, asserting that, when the Jews press 
them hard, they acknowledge the same God as they do; but that when Jesus 
legislates differently from Moses, they seek another god instead of Him. Now, 
whether we are conversing with the Jews, or are alone with ourselves, we know of 
only one and the same God, whom the Jews also worshipped of old time, and still 
profess to worship as God, and we are guilty of no impiety towards Him. We do 
not assert, however; that God will raise men from the dead with the same flesh 
and blood, as has been shown in the preceding pages; for we do not maintain that 
the natural body, which is sown in corruption, and in dishonour, and in 
weakness, will rise again such as it was sown. On such subjects, however, we 
have spoken at adequate length in the foregoing pages. 
CHAP. XXX. 
He next returns to the subject of the Seven ruling Demons, whose names are 
not found among Christians, but who, I think, are accepted by the Ophites. We 
found, indeed, that in the diagram, which on their account we procured a sight 
of, the same order was laid down as that which Celsus has given. Celsus says 
that "the goat was shaped like a lion," not mentioning the name given him by 
those who are truly the most impious of individuals; whereas we discovered that 
He who is honoured in holy Scripture as the angel of the Creator is called by 
this accursed diagram Michael the Lion-like. Again, Celsus says that the "second 
in order is a bull;" whereas the diagram which we possessed made him to be 
Suriel, the bull-like. Further, Celsus termed the third "an amphibious sort of 
animal, and one that hissed frightfully;" while the diagram described the third 
as Raphael, the serpent-like. Moreover, Celsus asserted that the "fourth had the 
form of an eagle;" the diagram representing him as Gabriel, the eagle-like. 
Again, the "fifth," according to Celsus, "had the countenance of a bear;" and 
this, according to the diagram, was Thauthabaoth, the bear-like. Celsus 
continues his account, that the "sixth was described as having the face of a 
dog;" and him the diagram called Erataoth. The "seventh," he adds, "had the 
countenance of an ass, and was named Thaphabaoth or Onoel;" whereas we 
discovered that in the diagram he is called Onoel, or Thartharaoth, being 
somewhat asinine in appearance. We have thought it proper to be exact in stating 
these matters, that we might not appear to be ignorant of those things which 
Celsus professed to know, but that we Christians, knowing them better than he, 
may demonstrate that these are not the words of Christians, but of those who are 
altogether alienated from salvation, and who neither acknowledge Jesus as 
Saviour, nor God, nor Teacher, nor Son of God. 
CHAP. XXXI. 
Moreover, if any one would wish to become acquainted with the artifices of 
those sorcerers, through which they desire to lead men away by their teaching 
(as if they possessed the knowledge of certain secret rites), but are not at all 
successful in so doing, let him listen to the instruction which they receive 
after passing through what is termed the "fence of wickedness,"-gates which are 
subjected to the world of ruling spirits. 
(The following, then, is the manner in which they proceed): "I salute the 
one-formed king, the bond of blindness, complete oblivion, the first power, 
preserved by the spirit of providence and by wisdom, from whom I am sent forth 
pure, being already part of the light of the son and of the father: grace be 
with me; yea, O father, let it be with me." They say also that the beginnings of 
the Ogdoad are derived from this. In the next place, they are taught to say as 
follows, while passing through what they call Ialdabaoth: 
"Thou, O first and seventh, who art born to command with confidence, thou, O 
Ialdabaoth, who art the rational ruler of a pure mind, and a perfect work to 
son and father, bearing the symbol of life in the character of a type, and 
opening to the world the gate which thou didst close against thy kingdom, I pass 
again in freedom through thy realm. Let grace be with me; yea, O father, let it 
be with me." They say, moreover, that the star Phaenon is in sympathy with the 
lion-like ruler. They next imagine that he who has passed through Ialdabaoth and 
arrived at Iao ought thus to speak: "Thou, O second Iao, who shinest by night 
who art the ruler of the secret mysteries of son and father, first prince of 
death, and portion of the innocent, bearing now mine own beard as symbol, I am 
ready to pass through thy realm, having strengthened him who is born of thee by 
the living word. Grace be with me; father, let it be with me." They next come to 
Sabaoth, to whom they think the following should be addressed: "O governor of 
the fifth realm, powerful Sabaoth, defender of the law of thy creatures, who are 
liberated by thy grace through the help of a more powerful Pentad, admit me, 
seeing the faultless symbol of their art, preserved by the stamp of an image, a 
body liberated by a Pentad. Let grace be with me, O father, let grace be with 
me." And after Sabaoth they come to Astaphaeus, to whom they believe the 
following prayer should be offered: "O Astaphaeus, ruler of the third gate, 
overseer of the first principle of water, look upon me as one of thine 
initiated, admit me who am purified with the spirit of a virgin, thou who seest 
the essence of the world. Let grace be with me, O father, let grace be with me." 
After him comes Aloaeus, who is to be thus addressed: "O Aloaeus, governor of 
the second gate, let me pass, seeing I bring to thee the symbol of thy mother, a 
grace which is hidden by the powers of the realms. Let grace be with me, O 
father, let it be with me." And last of all they name Horaeus, and think that 
the following prayer ought to be offered to him: "Thou who didst fearlessly 
overleap the rampart of fire, O Horaeus, who didst obtain the government of the 
first gate, let me pass, seeing thou beholdest the symbol of thine own power, 
sculptured on the figure of the tree of life, and formed after this image, in 
the likeness of innocence. Let grace be with me, O father, let grace be with 
me." 
CHAP. XXXII. 
The supposed great learning of Celsus, which is composed, however, rather of 
curious trifles and silly talk than anything else, has made us touch upon these 
topics, from a wish to show to every one who peruses his treatise and our reply, 
that we have no lack of information on those subjects, from which he takes 
occasion to calumniate the Christians, who neither are acquainted with, nor 
concern themselves about, such mat ters. For we, too, desired both to learn and 
set forth these things, in order that sorcerers might not, under pretext of 
knowing more than we, delude those who are easily carried away by the glitter of 
names. And I could have given many more illustrations to show that we are 
acquainted with the opinions of these deluders, and that we disown them, as 
being alien to ours, and impious, and not in harmony with the doctrines of true 
Christians, of which we are ready to make confession even to the death. It must 
be noticed, too, that those who have drawn up this array of fictions, have, from 
neither understanding magic, nor discriminating the meaning of holy Scripture, 
thrown everything into confusion; seeing that they have borrowed from magic the 
names of Ialdabaoth, and Astaphaeus, and Horaeus, and from the Hebrew Scriptures 
him who is termed in Hebrew Iao or Jah, and Sabaoth, and Adonaeus, and Eloaeus. 
Now the names taken from the Scriptures are names of one and the same God; 
which, not being understood by the enemies of God, as even themselves 
acknowledge, led to their imagining that Iao was a different God, and Sabaoth 
another, and Adonaeus, whom the Scriptures term Adonai, a third besides, and 
that Eloaeus, whom the prophets name in Hebrew Eloi, was also different. 
CHAP. XXXIII. 
Celsus next relates other fables, to the effect that "certain persons return 
to the shapes of the archontics, so that some are called lions, others bulls, 
others dragons, or eagles, or bears, or dogs." We found also in the diagram 
which we possessed, and which Celsus called the "square pattern," the statements 
made by these unhappy beings concerning the gates of Paradise. The flaming sword 
was depicted as the diameter of a flaming circle, and as if mounting guard over 
the tree of knowledge and of life. Celsus, however, either would not or could 
not repeat the harangues which, according to the fables of these impious 
individuals, are represented as spoken at each of the gates by those who pass 
through them; but this we have done in order to show to Celsus and those who 
read his treatise, that we know the depth of these unhallowed mysteries, and 
that they are far removed from the worship which Christians offer up to God. 
CHAP. XXXIV. 
After finishing the foregoing, and those analogous matters which we ourselves 
have added, Celsus continues as follows: "They continue to heap together one 
thing after another,--discourses of prophets, and circles upon circles, and 
effluents from an earthly church, and from circumcision; and a power flowing 
from one Prunicos, a virgin and a living soul; and a heaven slain in order to 
live, and an earth slaughtered by the sword, and many put to death that they may 
live, and death ceasing in the world, when the sin of the world is dead; and, 
again, a narrow way, and gates that open spontaneously. And in all their 
writings (is mention made) of the tree of life, and a resurrection of the flesh 
by means of the 'tree,' because, I imagine, their teacher was nailed to a cross, 
and was a carpenter by craft; so that if he had chanced to have been cast from a 
precipice, or thrust into a pit, or suffocated by hanging, or had been a 
leather-cutter, or stone-cutter, or worker in iron, there would have been 
(invented) a precipice of life beyond the heavens, or a pit of resurrection, or 
a cord of immortality, or a blessed stone, or an iron of love, or a sacred 
leather! Now what old woman would not be ashamed to utter such things in a 
whisper, even when making stories to lull an infant to sleep?" In using such 
language as this, Celsus appears to me to confuse together matters which he has 
imperfectly heard. For it seems likely that, even supposing that he had heard a 
few words traceable to some existing heresy, he did not clearly understand the 
meaning intended to be conveyed; but heaping the words together, he wished to 
show before those who knew nothing either of our opinions or of those of the 
heretics, that he was acquainted with all the doctrines of the Christians. And 
this is evident also from the foregoing words. 
CHAP. XXXV. 
It is our practice, indeed, to make use of the words of the prophets, who 
demonstrate that Jesus is the Christ predicted by them, and who show from the 
prophetic writings the events in the Gospels regarding Jesus have been 
fulfilled. But when Celsus speaks of "circles upon circles," (he perhaps 
borrowed the expression) from the aforementioned heresy, which includes in one 
circle (which they call the soul of all things, and Leviathan) the seven circles 
of archontic demons, or perhaps it arises from misunderstanding the preacher, 
when he says: "The wind goeth in a circle of circles, and returneth again upon 
its circles." The expression, too, "effluents of an earthly church and of 
circumcision," was probably taken from the fact that the church on earth was 
called by some an efflu ent from a heavenly church and a better world; and that 
the circumcision described in the law was a symbol of the circumcision performed 
there, in a certain place set apart for purification. The adherents of 
Valentinus, moreover, in keeping with their system of error, give the name of 
Prunicos to a certain kind of wisdom, of which they would have the woman 
afflicted with the twelve years' issue of blood to be the symbol; so that 
Celsus, who confuses together all sorts of opinions--Greek, Barbarian, and 
Heretical--having heard of her, asserted that it was a power flowing forth from 
one Prunicos, a virgin. The "living soul," again, is perhaps mysteriously 
referred by some of the followers of Valentinus to the being whom they term the 
psychic creator of the world; or perhaps, in contradistinction to a "dead" soul, 
the "living" soul is termed by some, not inelegantly, the soul of "him who is 
saved." I know nothing, however, of a "heaven which is said to be slain," or of 
an "earth slaughtered by the sword," or of many persons slain in order that they 
might live; for it is not unlikely that these were coined by Celsus out of his 
own brain. 
CHAP. XXXVI. 
We would say, moreover, that death ceases in the world when the sin of the 
world dies, referring the saying to the mystical words of the apostle, which run 
as follows: "When He shall have put all enemies under His feet, then the last 
enemy that shall be destroyed is death." And also: "When this corruptible shall 
have put on incorruption, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is 
written, Death is swallowed up in victory." The "strait descent," again, may 
perhaps be referred by those who hold the doctrine of transmigration of souls to 
that view of things. And it is not incredible that the gates which are said to 
open spontaneously are referred obscurely by some to the words, "Open to me the 
gates of righteousness, that I may go into them, and praise the LORD; this gate 
of the LORD, into it the righteous shall enter;" and again, to what is said in 
the ninth psalm, "Thou that liftest me up from the gates of death, that I may 
show forth all Thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion." The Scripture 
further gives the name of "gates of death" to those sins which lead to 
destruction, as it terms, on the contrary, good actions the "gates of Zion." So 
also "the gates of righteousness," which is an equivalent expression to "the 
gates of virtue," and these are ready to be opened to him who follows after 
virtuous pursuits. 
The subject of the "tree of life" will be more appropriately explained when 
we interpret the statements in the book of Genesis regarding the paradise 
planted by God. Celsus, moreover, has often mocked at the subject of a 
resurrection,--a doctrine which he did not comprehend; and on the present 
occasion, not satisfied with what he has formerly said, he adds, "And there is 
said to be a resurrection of the flesh by means of the tree;" not understanding, 
I think, the symbolical expression, that "through the tree came death, and 
through the tree comes life," because death was in Adam, and life in Christ. He 
next scoffs at the "tree," assailing it on two grounds, and saying, "For this 
reason is the tree introduced, either because our teacher was nailed to a cross, 
or because he was a carpenter by trade;" not observing that the tree of life is 
mentioned in the Mosaic writings, and being blind also to this, that in none of 
the Gospels current in the Churches is Jesus Himself ever described as being a 
carpenter. 
CHAP. XXXVII. 
Celsus, moreover, thinks that we have invented this "tree of life" to give an 
allegorical meaning to the cross; and in consequence of his error upon this 
point, he adds: "If he had happened to be cast down a precipice, or shoved into 
a pit, or suffocated by hanging, there would have been invented a precipice of 
life far beyond the heavens, or a pit of resurrection, or a cord of 
immortality." And again: "If the 'tree of life' were an invention, because 
he--Jesus-- (is reported) to have been a carpenter, it would follow that if he 
had been a leather-cutter, something would have been said about holy leather; or 
had he been a stone-cutter, about a blessed stone; or if a worker in iron, about 
an iron of love." Now, who does not see at once the paltry nature of his charge, 
in thus calumniating men whom he professed to convert on the ground of their 
being deceived? And after these remarks, he goes on to speak in a way quite in 
harmony with the tone of those who have invented the fictions of lion-like, and 
ass-headed, and serpent-like ruling angels, and other similar absurdities, but 
which does not affect those who belong to the Church. Of a truth, even a drunken 
old woman would be ashamed to chaunt or whisper to an infant, in order to lull 
him to sleep, any such fables as those have done who invented the beings with 
asses' heads, and the harangues, so to speak, which are delivered at each of the 
gates. But Celsus is not acquainted with the doctrines of the members of the 
Church, which very few have been able to comprehend, even of those who have 
devoted all their lives, in conformity with the command of Jesus, to the 
searching of the Scriptures, and have laboured to investigate the meaning of the 
sacred books, to a greater degree than Greek philosophers in their efforts to 
attain a so-called wisdom. 
CHAP. XXXVIII. 
Our noble (friend), moreover, not satisfied with the objections which he has 
drawn from the diagram, desires, in order to strengthen his accusations against 
us, who have nothing m common with it, to introduce certain other charges, which 
he adduces from the same (heretics), but yet as if they were from a different 
source. His words are: "And that is not the least of their marvels, for there 
are between the upper circles--those that are above the heavens--certain 
inscriptions of which they give the interpretation, and among others two words 
especially, 'a greater and a less,' which they refer to Father and Son." Now, in 
the diagram referred to, we found the greater and the lesser circle, upon the 
diameter of which was inscribed "Father and Son;" and between the greater circle 
(in which the lesser was contained) and another composed of two circles,--the 
outer one of which was yellow, and the inner blue,--a barrier inscribed in the 
shape of a hatchet. And above it, a short circle, close to the greater of the 
two former, having the inscription "Love;" and lower down, one touching the same 
circle, with the word "Life." And on the second circle, which was intertwined 
with and included two other circles, another figure, like a rhomboid, (entitled) 
"The foresight of wisdom." And within their point of common section was "The 
nature of wisdom." And above their point of common section was a circle, on 
which was inscribed "Knowledge;" and lower down another, on which was the 
inscription, "Understanding." We have introduced these matters into our reply to 
Celsus, to show to our readers that we know better than he, and not by mere 
report, those things, even although we also disapprove of them. Moreover, if 
those who pride themselves upon such matters profess also a kind of magic and 
sorcery,--which, in their opinion, is the summit of wisdom,--we, on the other 
hand, make no affirmation about it, seeing we never have discovered anything of 
the kind. Let Celsus, however, who has been already often convicted of false 
witness and irrational accusations, see whether he is not guilty of falsehood in 
these also, or whether he has not extracted and introduced into his treatise, 
statements taken from the writings of those who are foreigners and strangers to 
our Christian faith. 
CHAP. XXXIX. 
In the next place, speaking of those who employ the arts of magic and 
sorcery, and who invoke the barbarous names of demons, he remarks that such 
persons act like those who, in reference to the same things, perform marvels 
before those who are ignorant that the names of demons among the Greeks are 
different from what they are among the Scythians. He then quotes a passage from 
Herodotus, stating that "Apollo is called Gongosyrus by the Scythians; Poseidon, 
Thagimasada; Aphrodite, Argimpasan; Hestia, Tabiti." 
Now, he who has the capacity can inquire whether in these matters Celsus and 
Herodotus are not both wrong; for the Scythians do not understand the same thing 
as the Greeks, in what relates to those beings which are deemed to be gods. For 
how is it credible that Apollo should be called Gongosyrus by the Scythians? I 
do not suppose that Gongosyrus, when transferred into the Greek language, yields 
the same etymology as Apollo; or that Apollo, in the dialect of the Scythians, 
has the signification of Gongosyrus. Nor has any such assertion hitherto been 
made regarding the other names, for the Greeks took occasion from different 
circumstances and etymologies to give to those who are by them deemed gods the 
names which they bear; and the Scythians, again, from another set of 
circumstances; and the same also was the case with the Persians, or Indians, or 
Ethiopians, or Libyans, or with those who delight to bestow names (from fancy), 
and who do not abide by the just and pure idea of the Creator of all things. 
Enough, however, has been said by us in the preceding pages, where we wished to 
demonstrate that Sabaoth and Zeus were not the same deity, and where also we 
made some remarks, derived from the holy Scriptures, regarding the different 
dialects. We willingly, then, pass by these points, on which Celsus would make 
us repeat ourselves. In the next place, again, mixing up together matters which 
belong to magic and sorcery, and referring them perhaps to no one,--because of 
the non-existence of any who practise magic under pretence of a worship of this 
character,--and yet, perhaps, having in view some who do employ such practices 
in the presence of the simple (that they may have the appearance of acting by 
divine power), he adds: "What need to number up all those who have taught 
methods of purification, or expiatory hymns, or spells for averting evil, or 
(the making of) images, or resemblances of demons, or the various sorts of 
antidotes against poison (to be found) in clothes, or in numbers, or stones, or 
plants, or roots, or generally in all kinds of things?" In respect to these 
matters, reason does not require us to offer any defence, since we are not 
liable in the slightest degree to suspicions of such a nature. 
CHAP. XL. 
After these things, Celsus appears to me to act like those who, in their 
intense hatred of the Christians, maintain, in the presence of those who are 
utterly ignorant of the Christian faith, that they have actually ascertained 
that Christians devour the flesh of infants, and give themselves without 
restraint to sexual intercourse with their women. Now, as these statements have 
been condemned as falsehoods invented against the Christians, and this admission 
made by the multitude and those altogether aliens to our faith; so would the 
following statements of Celsus be found to be calumnies invented against the 
Christians, where he says that "he has seen in the hands of certain presbyters 
belonging to our faith barbarous books, containing the names and marvellous 
doings of demons;" asserting further, that "these presbyters of our faith 
professed to do no good, but all that was calculated to injure human beings." 
Would, indeed, that all that is said by Celsus against the Christians was of 
such a nature as to be refuted by the multitude, who have ascertained by 
experience that such things are untrue, seeing that most of them have lived as 
neighbours with the Christians, and have not even heard of the existence of any 
such alleged practices! 
CHAP. XLI. 
In the next place, as if he had forgotten that it was his object to write 
against the Christians, he says that, "having become acquainted with one 
Dionysius, an Egyptian musician, the latter told him, with respect to magic 
arts, that it was only over the uneducated and men of corrupt morals that they 
had any power, while on philosophers they were unable to produce any effect, 
because they were careful to observe a healthy manner of life." If, now, it had 
been our purpose to treat of magic, we could have added a few remarks in 
addition to what we have already said on this topic; but since it is only the 
more important matters which we have to notice in answer to Celsus, we shall say 
of magic, that any one who chooses to inquire whether philosophers were ever led 
captive by it or not, can read what has been written by Moiragenes regarding the 
memoirs of the magician and philosopher Apollonius of Tyana, in which this 
individual, who is not a Christian, but a philosopher, asserts that some 
philosophers of no mean note were won over by the magic power possessed by 
Apollonius, and resorted to him as a sorcerer; and among these, I think, he 
especially mentioned Euphrates and a certain Epicurean. Now on the other hand, 
affirm, and have learned by experience, that they who worship the God of all 
things in conformity with the Christianity which comes by Jesus, and who live 
according to His Gospel, using night and day, continuously and becomingly, the 
prescribed prayers, are not carried away either by magic or demons. For verily 
"the angel of the LORD encamps round about them that fear Him, and delivereth 
them" from all evil; and the angels of the little ones in the Church, who are 
appointed to watch over them, are said always to behold the face of their Father 
who is in heaven, whatever be the meaning of "face" or of "behold." 
CHAP. XLII. 
After these matters, Celsus brings the following charges against us from 
another quarter: "Certain most impious errors," he says, "are committed by them, 
due to their extreme ignorance, in which they have wandered away from the 
meaning of the divine enigmas, creating an adversary to God, the devil, and 
naming him in the Hebrew tongue, Satan. Now, of a truth, such statements are 
altogether of mortal invention, and not even proper to be repeated, viz., that 
the mighty God, in His desire to confer good upon men, has yet one 
counterworking Him, and is helpless. The Son of God, it follows, is vanquished 
by the devil; and being punished by him, teaches us also to despise the 
punishments which he inflicts, telling us beforehand that Satan, after appearing 
to men as He Himself had done, will exhibit great and marvellous works, claiming 
for himself the glory of God, but that those who wish to keep him at a distance 
ought to pay no attention to these works of Satan, but to place their faith in 
Him alone. Such statements are manifestly the words of a deluder, planning and 
manoeuvring against those who are opposed to his views, and who rank themselves 
against them." In the next place, desiring to point out the "enigmas," our 
mistakes regarding which lead to the introduction of our views concerning Satan, 
he continues: "The ancients allude obscurely to a certain war among the gods, 
Heraclitus speaking thus of it: 'If one must say that there is a general war and 
discord, and that all things are done and administered in strife.' Pherecydes, 
again, who is much older than Heraclitus, relates a myth of one army drown up in 
hostile array against another, and names Kronos as the leader of the one, and 
Ophioneus of the other, and recounts their challenges and struggles, and 
mentions that agreements were entered into between them, to the end that 
whichever party should fall into the Ocean should be held as vanquished, while 
those who had expelled and conquered them should have possession of heaven. The 
mysteries relating to the Titans and Giants also had some such (symbolical) 
meaning, as well as the Egyptian mysteries of Typhon, and Horus, and Osiris." 
After having made such statements, and not having got over the difficulty as to 
the way in which these accounts contain a higher view of things, while our 
accounts are erroneous copies of them, he continues his abuse of us, remarking 
that "these are not like the stories which are related of a devil, or demon, or, 
as he remarks with more truth, of a man who is an impostor, who wishes to 
establish an opposite doctrine." And in the same way he understands Homer, as if 
he referred obscurely to matters similar to those mentioned by Heraclitus, and 
Pherecydes, and the originators of the mysteries about the Titans and Giants, in 
those words which Hephaestus addresses to Hera as follows:- "Once in your cause 
I felt his matchless might, Hurled headlong downward from the ethereal height." 
And in those of Zeus to Hera:- "Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fix'd on 
high, From the vast concave of the spangled sky, I hung thee trembling in a 
golden chain, And all the raging gods opposed in vain? 
Headlong I hurled them from the Olympian hall, Stunn'd in the whirl, and 
breathless with the fall." 
Interpreting, moreover, the words of Homer, he adds: "The words of Zeus 
addressed to Hera are the words of God addressed to matter; and the words 
addressed to matter obscurely signify that the matter which at the beginning was 
in a state of discord (with God), was taken by Him, and bound together and 
arranged under laws, which may be analogically compared to chains; and that by 
way of chastising the demons who create disorder in it, he hurls them down 
headlong to this lower world." These words of Homer, he alleges, were so 
understood by Pherecydes, when he said that beneath that region is the region of 
Tartarus, which is guarded by the Harpies and Tempest, daughters of Boreas, and 
to which Zeus banishes any one of the gods who becomes disorderly. With the same 
ideas also are closely connected the peplos of Athena, which is beheld by all in 
the procession of the Panathenoea. For it is manifest from this, he continues, 
that a motherless and unsullied demon has the mastery over the daring of the 
Giants. While accepting, moreover, the fictions of the Greeks, he continues to 
heap against us such accusations as the following, viz., that "the Son of God is 
punished by the devil, and teaches us that we also, when punished by him, ought 
to endure it. Now these statements are altogether ridiculous. For it is the 
devil, I think, who ought rather to be punished, and those human beings who are 
calumniated by him ought not to be threatened with chastisement." 
CHAP. XLIII. 
Mark now, whether he who charges us with having committed errors of the most 
impious kind, and with having wandered away from the (true meaning) of the 
divine enigmas, is not himself clearly in error, from not observing that in the 
writings of Moses, which are much older not merely than Heraclitus and 
Pherecydes, but even than Homer, mention is made of this wicked one, and of his 
having fallen from heaven. For the serpent--from whom the Ophioneus spoken of by 
Pherecydes is derived--having become the cause of man's expulsion from the 
divine Paradise, obscurely shadows forth something similar, having deceived the 
woman by a promise of divinity and of greater blessings; and her example is said 
to have been followed also by the man. And, further, who else could the 
destroying angel mentioned in the Exodus of Moses be, than he who was the author 
of destruction to them that obeyed him, and did not withstand his wicked deeds, 
nor struggle against them? Moreover (the goat), which in the book Of Leviticus 
is sent away (into the wilderness), and which in the Hebrew language is named 
Azazel, was none other than this; and it was necessary to send it away into the 
desert, and to treat it as an expiatory sacrifice, because on it the lot fell. 
For all who belong to the "worse" part, on account of their wickedness, being 
opposed to those who are God's heritage, are deserted by God. Nay, with respect 
to the sons of Belial in the book of Judges, whose sons are they said to be, 
save his, on account of their wickedness? And besides all these instances, in 
the book of Job, which is older even than Moses himself, the devil is distinctly 
described as presenting himself before God, and asking for power against Job, 
that he might involve him in trials of the most painful kind; the first of which 
consisted in the loss of all his goods and of his children, and the second in 
afflicting the whole body of Job with the so-called disease of elephantiasis. I 
pass by what might be quoted from the Gospels regarding the devil who tempted 
the Saviour, that I may not appear to quote in reply to Celsus from more recent 
writings on this question. In the last (chapter) also of Job, in which the Lord 
utters to Job amid tempest and clouds what is recorded in the book which bears 
his name there are not a few things referring to the serpent. I have not yet 
mentioned the passages in Ezekiel, where he speaks, as it were, of Pharaoh, or 
Nebuchadnezzar, or the prince of Tyre; or those in Isaiah, where lament is made 
for the king of Babylon, from which not a little might be learned concerning 
evil, as to the nature of its origin and generation, and as to how it derived 
its existence from some who had lost their wings, and who had followed him who 
was the first to lose his own. 
CHAP. XLIV. 
For it is impossible that the good which is the result of accident, or of 
communication, should be like that good which comes by nature; and yet the 
former will never be lost by him who, so to speak, partakes of the "living" 
bread with a view to his own preservation. But if it should fail any one, it 
must be through his own fault, in being slothful to partake of this "living 
bread" and "genuine drink," by means of which the wings, nourished and watered, 
are fitted for their purpose, even according to the saying of Solomon, the 
wisest of men, concerning the truly rich man, that "he made to himself wings 
like an eagle, and returns to the house of his patron. For it became God, who 
knows how to turn to proper account even those who in their wickedness have 
apostatized from Him, to place wickedness of this sort in some part of the 
universe, and to appoint a training-school of virtue, wherein those must 
exercise themselves who would desire to recover in a "lawful manner " the 
possession (which they had lost); in order that being tested, like gold in the 
fire, by the wickedness of these, and having exerted themselves to the utmost to 
prevent anything base injuring their rational nature, they may appear deserving 
of an ascent to divine things, and may be elevated by the Word to the 
blessedness which is above all things, and so to speak, to the very summit of 
goodness. Now he who in the Hebrew language is named Satan, and by some 
Satanas--as being more in conformity with the genius of the Greek 
language--signifies, when translated into Greek, "adversary." But every one who 
prefers vice and a vicious life, is (because acting in a manner contrary to 
virtue) Satanas, that is, an "adversary" to the Son of God, who is 
righteousness, and truth, and wisdom. With more propriety, however, is he called 
"adversary," who was the first among those that were living a peaceful and happy 
life to lose his wings, and to fall from blessedness; he who, according to 
Ezekiel, walked faultlessly in all his ways, "until iniquity was found in him," 
and who being the "seal of resemblance" and the "crown of beauty" in the 
paradise of God, being filled as it were with good things, fell into 
destruction, in accordance with the word which said to him in a mystic sense: 
"Thou hast fallen into destruction, and shalt not abide for ever." We have 
ventured somewhat rashly to make these few remarks, although in so doing we have 
added nothing of importance to this treatise. If any one, however, who has 
leisure for the examination of the sacred writings, should collect together from 
all sources and form into one body of doctrine what is recorded concerning the 
origin of evil, and the manner of its dissolution, he would see that the views 
of Moses and the prophets regarding Satan had not been even dreamed of either by 
Celsus or any one of those whose soul had been dragged down, and torn away from 
God, and from right views of Him, and from His word, by this wicked demon. 
CHAP. XLV. 
But since Celsus rejects the statements concerning Antichrist, as it is 
termed, having neither read what is said of him in the book of Daniel 
nor in the writings of Paul, nor what the Saviour in the Gospels has 
predicted about his coming, we must make a few remarks upon this subject also; 
because, "as faces do not resemble faces," so also neither do men's "hearts" 
resemble one another. It is certain, then, that there will be diversities 
amongst the hearts of men,--those which are inclined to virtue not being all 
modelled and shaped towards it in the same or like degree; while others, through 
neglect of virtue, rash to the opposite extreme. And amongst the latter are some 
in whom evil is deeply engrained, and others in whom it is less deeply rooted. 
Where is the absurdity, then, in holding that there exist among men, so to 
speak, two extremes,--the one of virtue, and the other of its opposite; so that 
the perfection of virtue dwells in the man who realizes the ideal given in 
Jesus, from whom there flowed to the human race so great a conversion, and 
healing, and amelioration, while the opposite extreme is in the man who embodies 
the notion of him that is named Antichrist? For God, comprehending all things by 
means of His foreknowledge, and foreseeing what consequences would result from 
both of these, wished to make these known to mankind by His prophets, that those 
who understand their words might be familiarized with the good, and be on their 
guard against its opposite. It was proper, moreover, that the one of these 
extremes, and the best of the two, should be styled the Son of God, on account 
of His pre-eminence; and the other, who is diametrically opposite, be termed the 
son of the wicked demon, and of Satan, and of the devil. And, in the next place, 
since evil is specially characterized by its diffusion, and attains its greatest 
height when it simulates the appearance of the good, for that reason are signs, 
and marvels, and lying miracles found to accompany evil, through the 
co-operation of its father the devil. For, far surpassing the help which these 
demons give to jugglers (who deceive men for the basest of purposes), is the aid 
which the devil himself affords in order to deceive the human race. Paul, 
indeed, speaks of him who is called Antichrist, describing, though with a 
certain reserve, both the manner, and time, and cause of his coming to the human 
race. And notice whether his language on this subject is not most becoming, and 
undeserving of being treated with even the slightest degree of ridicule. 
CHAP. XLVI. 
It is thus that the apostle expresses himself: "We beseech you, brethren, by 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto Him, 
that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by word, nor by 
spirit, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of the Lord is at hand. Let no 
man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a 
falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition; who 
opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is 
worshipped; so that he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is 
God. Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things? 
And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time. For the 
mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until 
he be taken out of the way. And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the 
Lord shall consume with the spirit of His mouth, and shall destroy with the 
brightness of His coming: even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, 
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of 
unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the 
truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong 
delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who 
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." To explain each 
particular here referred to does not belong to our present purpose. The prophecy 
also regarding Antichrist is stated in the book of Daniel, and is fitted to make 
an intelligent and candid reader admire the words as truly divine and prophetic; 
for in them are mentioned the things relating to the coming kingdom, beginning 
with the times of Daniel, and continuing to the destruction of the world. And 
any one who chooses may read it. Observe, however, whether the prophecy 
regarding Antichrist be not as follows: "And at the latter time of their 
kingdom, when their sins are coming to the full, there shall arise a king, bold 
in countenance, and understanding riddles. And his power shall be great, and he 
shall destroy wonderfully, and prosper, and practise; and shall destroy mighty 
men, and the holy people. And the yoke of his chain shall prosper: there is 
craft in his hand, and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by craft shall 
destroy many; and he shall stand up for the destruction of many, and shall crush 
them as eggs in his hand." What is stated by Paul in the words quoted from him, 
where he says, "so that he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he 
is God," is in Daniel referred to in the following fashion: "And on the temple 
shall be the abomination of desolations, and at the end of the time an end shall 
be put to the desolation." So many, out of a greater number of passages, have I 
thought it right to adduce, that the hearer may understand in some slight degree 
the meaning of holy Scripture, when it gives us information concerning the devil 
and Antichrist; and being satisfied with what we have quoted for this purpose, 
let us look at another of the charges of Celsus, and reply to it as we best may. 

CHAP. XLVII. 
Celsus, after what has been said, goes on as follows: "I can tell how the 
very thing occurred, viz., that they should call him 'Son of God.' Men of 
ancient times termed this world, as being born of God, both his child and his 
son. Both the one and other 'Son of God,' then, greatly resembled each other." 
He is therefore of opinion that we employed the expression "Son of God," having 
perverted what is said of the world, as being born of God, and being His "Son," 
and "a God." For he was unable so to consider the times of Moses and the 
prophets, as to see that the Jewish prophets predicted generally that there was 
a "Son of God" long before the Greeks and those men of ancient time of whom 
Celsus speaks. Nay, he would not even quote the passage in the letters of Plato, 
to which we referred in the preceding pages, concerning Him who so beautifully 
arranged this world, as being the Son of God; lest he too should be compelled by 
Plato, whom he often mentions with respect, to admit that the architect of this 
world is the Son of God, and that His Father is the first God and Sovereign 
Ruler over all things. Nor is it at all wonderful if we maintain that the soul 
of Jesus is made one with so great a Son of God through the highest union with 
Him, being no longer in a state of separation from Him For the sacred language 
of holy Scripture knows of other things also, which, although "dual" in their 
own nature, are considered to be, and really are, "one" in respect to one 
another. It is said of husband and wife, "They are no longer twain, but one 
flesh;" and of the perfect man, and of him who is joined to the true Lord, Word, 
and Wisdom, and Truth, that "he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit." And if 
he who "is joined to the Lord is one spirit," who has been joined to the Lord, 
the Very Word, and Wisdom, and Truth, and Righteousness, in a more intimate 
union, or even in a manner at all approaching to it than the soul of Jesus? And 
if this be so, then the soul of Jesus and God the Word--the first-born of every 
creature--are no longer two, (but one). 
CHAP. XLVIII. 
In the next place, when the philosophers of the Porch, who assert that the 
virtue of God and man is the same, maintain that the God who is over all things 
is not happier than their wise man, but that the happiness of both is equal, 
Celsus neither ridicules nor scoffs at their opinion. If, however, holy 
Scripture says that the perfect man is joined to and made one with the Very Word 
by means of virtue, so that we infer that the soul of Jesus is not separated 
from the first-born of all creation, he laughs at Jesus being called "Son of 
God," not observing what is said of Him with a secret and mystical signification 
in the holy Scriptures. But that we may win over to the reception of our views 
those who are willing to accept the inferences which flow from our doctrines, 
and to be benefited thereby, we say that the holy Scriptures declare the body of 
Christ, animated by the Son of God, to be the whole Church of God, and the 
members of this body--considered as a whole--to consist of those who are 
believers; since, as a soul vivifies and moves the body, which of itself has not 
the natural power of motion like a living being, so the Word, arousing and 
moving the whole body, the Church, to befitting action, awakens, moreover, each 
individual member belonging to the Church, so that they do nothing apart from 
the Word. Since all this, then, follows by a train of reasoning not to be 
depreciated, where is the difficulty in maintaining that, as the soul of Jesus 
is joined in a perfect and inconceivable manner with the very Word, so the 
person of Jesus, generally speaking, is not separated from the only-begotten and 
first-born of all creation, and is not a different being from Him? But enough 
here on this subject. 
CHAP. XLIX. 
Let us notice now what follows, where, expressing in a single word his 
opinion regarding the Mosaic cosmogony, without offering, however, a single 
argument in its support, he finds fault with it, saying: "Moreover, their 
cosmogony is extremely silly." Now, if he had produced some credible proofs of 
its silly character, we should have endeavoured to answer them; but it does not 
appear to me reasonable that I should be called upon to demonstrate, in answer 
to his mere assertion, that it is not "silly." If any one, however, wishes to 
see the reasons which led us to accept the Mosaic account, and the arguments by 
which it may be defended, he may read what we have written upon Genesis, from 
the beginning of the book up to the passage, "And this is the book of the 
generation of men," where we have tried to show from the holy Scriptures 
themselves what the "heaven" was which was created in the beginning; and what 
the "earth," and the "invisible part of the earth," and that which was "without 
form;" and what the "deep" was, and the "darkness" that was upon it; and what 
the "water" was, and the "Spirit of God" which was "borne over it;" and what the 
"light" which was created, and what the "firmament," as distinct from the 
"heaven" which was created in the beginning; and so on with the other subjects 
that follow. Celsus has also expressed his opinion that the narrative of the 
creation of man is "exceedingly silly," without stating any proofs, or 
endeavouring to answer our arguments; for he had no evidence, in my judgment, 
which was fitted to overthrow the statement that "man has been made in the image 
of God." He does not even understand the meaning of the "Paradise" that was 
planted by God, and of the life which man first led in it; and of that which 
resulted from accident, when man was cast forth on account of his sin, and was 
settled opposite the Paradise of delight. Now, as he asserts that these are 
silly statements, let him turn his attention not merely to each one of them (in 
general), but to this in particular, "He placed the cherubim, and the flaming 
sword, which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life," and say 
whether Moses wrote these words with no serious object in view, but in the 
spirit of the writers of the old Comedy, who have sportively related that 
"Proetus slew Bellerophon," and that "Pegasus came from Arcadia." Now their 
object was to create laughter in composing such stories; whereas it is 
incredible that he who left behind him laws for a whole nation, regarding which 
he wished to persuade his subjects that they were given by God, should have 
written words so little to the purpose, and have said without any meaning, "He 
placed the cherubim, and the flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep the 
way of the tree of life," or made any other statement regarding the creation of 
man, which is the subject of philosophic investigation by the Hebrew sages. 
CHAP. L. 
In the next place, Celsus, after heaping together, simply as mere assertions, 
the varying opinions of some of the ancients regarding the world, and the origin 
of man, alleges that "Moses and the prophets, who have left to us our books, not 
knowing at all what the nature of the world is, and of man, have woven together 
a web of sheer nonsense." If he had shown, now, how it appeared to him that the 
holy Scriptures contained "sheer nonsense," we should have tried to demolish the 
arguments which appeared to him to establish their nonsensical character; but on 
the present occasion, following his own example, we also sportively give it as 
our opinion that Celsus, knowing nothing at all about the nature of the meaning 
and language of the prophets, composed a work which contained "sheer nonsense," 
and boastfully gave it the title of a "true discourse." And since he makes the 
statements about the "days of creation" ground of accusation,--as if he 
understood them clearly and correctly, some of which elapsed before the creation 
of light and heaven, and sun, and moon, and stars, and some of them after the 
creation of these,--we shall only make this observation, that Moses must then 
have forgotten that he had said a little before, "that in six days the creation 
of the world had been finished," and that in consequence of this act of 
forgetfulness he subjoins to these words the following: "This is the book of the 
creation of man, in the day when God made the heaven and the earth!" But it is 
not in the least credible, that after what he had said respecting, the six days, 
Moses should immediately add, without a special meaning, the words, "in the day 
that God made the heavens and the earth;" and if any one thinks that these words 
may be referred to the statement, "In the beginning God made the heaven and the 
earth," let him observe that before the words, "Let there be light, and there 
was light," and these, "God called the light day," it has been stated that "in 
the beginning God made the heaven and the earth." 
CHAP. LI. 
On the present occasion, however, it is not our object to enter into an 
explanation of the subject of intelligent and sensible beings, nor of the manner 
in which the different kinds of days were allotted to both sorts, nor to 
investigate the details which belong to the subject, for we should need whole 
treatises for the exposition of the Mosaic cosmogony; and that work we had 
already performed, to the best of our ability, a considerable time before the 
commencement of this answer to Celsus, when we discussed with such measure of 
capacity as we then possessed the question of the Mosaic cosmogony of the six 
days. We must keep in mind, however, that the Word promises to the righteous 
through the mouth of Isaiah, that days will come when not the sun, but the LORD 
Himself, will be to them an everlasting light, and God will be their glory. And 
it is from misunderstanding, I think, some pestilent heresy which gave an 
erroneous interpretation to the words, "Let there be light," as if they were the 
expression of a wish merely on the part of the Creator, that Celsus made the 
remark: "The Creator did not borrow light from above, like those persons who 
kindle their lamps at those of their neighbours." Misunderstanding, moreover, 
another impious heresy, he has said: "If, indeed, there did exist an accursed 
god opposed to the great God, who did this contrary to his approval, why did he 
lend him the light?" So far are we from offering a defence of such puerilities, 
that we desire, on the contrary, distinctly to arraign the statements of these 
heretics as erroneous, and to undertake to refute, not those of their opinions 
with which we are unacquainted, as Celsus does, but those of which we have 
attained an accurate knowledge, derived in part from the statements of their own 
adherents, and partly from a careful perusal of their writings. 
CHAP. LII. 
Celsus proceeds as follows: "With regard to the origin of the world and its 
destruction, whether it is to be regarded as uncreated and indestructible, or as 
created indeed, but not destructible, or the reverse, I at present say nothing." 
For this reason we too say nothing on these points, as the work in hand does not 
require it. Nor do we allege that the Spirit of the universal God mingled itself 
in things here below as in things alien to itself, as might appear from the 
expression, "The Spirit of God moved upon the water;" nor do we assert that 
certain wicked devices directed against His Spirit as if by a different creator 
from the great God, and which were tolerated by the Supreme Divinity, needed to 
be completely frustrated. And, accordingly, I have nothing further to say to 
those who utter such absurdities; nor to Celsus, who does not refute them with 
ability. For he ought either not to have mentioned such matters at all, or else, 
in keeping with that character for philanthropy which he assumes, have carefully 
set them forth, and then endeavoured to rebut these impious assertions. Nor have 
we ever heard that the great God, after giving his spirit to the creator, 
demands it back again. 
Proceeding next foolishly to assail these impious assertions, he asks: "What 
god gives anything with the intention of demanding it back? For it is the mark 
of a needy person to demand back (what he has given), whereas God stands in need 
of nothing." To this he adds, as if saying something clever against certain 
parties: "Why, when he lent (his spirit), was he ignorant that he was lending it 
to an evil being?" He asks, further: "Why does he pass without notice a wicked 
creator who was counter-working his purposes?" 
CHAP. LIII. 
In the next place, mixing up together various heresies, and not observing 
that some statements are the utterances of one heretical sect, and others of a 
different one, he brings forward the objections which we raised against Marcion. 
And, probably, having heard them from some paltry and ignorant individuals, he 
assails the very arguments which combat them, but not in a way that Shows much 
intelligence. Quoting then our arguments against Marcion, and not observing that 
it is against Marcion that he is speaking, he asks: 
"Why does he send secretly, and destroy the works which he has created? Why 
does he secretly employ force, and persuasion, and deceit? Why does he allure 
those who, as ye assert, have been condemned or accused by him, and carry them 
away like a slave-dealer? Why does he teach them to steal away from their Lord? 
Why to flee from their father? Why does he claim them for himself against the 
father's will? Why does he profess to be the father of strange children?" To 
these questions he subjoins the following remark, as if by way of expressing his 
surprise: "Venerable, indeed, is the god who desires to be the father of those 
sinners who are condemned by another (god), and of the needy, and, as themselves 
say, of the very offscourings (of men), and who is unable to capture and punish 
his messenger, who escaped from him!" After this, as if addressing us who 
acknowledge that this world is not the work of a different and strange god, he 
continues in the following strain: "If these are his works, how is it that God 
created evil? And how is it that he cannot persuade and admonish (men)? And how 
is it that he repents on account of the ingratitude and wickedness of men? He 
finds fault, moreover, with his own handwork, and hates, and threatens, and 
destroys his own off spring? Whither can he transport them out of this world, 
which he himself has made?" Now it does not appear to me that by these remarks 
he makes clear what "evil" is; and although there have been among the Greeks 
many sects who differ as to the nature of good and evil, he hastily concludes, 
as if it were a consequence of our maintaining that this world also is a work of 
the universal God, that in our judgment God is the author of evil. Let it be, 
however, regarding evil as it may--whether created by God or not--it 
nevertheless follows only as a result when you compare the principal design. And 
I am greatly surprised if the inference regarding God's authorship of evil, 
which he thinks follows from our maintaining that this world also is the work of 
the universal God, does not follow too from his own statements. For one might 
say to Celsus: "If these are His works, how is it that God created evil? and how 
is it that He cannot persuade and admonish men?" It is indeed the greatest error 
in reasoning to accuse those who are of different opinions of holding unsound 
doctrines, when the accuser himself is much more liable to the same charge with 
regard to his own. 
CHAP. LIV. 
Let us see, then, briefly what holy Scripture has to say regarding good and 
evil, and what answer we are to return to the questions, "How is it that God 
created evil?" and, "How is He incapable of persuading and admonishing men?" 
Now, according to holy Scripture, properly speaking, virtues and virtuous 
actions are good, as, properly speaking, the reverse of these are evil. We shall 
be satisfied with quoting on the present occasion some verses from the 34th 
Psalm, to the following effect: "They that seek the LOuD shall not want any good 
thing. Come, ye children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the 
LORD. What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see 
good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from 
evil, and do good." Now, the injunctions to "depart from evil, and to do good," 
do not refer either to corporeal evils or corporeal blessings, as they are 
termed by some, nor to external things at all, but to blessings and evils of a 
spiritual kind; since he who departs from such evils, and performs such virtuous 
actions, will, as one who desires the true life, come to the enjoyment of it; 
and as one loving to see "good days," in which the word of righteousness will be 
the Sun, he will see them, God taking him away from this "present evil world," 
and from those evil days concerning which Paul said: "Redeeming the time, 
because the days are evil." 
CHAP. LV. 
Passages, indeed, might be found where corporeal and external (benefits) are 
improperly called "good,"--those things, viz., which contribute to the natural 
life, while those which do the reverse are termed "evil." It is in this sense 
that Job says to his wife: "If we have received good at the hand of the Lord, 
shall we not also receive evil!" Since, then, there is found in the sacred 
Scriptures, in a certain passage, this statement put into the mouth of God, "I 
make peace, and create evil;" and again another, where it is said of Him that 
"evil came down from the LORD to the gate of Jerusalem, the noise of chariots 
and horsemen,"--passages which have disturbed many readers of Scripture, who are 
unable to see what Scripture means by "good" and "evil,"--it is probable that 
Celsus, being perplexed thereby, gave utterance to the question, "How is it that 
God created evil?" or, perhaps, having heard some one discussing the matters 
relating to it in an ignorant manner, he made this statement which we have 
noticed. We, on the other hand, maintain that "evil," or "wickedness," and the 
actions which proceed from it, were not created by God. For if God created that 
which is really evil, how was it possible that the proclamation regarding (the 
last) judgment should be confidently announced, which informs us that the wicked 
are to be punished for their evil deeds in proportion to the amount of their 
wickedness, while those who have lived a virtuous life, or performed virtuous 
actions, will be in the enjoyment of blessedness, and will receive rewards from 
God? I am well aware that those who would daringly assert that these evils were 
created by God will quote certain expressions of Scripture (in their support), 
because we are not able to show one consistent series of passages; for although 
Scripture (generally) blames the wicked and approves of the righteous, it 
nevertheless contains some statements which, although comparatively few in 
number, seem to disturb the minds of ignorant readers of holy Scripture. I have 
not, however, deemed it appropriate to my present treatise to quote on the 
present occasion those discordant statements, which are many in number, and 
their explanations, which would require a long array of proofs. Evils, then, if 
those be meant which are properly so called, were not created by God; but some, 
although few in comparison with the order of the whole world, have resulted from 
His principal works, as there follow from the chief works of the carpenter such 
things as spiral shavings and sawdust, or as architects might appear to be the 
cause of the rubbish which lies around their buildings in the form of the filth 
which drops from the stones and the plaster. 
CHAP. LVI. 
If we speak, however, of what are called "corporeal" and "external" 
evils,--which are improperly so termed,--then it may be granted that there are 
occasions when some of these have been called into existence by God, in order 
that by their means the conversion of certain individuals might be effected. 
And what absurdity would follow from such a course? For as, if we should hear 
those sufferings improperly termed "evils" which are inflicted by fathers, and 
instructors, and pedagogues upon those who are under their care, or upon 
patients who are operated upon or cauterized by the surgeons in order to effect 
a cure, we were to say that a father was ill-treating his son, or pedagogues and 
instructors their pupils, or physicians their patients, no blame would be laid 
upon the operators or chastisers; so, in the same way, if God is said to bring 
upon men such evils for the conversion and cure of those who need this 
discipline, there would be no absurdity in the view, nor would "evils come down 
from the LORD upon the gates of Jerusalem,"--which evils consist of the 
punishments inflicted upon the Israelites by their enemies with a view to their 
conversion; nor would one visit "with a rod the transgressions of those who 
forsake the law of the Lord, and their iniquities with stripes;" nor could it be 
said, "Thou hast coals of fire to set upon them; they shall be to thee a help." 
In the same way also we explain the expressions, "I, who make peace, and create 
evil;" for He calls into existence "corporeal" or "external" evils, while 
purifying and training those who would not be disciplined by the word and sound 
doctrine. This, then, is our answer to the question, "How is it that God created 
evil?" 
CHAP. LVII. 
With respect to the question, "How is he incapable of persuading and 
admonishing men?" it has been already stated that, if such an objection were 
really a ground of charge, then the objection of Celsus might be brought against 
those who accept the doctrine of providence. Any one might answer the charge 
that God is incapable of admonishing men; for He conveys His admonitions 
throughout the whole of Scripture, and by means of those persons who, through 
God's gracious appointment, are the instructors of His hearers. Unless, indeed, 
some peculiar meaning be understood to attach to the word "admonish," as if it 
signified both to penetrate into the mind of the person admonished, and to make 
him hear the words of his instructor, which is contrary to the usual meaning of 
the word. To the objection, "How is he incapable of persuading?"--which also 
might be brought against all who believe in providence,--we have to make the 
following remarks. Since the expression "to be persuaded" belongs to those words 
which are termed, so to speak, "reciprocal" (compare the phrase "to shave a 
man," when he makes an effort to submit himself to the barber, there is for this 
reason needed not merely the effort of him who persuades, but also the 
submission, so to speak, which is to be yielded to the persuader, or the 
acceptance of what is said by him. And therefore it must not be said that it is 
because God is incapable of persuading men that they are not persuaded, but 
because they will not accept the faithful words of God. And if one were to apply 
this expression to men who are the "artificers of persuasion," he would not be 
wrong; for it is possible for a man who has thoroughly learned the principles of 
rhetoric, and who employs them properly, to do his utmost to persuade, and yet 
appear to fail, because he cannot overcome the will of him who ought to yield to 
his persuasive arts. Moreover, that persuasion does not come from God, although 
persuasive words may be uttered by him, is distinctly taught by Paul, when he 
says: "This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you." Such also is the 
view indicated by these words: "If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the 
good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, a sword shall devour you." For 
that one may (really) desire what is addressed to him by one who admonishes, and 
may become deserving of those promises of God which he hears, it is necessary to 
secure the will of the hearer, and his inclination to what is addressed to him. 
And therefore it appears to me, that in the book of Deuteronomy the following 
words are uttered with peculiar emphasis: "And now, O Israel, what doth the LORD 
thy God require of thee, but to fear the LORD thy God, and to walk in all His 
ways, and to love Him, and to keep His commandments?" 
CHAP. LVIII. 
There is next to be answered the following query: "And how is it that he 
repents when men become ungrateful and wicked; and finds fault with his own 
handwork, and hates, and threatens, and destroys his own offspring?" Now Celsus 
here calumniates and falsities what is written in the book of Genesis to the 
following effect: "And the LORD God, seeing that the wickedness of men upon the 
earth was increasing, and that every one in his heart carefully meditated to do 
evil continually, was grieved He had made man upon the earth. And God meditated 
in His heart, and said, I will destroy man, whom I have made, from the face of 
the earth, both man and beast, and creeping thing, and fowl of the air, because 
I am grieved that I made them;" quoting words which are not written in 
Scripture, as if they conveyed the meaning of what was actually written. For 
there is no mention in these words of the repentance of God, nor of His blaming 
and hating His own handwork. And if there is the appearance of God threatening 
the catastrophe of the deluge, and thus destroying His own children in it, we 
have to answer that, as the soul of man is immortal, the supposed threatening 
has for its object the conversion of the hearers, while the destruction of men 
by the flood is a purification of the earth, as certain among the Greek 
philosophers of no mean repute have indicated by the expression: "When the gods 
purify the earth." And with respect to the transference to God of those 
anthropopathic phrases, some remarks have been already made by us in the 
preceding pages. 
CHAP. LIX. 
Celsus, in the next place, suspecting, or perhaps seeing clearly enough, the 
answer which might be returned by those who defend the destruction of men by the 
deluge, continues: "But if he does not destroy his own offspring, whither does 
he convey them out of this world which he himself created?" To this we reply, 
that God by no means removes out of the whole world, consisting of heaven and 
earth, those who suffered death by the deluge, but removes them from a life in 
the flesh, and, having set them free from their bodies, liberates them at the 
same time from an existence upon earth, which in many parts of Scripture it is 
usual to call the "world." In the Gospel according to John especially, we may 
frequently find the regions of earth termed "world," as in the passage, "He was 
the true Light, which lighteneth every man that cometh into the 'world;'" as 
also in this, "In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I 
have overcome the world." If, then, we understand by "removing out of the world" 
a transference from "regions on earth," there is nothing absurd in the 
expression. If, on the contrary, the system of things which consists of heaven 
and earth be termed "world," then those who perished in the deluge are by no 
means removed out of the so-called "world." And yet, indeed, if we have regard 
to the words, "Looking not at the things which are seen, but at the things which 
are not seen;" and also to these, "For the invisible things of Him from the 
creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are 
made,"--we might say that he who dwells amid the "invisible" things, and what 
are called generally "things not seen,"is gone out of the world, the Word having 
removed him hence, and transported him to the heavenly regions, in order to 
behold all beautiful things. 
CHAP. LX. 
But after this investigation of his assertions, as if his object were to 
swell his book by many words, he repeats, in different language, the same 
charges which we have examined a little ago, saying: "By far the most silly 
thing is the distribution of the creation of the world over certain days, before 
days existed: for, as the heaven was not yet created, nor the foundation of the 
earth yet laid, nor the sun yet revolving, how could there be days?" Now, what 
difference is there between these words and the following: "Moreover, taking and 
looking at these things from the beginning, would it not be absurd in the first 
and greatest God to issue the command, Let this (first thing) come into 
existence, and this second thing, and this (third); and after accomplishing so 
much on the first day, to do so much more again on the second, and third, and 
fourth, and fifth, and sixth?" We answered to the best of our ability this 
objection to God's "commanding this first, second, and third thing to be 
created," when we quoted the words, "He said, and it was done; He commanded, and 
all things stood fast;" remarking that the immediate Creator, and, as it were, 
very Maker of the world was the Word, the Son of God; while the Father of the 
Word, by commanding His own Son--the Word--to create the world, is primarily 
Creator. And with regard to the creation of the light upon the first day, and of 
the firmament upon the second, and of the gathering together of the waters that 
are under the heaven into their several reservoirs on the third (the earth thus 
causing to sprout forth those (fruits) which are under the control of nature 
alone, and of the (great) lights and stars upon the fourth, and of aquatic 
animals upon the fifth, and of land animals and man upon the sixth, we have 
treated to the best of our ability in our notes upon Genesis, as well as in the 
foregoing pages, when we found fault with those who, taking the words in their 
apparent signification, said that the time of six days was occupied in the 
creation of the world, and quoted the words: "These are the generations of the 
heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God 
made the earth and the heavens." 
CHAP. LXI. 
Again, not understanding the meaning of the words, "And God ended on the 
sixth day His works which He had made, and ceased on the seventh day from all 
His works which He had made: and God blessed the seventh day, and hollowed it, 
because on it He had ceased from all His works which He had begun to make;" and 
imagining the expression," He ceased on the seventh day," to be the same as 
this, "He rested on the seventh day," he makes the remark: "After this, indeed, 
he is weary, like a very bad workman, who stands in need of rest to refresh 
himself!" For he knows nothing of the day of the Sabbath and rest of God, which 
follows the completion of the world's creation, and which lasts during the 
duration of the world, and in which all those will keep festival with God who 
have done all their works in their six days, and who, because they have omitted 
none of their duties, will ascend to the contemplation (of celestial things), 
and to the assembly of righteous and blessed beings. In the next place, as if 
either the Scriptures made such a statement, or as if we ourselves so spoke of 
God as having rested from fatigue, he continues: "It is not in keeping with the 
fitness of things that the first God should feel fatigue, or work with His 
hands, or give forth commands." Celsus says, that" it is not in keeping with the 
fitness of things that the first God should feel fatigue. Now we would say that 
neither does God the Word feel fatigue, nor any of those beings who belong to a 
better and diviner order of things, because the sensation of fatigue is peculiar 
to those who are in the body. You can examine whether this is true of those who 
possess a body of any kind, or of those who have an earthly body, or one a 
little better than this. But "neither is it consistent with the fitness of 
things that the first God should work with His own hands." If you understand the 
words" work with His own hands" literally, then neither are they applicable to 
the second God, nor to any other being partaking of divinity. But suppose that 
they are spoken in an improper and figurative sense, so that we may translate 
the following expressions, "And the firmament showeth forth His handywork," and 
"the heavens are the work of Thy hands," and any other similar phrases, in a 
figurative manner, so far as respects the "hands" and "limbs" of Deity, where is 
the absurdity in the words, "God thus working with His own hands?" And as there 
is no absurdity in God thus working, so neither is there in His issuing 
"commands;" so that what is done at His bidding should be beautiful and 
praiseworthy, because it was God who commanded it to be performed. 
CHAP. LXII. 
Celsus, again, having perhaps misunderstood the words, "For the mouth of the 
LORD hath spoken it," or perhaps because some ignorant individuals had rashly 
ventured upon the explanation of such things, and not understanding, moreover, 
on what principles parts called after the names of the bodily members are 
assigned to the attributes of God, asserts: "He has neither mouth nor voice." 
Truly, indeed, God can have no voice, if the voice is a concussion of the air, 
or a stroke on the air, or a species of air, or any other definition which may 
be given to the voice by those who are skilled in such matters; but what is 
called the "voice of God" is said to be seen as "God's voice" by the people in 
the passage; "And all the people saw the voice of God;" the word "saw" being 
taken, agreeably to the custom of Scripture, in a spiritual sense. Moreover, he 
alleges that "God possesses nothing else of which we have any knowledge;" but of 
what things we have knowledge he gives no indication. 
If he means "limbs," we agree with him, understanding the things "of which we 
have knowledge" to be those called corporeal, and pretty generally sO termed. 
But if we are to understand the words "of which we have knowledge" in a 
universal sense, then there are many things of which we have knowledge, (and 
which may be attributed to God); for He possesses virtue, and blessedness, and 
divinity. If we, however, put a higher meaning upon the words, "of which we have 
knowledge," since all that we know is less than God, there is no absurdity in 
our also admitting that God possesses none of those things" of which we have 
knowledge." For the attributes which belong to God are far superior to all 
things with which not merely the nature of man is acquainted, but even that of 
those who have risen far above it. And if he had read the writings of the 
prophets, David on the one hand saying, "But Thou art the same," and Malachi on 
the other, "I am (the LORD), and change not," he would have observed that none 
of us assert that there is any change in God, either in act or thought. For 
abiding the same, He administers mutable things according to their nature, and 
His word elects to undertake their administration. 
CHAP. LXIII. 
Celsus, not observing the difference between "after the image of God" and 
"God's image," next asserts that the "first-born of every creature" is the image 
of God,--the very word and truth, and also the very wisdom, being the image of 
His goodness, while man has been created after the image of God; moreover, that 
every man whose head is Christ is the image and glory of God;--and further, not 
observing to which of the characteristics of humanity the expression "after the 
image of God" belongs, and that it consists in a nature which never had nor 
longer has "the old man with his deeds," being called "after the image of Him 
who created it," from its not possessing these qualities,--he maintains: 
"Neither did He make man His image; for God is not such an one, nor like any 
other species of (visible) being." Is it possible to suppose that the element 
which is "after the image of God" should exist in the inferior part--I mean the 
body--of a compound being like man, because Celsus has explained that to be made 
after the image of God? For if that which is "after the image of God" be in the 
body only, the better part, the soul, has been deprived of that which is "after 
His image," and this (distinction) exists in the corruptible body,--an assertion 
which is made by none of us. But if that which is "after the image of God" be in 
both together, then God must necessarily be a compound being, and consist, as it 
were, of soul and body, in order that the element which is "after God's image," 
the better part, may be in the soul; while the inferior part, and that which "is 
according to the body," may be in the body,--an assertion, again, which is made 
by none of us. It remains, therefore, that that which is "after the image of 
God" must be understood to be in our "inner man," which is also renewed, and 
whose nature it is to be "after the image of Him who created it," when a man 
becomes "perfect," as "our Father in heaven is perfect," and hears the command, 
"Be ye holy, for I the LORD your God am holy," and learning the precept, "Be ye 
followers of God," receives into his virtuous soul the traits of God's image. 
The body, moreover, of him who possesses such a soul is a temple of God; and in 
the soul God dwells, because it has been made after His image. 
CHAP. LXIV. 
Celsus, again, brings together a number of statements, which he gives as 
admissions on our part, but which no intelligent Christian would allow. For not 
one of us asserts that "God partakes of form or colour." Nor does He even 
partake of "motion," because He stands firm, and His nature is permanent, and He 
invites the righteous man also to do the same, saying: "But as for thee, stand 
thou here by Me." And if certain expressions indicate a kind of motion, as it 
were, on His part, such as this, "They heard the voice of the LORD God walking 
in the garden in the cool of the day," we must understand them in this way, that 
it is by sinners that God is understood as moving, or as we understand the 
"sleep" of God, which is taken in a figurative sense, or His "anger," or any 
other similar attribute. But "God does not partake even of substance." For He is 
partaken of (by others) rather than that Himself partakes of them, and He is 
partaken of by those who have the Spirit of God. Our Saviour, also, does not 
partake of righteousness; but being Himself "righteousness," He is partaken of 
by the righteous. A discussion about "substance" would be protracted and 
difficult, and especially if it were a question whether that which is permanent 
and immaterial be "sub stance" properly so called, so that it would be found 
that God is beyond" substance," communicating of His "substance," by means of 
office and power, to those to whom He communicates Himself by His Word, as He 
does to the Word Himself; or even if He is "substance," yet He is said be in His 
nature "invisible," in these words respecting our Saviour, who is said to be 
"the image of the invisible God," while from the term "invisible" it is 
indicated that He is "immaterial." It is also a question for investigation, 
whether the "only-begotten" and "first-born of every creature" is to be called 
"substance of substances," and "idea of ideas," and the "principle of all 
things," while above all there is His Father and God. 
CHAP. LXV. 
Celsus proceeds to say of God that "of Him are all things," abandoning (in so 
speaking), I know not how, all his principles; while our Paul declares, that "of 
Him, and through Him, and to Him are all things," showing that He is the 
beginning of the substance of all things by the words "of Him," and the bond of 
their subsistence by the expression "through Him," and their final end by the 
terms "to Him." Of a truth, God is of nothing. But when Celsus adds, that "He is 
not to be reached by word," I make a distinction, and say that if he means the 
word that is in us--whether the word conceived in the mind, or the word that is 
uttered--I, too, admit that God is not to be reached by word. If, however, we 
attend to the passage, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God," we are of opinion that God is to be reached by this 
Word, and is comprehended not by Him only, but by any one whatever to whom He 
may reveal the Father; and thus we shall prove the falsity of the assertion of 
Celsus, when he says, "Neither is God to be reached by word." The statement, 
moreover, that "He cannot be expressed by name," requires to be taken with a 
distinction. If he means, indeed, that there is no word or sign that can 
represent the attributes of God, the statement is true, since there are many 
qualities which cannot be indicated by words. Who, for example, could describe 
in words the difference betwixt the quality of sweetness in a palm and that in a 
fig? And who could distinguish and set forth in words the peculiar qualities of 
each individual thing? It is no wonder, then, if in this way God cannot be 
described by name. But if you take the phrase to mean that it is possible to 
represent by words something of God's attributes, in order to lead the hearer by 
the hand, as it were, and so enable him to comprehend something of God, so far 
as attainable by human nature, then there is no absurdity in saying that "He can 
be described by name." And we make a similar distinction with regard to the 
expression, "for He has undergone no suffering that can be conveyed by words." 
It is true that the Deity is beyond all suffering. And so much on this point. 
CHAP. LXVI. 
Let us look also at his next statement, in which he introduces, as it were, a 
certain person, who, after hearing what has been said expresses himself in the 
following manner, "How, then, shall I know God? and how shall I learn the way 
that leads to Him? And how will you show Him to me? Because now, indeed, you 
throw darkness before my eyes, and I see nothing distinctly." He then answers, 
as it were, the individual who is thus perplexed, and thinks that he assigns the 
reason why darkness has been poured upon the eyes of him who uttered the 
foregoing words, when he asserts that "those whom one would lead forth out of 
darkness into the brightness of light, being unable to withstand its splendours, 
have their power of vision affected and injured, and so imagine that they are 
smitten with blindness." In answer to this, we would say that all those indeed 
sit in darkness, and are rooted in it, who fix their gaze upon the evil 
handiwork of painters, and moulders and sculptors, and who will not look 
upwards, and ascend in thought from all visible and sensible things, to the 
Creator of all things, who is light; while, on the other hand, every one is in 
light who has followed the radiance of the Word, who has shown in consequence of 
what ignorance, and impiety, and want of knowledge of divine things these 
objects were worshipped instead of God, and who has conducted the soul of him 
who desires to be saved towards the uncreated God, who is over all. For "the 
people that sat in darkness--the Gentiles--saw a great light, and to them who 
sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up,"--the God Jesus. No 
Christian, then, would give Celsus, or any accuser of the divine Word, the 
answer, "How shall I know God?" for each one of them knows God according to his 
capacity. And no one asks, "How shall I learn the way which leads to Him?" 
because he has heard Him who says, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life," 
and has tasted, in the course of the journey, the happiness which results from 
it. And not a single Christian would say to Celsus, "How will you show me God?" 
CHAP. LXVII. 
The remark, indeed, was true which Celsus made, that any one, on hearing his 
words, would answer, seeing that his words are words of darkness, "You pour 
darkness before my eyes." Celsus verily, and those like him, do desire to pour 
darkness before our eyes: we, however, by means of the light of the Word, 
disperse the darkness of their impious opinions. The Christian, indeed, could 
retort on Celsus, who says nothing that is distinct or true, "I see nothing that 
is distinct among all your statements." It is not, therefore, "out of darkness" 
into "the brightness of light" that Celsus leads us forth: he wishes, on the 
contrary, to transport us from light into darkness, making the darkness light 
and the light darkness, and exposing himself to the woe well described by the 
prophet Isaiah in the following manner: "Woe unto them that put darkness for 
light, and light for darkness." But we, the eyes of whose soul have been opened 
by the Word, and who see the difference between light and darkness, prefer by 
all means to take our stand "in the light," and will have nothing to do with 
darkness at all. The true light, moreover, being endued with life, knows to whom 
his full splendours are to be manifested, and to whom his light; for he does not 
display his brilliancy on account of the still existing weakness in the eyes of 
the recipient. And if we must speak at all of "sight being affected and 
injured," what other eyes shall we say are in this condition, than his who is 
involved in ignorance of God, and who is prevented by his passions from seeing 
the truth? Christians, however, by no means consider that they are blinded by 
the words of Celsus, or any other who is opposed to the worship of God. But let 
those who perceive that they are blinded by following multitudes who are in 
error, and tribes of those who keep festivals to demons, draw near to the Word, 
who can bestow the gift of sight, in order that, like those poor and blind who 
had thrown themselves down by the wayside, and who were healed by Jesus because 
they said to Him, "Son of David, have mercy upon me," they too may receive mercy 
and recover their eyesight, fresh and beautiful, as the Word of God can create 
it. 
CHAP. LXVIII. 
Accordingly, if Celsus were to ask us how we think we know God, and how we 
shall be saved by Him, we would answer that the Word of God, which entered into 
those who seek Him, or who accept Him when He appears, is able to make known and 
to reveal the Father, who was not seen (by any one) before the appearance of the 
Word. And who else is able to save and conduct the soul of man to the God of all 
things, save God the Word, who, "being in the beginning with God," became flesh 
for the sake of those who had cleaved to the flesh, and had become as flesh, 
that He might be received by those who could not behold Him, inasmuch as He was 
the Word, and was with God, and was God? And discoursing in human form, and 
announcing Himself as flesh, He calls to Himself those who are flesh, that He 
may in the first place cause them to be transformed according to the Word that 
was made flesh, and afterwards may lead them upwards to behold Him as He was 
before He became flesh; so that they, receiving the benefit, and ascending from 
their great introduction to Him, which was according to the flesh, say, "Even if 
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we Him no more." 
Therefore He became flesh, and having become flesh, "He tabernacled among us," 
not dwelling without us; and after tabernacling and dwelling within us, He did 
not continue in the form in which He first presented Himself, but caused us to 
ascend to the lofty mountain of His word, and showed us His own glorious form, 
and the splendour of His garments; and not His own form alone, but that also of 
the spiritual law, which is Moses, seen in glory along with Jesus. He showed to 
us, moreover, all prophecy, which did not perish even after His incarnation, but 
was received up into heaven, and whose symbol was Elijah. And he who beheld 
these things could say, "We beheld His glory, the glory as of the only-begotten 
of the Father, full of grace and truth." Celsus, then, has exhibited 
considerable ignorance in the imaginary answer to his question which he puts 
into our mouth, "How we think we can know God? and how we know we shall be saved 
by Him?" for our answer is what we have just stated. 
CHAP. LXIX. 
Celsus, however, asserts that the answer which we give is based upon a 
probable conjecture, admitting that he describes our answer in the following 
terms: "Since God is great and diffi cult to see, He put His own Spirit into a 
body that resembled ours, and sent it down to us, that we might be enabled to 
hear Him and become acquainted with Him." But the God and Father of all things 
is not the only being that is great in our judgment; for He has imparted (a 
share) of Himself and His greatness to His Only-begotten and First-born of every 
creature, in order that He, being the image of the invisible God, might 
preserve, even in His greatness, the image of the Father. For it was not 
possible that there could exist a well-proportioned, so to speak, and beautiful 
image of the invisible God, which did not at the same time preserve the image of 
His greatness. God, moreover, is in our judgment invisible, because He is not a 
body, while He can be seen by those who see with the heart that is, the 
understanding; not indeed with any kind of heart, but with one which is pure. 
For it is inconsistent with the fitness of things that a polluted heart should 
look upon God; for that must be itself pure which would worthily behold that 
which is pure. Let it be granted, indeed, that God is "difficult to see," yet He 
is not the only being who is so; for His Only-begotten also is "difficult to 
see." For God the Word is "difficult to see," and so also is His wisdom, by 
which God created all things. For who is capable of seeing the wisdom which is 
displayed in each individual part of the whole system of things, and by which 
God created every individual thing? It was not, then, because God was "difficult 
to see" that He sent God His Son to be an object "easy to be seen." And because 
Celsus does not understand this, he has represented us as saying, "Because God 
was 'difficult to see,' He put His own Spirit in a body resembling ours, and 
sent it down to us, that we might be enabled to hear Him and become acquainted 
with Him." Now, as we have stated, the Son also is "difficult to see," because 
He is God the Word, through whom all things were made, and who "tabernacled 
amongst us." 
CHAP. LXX. 
If Celsus, indeed, had understood our teaching regarding the Spirit of God, 
and had known that "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons 
of God," he would not have returned to himself the answer which he represents as 
coming from us, that "God put His own Spirit into a body, and sent it down to 
us;" for God is perpetually bestowing of His own Spirit to those who are capable 
of receiving it, although it is not by way of division and separation that He 
dwells in (the hearts of) the deserving. Nor is the Spirit, in our opinion, a 
"body," any more than fire is a "body," which God is said to be in the passage, 
"Our God is a consuming fire." For all these are figurative expressions, 
employed to denote the nature of "intelligent beings" by means of familiar and 
corporeal terms. In the same way, too, if sins are called "wood, and straw, and 
stubble," we shall not maintain that sins are corporeal; and if blessings are 
termed "gold, and silver, and precious stones," we shall not maintain that 
blessings are "corporeal;" so also, if God be said to be a fire that consumes 
wood, and straw, and stubble, and all substance of sin, we shall not understand 
Him to be a "body," so neither do we understand Him to be a body if He should be 
called "fire." In this way, if God be called "spirit," we do not mean that He is 
a "body." For it is the custom of Scripture to give to "intelligent beings" the 
names of "spirits" and "spiritual things," by way of distinction from those 
which are the objects of "sense;" as when Paul says, "But our sufficiency is of 
God; who hath also made us able ministers of the New Testament; not of the 
letter, but of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life," 
where by the "letter" he means that "exposition of Scripture which is apparent 
to the senses," while by the "spirit" that which is the object of the 
"understanding." It is the same, too, with the expression, "God is a Spirit." 
And because the prescriptions of the law were obeyed both by Samaritans and Jews 
m a corporeal and literal manner, our Saviour said to the Samaritan woman, "The 
hour is coming, when neither in Jerusalem, nor in this mountain, shall ye 
worship the Father. God is a Spirit; and they that worship Him must worship Him 
in spirit and in truth." And by these words He taught men that God must be 
worshipped not in the flesh, and with fleshly sacrifices, but in the spirit. And 
He will be understood to be a Spirit in proportion as the worship rendered to 
Him is rendered in spirit, and with understanding. It is not, however, with 
images that we are to worship the Father, but "in truth," which "came by Jesus 
Christ," after the giving of the law by Moses. For when we turn to the Lord (and 
the Lord is a Spirit), He takes away the veil which lies upon the heart when 
Moses is read. 

CHAP. LXXI. 
Celsus accordingly, as not understanding the doctrine relating to the Spirit 
of God ("for the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for 
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned"), weaves together (such a web) as pleases himself, 
imagining that we, in calling God a Spirit, differ in no respect in this 
particular from the Stoics among the Greeks, who maintain that "God is a Spirit, 
diffused through all things, and containing all things within Himself." Now the 
superintendence and providence of God does extend through all things, but not in 
the way that spirit does, according to the Stoics. Providence indeed contains 
all things that are its objects, and comprehends them all, but not as a 
containing body includes its contents, because they also are "body," but as a 
divine power does it comprehend what it contains. According to the philosophers 
of the Porch, indeed, who assert that principles are "corporeal," and who on 
that account make all things perishable, and who venture even to make the God of 
all things capable of perishing, the very Word of God, who descends even to the 
lowest of mankind, would be--did it not appear to them to be too gross an 
incongruity--nothing else than a "corporeal" spirit; whereas, in our 
opinion,--who endeavour to demonstrate that the rational soul is superior to all 
"corporeal" nature, and that it is an invisible substance, and incorporeal,--God 
the Word, by whom all things were made, who came, in order that all things might 
be made by the Word, not to men only, but to what are deemed the very lowest of 
things, under the dominion of nature alone, would be no body. The Stoics, then, 
may consign all things to destruction by fire; we, however, know of no 
incorporeal substance that is destructible by fire, nor (do we believe) that the 
soul of man, or the substance of "angels," or of "thrones," or dominions," or 
"principalities," or "powers," can be dissolved by fire. 
CHAP. LXXII. 
It is therefore in vain that Celsus asserts, as one who knows not the nature 
of the Spirit of God, that "as the Son of God, who existed in a human body, is a 
Spirit, this very Son of God would not be immortal." He next becomes confused in 
his statements, as if there were some of us who did not admit that God is a 
Spirit, but maintain that only with regard to His Son, and he thinks that he can 
answer us by saying that there "is no kind of spirit which lasts for ever." This 
is much the same as if, when we term God a "consuming fire," he were to say that 
there "is no kind of fire which lasts for ever;" not observing the sense in 
which we say that our God is a fire, and what the things are which He consumes, 
viz., sins, and wickedness. For it becomes a God of goodness, after each 
individual has shown, by his efforts, what kind of combatant he has been, to 
consume vice by the fire of His chastisements. He proceeds, in the next place, 
to assume what we do not maintain, that "God must necessarily have given up the 
ghost;" from which also it follows that Jesus could not have risen again with 
His body. For God would not have received back the spirit which He had 
surrendered after it had been stained by contact with the body. It is foolish, 
however, for us to answer statements as ours which were never made by us. 
CHAP. LXXIII. 
He proceeds to repeat himself, and after saying a great deal which he had 
said before, and ridiculing the birth of God from a virgin,--to which we have 
already replied as we best could,--he adds the following: "If God had wished to 
send down His Spirit from Himself, what need was there to breathe it into the 
womb of a woman? For as one who knew already how to form men, He could also have 
fashioned a body for this person, without casting His own Spirit into so much 
pollution; and in this way He would not have been received with incredulity, if 
He had derived His existence immediately from above." He had made these remarks, 
because he knows not the pure and virgin birth, unaccompanied by any corruption, 
of that body which was to minister to the salvation of men. For, quoting the 
sayings of the Stoics, and affecting not to know the doctrine about "things 
indifferent," he thinks that the divine nature was cast amid pollution, and was 
stained either by being in the body of a woman, until a body was formed around 
it, or by assuming a body. And in this he acts like those who imagine that the 
sun's rays are polluted by dung and by foul-smelling bodies, and do not remain 
pure amid such things. If, however, according to the view of Celsus, the body of 
Jesus had been fashioned without generation, those who beheld the body would at 
once have believed that it had not been formed by generation; and yet an object, 
when seen, does not at the same time indicate the nature of that from which it 
has derived its origin. For example, suppose that there were some honey (placed 
before one) which had not been manufactured by bees, no one could tell from the 
taste or sight that it was not their workmanship, because the honey which comes 
from bees does not make known its origin by the senses, but experience alone can 
tell that it does not proceed from them. In the same way, too, experience 
teaches that wine comes from the vine, for taste does not enable us to 
distinguish (the wine) which comes from the vine. In the same manner, therefore, 
the visible body does not make known the manner of its existence. And you will 
be induced to accept this view, by (regarding) the heavenly bodies, whose 
existence and splendour we perceive as we gaze at them; and yet, I presume, 
their appearance does not suggest to us whether they are created or uncreated; 
and accordingly different opinions have existed on these points. And yet those 
who say that they are created are not agreed as to the manner of their creation, 
for their appearance does not suggest it, although the force of reason may have 
discovered that they are created, and how their creation was effected. 
CHAP. LXXIV. 
After this he returns to the subject of Marcion's opinions (having already 
spoken frequently of them), and states some of them correctly, while others he 
has misunderstood; these, however, it is not necessary for us to answer or 
refute. Again, after this he brings forward the various arguments that may be 
urged on Marcion's behalf, and also against him, enumerating what the opinions 
are which exonerate him from the charges, and what expose him to them; and when 
he desires to support the statement which declares that Jesus has been the 
subject of prophecy,--in order to found a charge against Marcion and his 
followers,--he distinctly asks, "How could he, who was punished in such a 
manner, be shown to be God's Son, unless these things had been predicted of 
him?" He next proceeds to jest, and, as his custom is, to pour ridicule upon the 
subject, introducing "two sons of God, one the son of the Creator, and the other 
the son of Marcion's God; and he portrays their single combats, saying that the 
Theomachies of the Fathers are like the battles between quails; or that the 
Fathers, becoming useless through age, and falling into their dotage do not 
meddle at all with one another, but leave their sons to fight it out." The 
remark which he made formerly we will turn against himself: "What old woman 
would not be ashamed to lull a child to sleep with such stories as he has 
inserted in the work which he entitles A True Discourse? For when he ought 
seriously to apply himself to argument, he leaves serious argument aside, and 
betakes himself to jesting and buffoonery, imagining that he is writing mimes or 
scoffing verses; not observing that such a method of procedure defeats his 
purpose, which is to make us abandon Christianity and give in our adherence to 
his opinions, which, perhaps, had they been stated with some degree of gravity, 
would have appeared more likely to convince, whereas since he continues to 
ridicule, and scoff, and play the buffoon, we answer that it is because he has 
no argument of weight (for such he neither had, nor could understand) that he 
has betaken himself to such drivelling." 
CHAP. LXXV. 
To the preceding remarks he adds the following: "Since a divine Spirit 
inhabited the body (of Jesus), it must certainly have been different From that 
of other beings, in respect of grandeur, or beauty, or strength, or voice, or 
impressiveness, or persuasiveness. For it is impossible that He, to whom was 
imparted some divine quality beyond other beings, should not differ from others; 
whereas this person did not differ in any respect from another, but was, as they 
report, little, and ill-favoured, and ignoble." Now it is evident by these 
words, that when Celsus wishes to bring a charge against Jesus, he adduces the 
sacred writings, as one who believed them to be writings apparently fitted to 
afford a handle for a charge against Him; but wherever, in the same writings, 
statements would appear to be made opposed to those charges which are adduced, 
he pretends not even to know them! There are, indeed, admitted to be recorded 
some statements respecting the body of Jesus having been "ill-favoured;" not, 
however, "ignoble," as has been stated, nor is there any certain evidence that 
he was "little." The language of Isaiah runs as follows, who prophesied 
regarding Him that He would come and visit the multitude, not in comeliness of 
form, nor in any surpassing beauty: "Lord, who hath believed our report, and to 
whom was the arm of the Lord revealed? He made announcement before Him, as a 
child, as a root in a thirsty ground. He has no form nor glory, and we beheld 
Him, and He had no form nor beauty; but His form was without honour, and 
inferior to that of the sons of men." These passages, then, Celsus listened to, 
because he thought they were of use to him in bringing a charge against Jesus; 
but he paid no attention to the words of the 45th Psalm, and why it is then 
said, "Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O most mighty, with Thy comeliness and 
beauty; and continue, and prosper, and reign." 
CHAP. LXXVI. 
Let it be supposed, however, that he had not read the prophecy, or that he 
had read it, but had been drawn away by those who misinterpreted it as not being 
spoken of Jesus Christ. What has he to say of the Gospel, in the narratives of 
which Jesus ascended up into a high mountain, and was transfigured before the 
disciples, and was seen in glory, when both Moses: and Elias, "being seen in 
glory, spake of the decease which He was about to accomplish at Jerusalem?" or 
when the prophet says, "We beheld Him, and He had no form nor beauty," etc.? and 
Celsus accepts this prophecy as referring to Jesus, being blinded in so 
accepting it,! and not seeing that it is a great proof that the Jesus who 
appeared to be "without form" was the Son of God, that His very appearance 
should have been made the subject of prophecy many years before His birth. But 
if another prophet speak of His comeliness and beauty, he will no longer accept 
the prophecy as referring to Christ And if it were to be clearly ascertained 
from the Gospels that "He had no form nor beauty, but that His appearance was 
without honour, and inferior to that of the sons of men," it might be said that 
it was not with reference to the prophetic writings, but to the Gospels, that 
Celsus made his remarks. But now, as neither the Gospels nor the apostolic 
writings indicate that "He had no form nor beauty," it is evident that we must 
accept the declaration of the prophets as true of Christ, and this will prevent 
the charge against Jesus from being advanced. 
CHAP. LXXVII. 
But again, how did he who said, "Since a divine Spirit inhabited the body (of 
Jesus), it must certainly have been different from that of other beings in 
respect of grandeur, or voice, or strength, or impressiveness, or 
persuasiveness," not observe the changing relation of His body according to the 
capacity of the spectators (and therefore its corresponding utility), inasmuch 
as it appeared to each one of such a nature as it was requisite for him to 
behold it? Moreover it is not a subject of wonder that the matter, which is by 
nature susceptible of being altered and changed, and of being transformed into 
anything which the Creator chooses, and is capable of receiving all the 
qualities which the Artificer desires, should at one time possess a quality, 
agreeably to which it is said, "He had no form nor beauty," and at another, one 
so glorious, and majestic, and marvellous, that the spectators of such 
surpassing loveliness--three disciples who had ascended (the mount) with 
Jesus--should fall upon their faces. He will say, however, that these are 
inventions, and in no respect different from myths, as are also the other 
marvels related of Jesus; which objection we have answered at greater length in 
what has gone before. But there is also something mystical in this doctrine, 
which announces that the varying appearances of Jesus are to be referred to the 
nature of the divine Word, who does not show Himself in the same manner to the 
multitude as He does to those who are capable of following Him to the high 
mountain which we have mentioned; for to those who still remain below, and are 
not yet prepared to ascend, the Word "has neither form nor beauty," because to 
such persons His form is "without honour," and inferior to the words given forth 
by men, which are figuratively termed "sons of men." For we might say that the 
words of philosophers--who are "sons of men"--appear far more beautiful than the 
Word of God, who is proclaimed to the multitude, and who also exhibits (what is 
called) the "foolishness of preaching," and on account of this apparent 
"foolishness of preaching" those who look at this alone say, "We saw Him; but He 
had no form nor beauty." To those, indeed, Who have received power to follow 
Him, in order that they may attend Him even when He ascends to the "lofty 
mount," He has a diviner appearance, which they behold, if there happens to be 
(among them) a Peter, who has received within himself the edifice of the Church 
based upon the Word, and who has gained such a habit (of goodness) that none of 
the gates of Hades will prevail against him, having been exalted by the Word 
from the gates of death, that he may "publish the praises of God in the gates of 
the daughter of Sion," and any others who have derived their birth from 
impressive preaching, and who are not at all inferior to "sons of thunder." But 
how can Celsus and the enemies of the divine Word, and those who have not 
examined the doctrines of Christianity in the spirit of truth, know the meaning 
of the different appearances of Jesus? And I refer also to the different stages 
of His life, and to any actions performed by Him be fore His sufferings, and 
after His resurrection from the dead. 
CHAP. LXXVIII. 
Celsus next makes certain observations of the following nature: "Again, if 
God, like Jupiter in the comedy, should, on awaking from a lengthened slumber, 
desire to rescue the human race from evil, why did He send this Spirit of which 
you speak into one corner (of the earth)? He ought to have breathed it alike 
into many bodies, and have sent them out into all the world. Now the comic poet, 
to cause laughter in the theatre, wrote that Jupiter, after awakening, 
despatched Mercury to the Athenians and Lacedaemonians; but do not you think 
that you have made the Son of God more ridiculous in sending Him to the Jews?" 
Observe in such language as this the irreverent character of Celsus, who, unlike 
a philosopher, takes the writer of a comedy, whose business is to cause 
laughter, and compares our God, the Creator of all things, to the being who, as 
represented in the play, on awaking, despatches Mercury (on an errand)! We 
stated, indeed, in what precedes, that it was not as if awakening from a 
lengthened slumber that God sent Jesus to the human race, who has now, for good 
reasons, fulfilled the economy of His incarnation, but who has always conferred 
benefits upon the human race. For no noble deed has ever been performed amongst 
men, where the divine Word did not visit the souls of those who were capable, 
although for a little time, of admitting such operations of the divine Word. 
Moreover, the advent of Jesus apparently to one corner (of the earth) was 
founded on good reasons, since it was necessary that He who was the subject of 
prophecy should make His appearance among those who had become acquainted with 
the doctrine of one God, and who perused the writings of His prophets, and who 
had come to know the announcement of Christ, and that He should come to them at 
a time when the Word was about to be diffused from one corner over the whole 
world. 
CHAP. LXXIX. 
And therefore there was no need that there should everywhere exist many 
bodies, and many spirits like Jesus, in order that the whole world of men might 
be enlightened by the Word of God. For the one Word was enough, having arisen as 
the "Sun of righteousness," to send forth from Judea His coming rays into the 
soul of all who were willing to receive Him. But if any one desires to see many 
bodies filled with a divine Spirit, similar to the one Christ, ministering to 
the salvation of men everywhere, let him take note of those who teach the Gospel 
of Jesus in all lands in soundness of doctrine and uprightness of life, and who 
are themselves termed "christs" by the holy Scriptures, in the passage, "Touch 
not Mine anointed, and do not My prophets any harm." For as we have heard that 
Antichrist cometh, and yet have learned that there are many antichrists in the 
world, in the same way, knowing that Christ has come, we see that, owing to Him, 
there are many christs in the world, who, like Him, have loved righteousness and 
hated iniquity, and therefore God, the God of Christ, anointed them also with 
the "oil of gladness." But inasmuch as He loved righteousness and hated iniquity 
above those who were His partners, He also obtained the first-fruits of His 
anointing, and, if we must so term it, the entire unction of the oil of 
gladness; while they who were His partners shared also in His unction, in 
proportion to their individual capacity. Therefore, since Christ is the Head of 
the Church, so that Christ and the Church form one body, the ointment descended 
from the head to the beard of Aaron,--the symbols of the perfect man,--and this 
ointment in its descent reached to the very skirt of his garment. This is my 
answer to the irreverent language of Celsus when he says, "He ought to have 
breathed (His Spirit) alike into many bodies, and have sent it forth into all 
the world." The comic poet, indeed, to cause laughter, has represented Jupiter 
asleep and awaking from slumber, and despatching Mercury to the Greeks; but the 
Word, knowing that the nature of God is unaffected by sleep, may teach us that 
God administers in due season, and as right reason demands, the affairs of the 
world. It is 'not, however, a matter of surprise that, owing to the greatness 
and incomprehensibility of the divine judgments, ignorant persons should make 
mistakes, and Celsus among them. There is therefore nothing ridiculous in the 
Son of God having been sent to the Jews, amongst whom the prophets had appeared, 
in order that, making a commencement among them in a bodily shape, He might 
arise with might and power upon a world of souls, which no longer desired to 
remain deserted by God. 
CHAP. LXXX. 
After this, it seemed proper to Celsus to term the Chaldeans a most 
divinely-inspired nation from the very earliest times, from whom the delusive 
system of astrology has spread abroad among men. Nay, he ranks the Magi also in 
the same category, from whom the art of magic derived its name and has been 
transmitted to other nations, to the corruption and destruction of those who 
employ it. In the preceding part of this work, (we mentioned) that, in the 
opinion even of Celsus, the Egyptians also were guilty of error, because they 
had indeed solemn enclosures around what they considered their temples, while 
within them there was nothing save apes, or crocodiles, or goats, or asps, or 
some other animal; but on the present occasion it pleases him to speak of the 
Egyptian people too as most divinely inspired, and that, too, from the earliest 
times,--perhaps because they made war upon the Jews from an early date. The 
Persians, moreover, who marry their own mothers, and have intercourse with their 
own daughters, are, in the opinion of Celsus, an inspired race; nay, even. the 
Indians are so, some of whom, in the preceding, he mentioned as eaters of human 
flesh. To the Jews, however, especially those of ancient times, who employ none 
of these practices, he did not merely refuse the name of inspired, but declared 
that they would immediately perish. And this prediction he uttered respecting 
them, as being doubtless endued with prophetic power, not observing that the 
whole history of the Jews, and their ancient and venerable polity, were 
administered by God; and that it is by their fall that salvation has come to the 
Gentiles, and that "their fall is the riches of the world, and the diminishing 
of them the riches of the Gentiles," until the fulness of the Gentiles come, 
that after that the whole of Israel, whom Celsus does not know, may be saved. 
CHAP. LXXXI. 
I do not understand, however, how he should say of God, that although 
"knowing all things, He was not aware of this, that He was sending His Son 
amongst wicked men, who were both to be guilty of sin, and to inflict punishment 
upon Him." Certainly he appears, in the present instance, to have forgotten that 
all the sufferings which Jesus was to undergo were foreseen by the Spirit of 
God, and foretold by His prophets; from which it does not follow that "God did 
not know that He was sending His Son amongst wicked and sinful men, who were 
also to inflict punishment upon Him." He immediately adds, however, that "our 
defence on this point is that all these things were predicted." But as our sixth 
book has now attained sufficient dimensions, we shall stop here, and begin, God 
willing, the argument of the seventh, in which we shall consider the reasons 
which he thinks furnish an answer to our statement, that everything regarding 
Jesus was foretold by the prophets; and as these are numerous, and require to be 
answered at length, we wished neither to cut the subject short, in consequence 
of the size of the present book, nor, in order to avoid doing so, to swell this 
sixth book beyond its proper proportions. 


