
Origen












Origen. Contra Celsus
BOOK VII. 
CHAP. I. 
In the six former books we have endeavoured, reverend brother Ambrosius, 
according to our ability to meet the charges brought by Celsus against the 
Christians, and have as far as possible passed over nothing without first 
subjecting it to a full and close examination. And now, while we enter upon the 
seventh book, we call upon God through Jesus Christ, whom Celsus accuses, that 
He who is the truth of God would shed light into our hearts and scatter the 
darkness of error, in accordance with that saying of the prophet which we now 
offer as our prayer, "Destroy them by Thy truth." For it is evidently the words 
and reasonings opposed to the truth that God destroys by His truth; so that when 
these are destroyed, all who are delivered from deception may go on with the 
prophet to say, "I will freely sacrifice unto Thee," and may offer to the Most 
High a reasonable and smokeless sacrifice. 
CHAP. II. 
Celsus now sets himself to combat the views of those who say that the Jewish 
prophets foretold events which happened in the life of Christ Jesus. At the 
outset let us refer to a notion he has, that those who assume the existence of 
another God beSides the God of the jews have no ground on which to answer his 
objections; while we who recognise the same God rely for our defence on the 
prophecies which were delivered concerning Jesus Christ. His words are: "Let us 
see how they can raise a defence. To those who admit another God, no defence is 
possible; and they who recognise the same God will always fall back upon the 
same reason 'This and that must have happened.' And why? 'Because it had been 
predicted long before.'" To this we answer, that the arguments recently raised 
by Celsus against Jesus and Christians were so utterly feeble, that they might 
easily be overthrown even by those who are impious enough to bring in another 
God. Indeed, were it not dangerous to give to the weak any excuse for embracing 
false notions, we could furnish the answer ourselves, and show Celsus how 
unfounded is his opinion, that those who admit another God are not in a position 
to meet his arguments. However, let us for the present confine ourselves to a 
defence of the prophets, in continuation of what we have said on the subject 
before. 
CHAP. III. 
Celsus goes on to say of us: "They set no value on the oracles of the Pythian 
priestess, of the priests of Dodona, of Clarus, of Branchidae, of Jupiter Ammon, 
and of a multitude of others; although under their guidance we may say that 
colonies were sent forth, and the whole world peopled. But those sayings which 
were uttered or not uttered in Judea, after the manner of that country, as 
indeed they are still delivered among the people of Phoenicia and 
Palestine--these they look upon as marvellous sayings, and unchangeably true." 
In regard to the oracles here enumerated, we reply that it would be possible 
for us to gather from the writings of Aristotle and the Peripatetic school not a 
few things to overthrow the authority of the Pythian and the other oracles. 
From Epicurus also, and his followers, we could quote passages to show that 
even among the Greeks themselves there were some who utterly discredited the 
oracles which were recognised and admired throughout the whole of Greece. But 
let it be granted that the responses delivered by the Pythian and other oracles 
were not the utterances of false men who pretended to a divine inspiration; and 
let us see if, after all, we cannot convince any sincere inquirers that there is 
no necessity to attribute these oracular responses to any divinities, but that, 
on the other hand, they may be traced to wicked demons--to spirits which are at 
enmity with the human race, and which in this way wish to hinder the soul from 
rising upwards, from following the path of virtue, and from returning to God in 
sincere piety. It is said of the Pythian priestess, whose oracle seems to have 
been the most celebrated, that when she sat down at the mouth of the Castalian 
cave, the prophetic Spirit of Apollo entered her private parts; and when she was 
filled with it, she gave utterance to responses which are regarded with awe as 
divine truths. Judge by this whether that spirit does not show its profane and 
impure nature, by choosing to enter the soul of the prophetess not through the 
more becoming medium of the bodily pores which are both open and invisible, but 
by means of what no modest man would ever see or speak of. And this occurs not 
once or twice, which would be more permissible, but as often as she was believed 
to receive inspiration from Apollo. Moreover, it is not the part of a divine 
spirit to drive the prophetess into such a state of ecstasy and madness that she 
loses control of herself. For he who is under the influence of the Divine Spirit 
ought to be the first to receive the beneficial effects; and these ought not to 
be first enjoyed by the persons who consult the oracle about the concerns of 
natural or civil life, or for purposes of temporal gain or interest; and, 
moreover, that should be the time of clearest perception, when a person is in 
close intercourse with the Deity. 
CHAP. IV. 
Accordingly, we can show from an examination of the sacred Scriptures, that 
the Jewish prophets, who were enlightened as far as was necessary for their 
prophetic work by the Spirit of God, were the first to enjoy the benefit of the 
inspiration; and by the contact--if I may so say--of the Holy Spirit they became 
clearer in mind, and their souls were filled with a brighter light. And the body 
no longer served as a hindrance to a virtuous life; for to that which we call 
"the lust of the flesh" it was deadened. For we are persuaded that the Divine 
Spirit "mortifies the deeds of the body," and destroys that enmity against God 
which the carnal passions serve to excite. If, then, the Pythian priestess is 
beside herself when she prophesies, what spirit must that be which fills her 
mind and clouds her judgment with darkness, unless it be of the same order with 
those demons which many Christians cast out of persons possessed with them? And 
this, we may observe, they do without the use of any curious arts of magic, or 
incantations, but merely by prayer and simple adjurations which the plainest 
person can use. Because for the most part it is unlettered persons who perform 
this work; thus making manifest the grace which is in the word of Christ, and 
the despicable weakness of demons, which, in order to be overcome and driven out 
of the bodies and souls of men, do not require the power and wisdom of those who 
are mighty in argument, and most learned in matters of faith. 
CHAP. V. 
Moreover, if it is believed not only among Christians and Jews, but also by 
many others among the Greeks and Barbarians, that the human soul lives and 
subsists after its separation from the body; and if reason supports the idea 
that pure souls which are not weighed down with sin as with a weight of lead 
ascend on high to the region of purer and more ethereal bodies, leaving here 
below their grosser bodies along with their impurities; whereas souls that are 
polluted and dragged down to the earth by their sins, so that they are unable 
even to breathe upwards, wander hither and thither, at some times about 
sepulchres, where they appear as the apparitions of shadowy spirits, at others 
among other objects on the ground;--if this is so, what are we to think of those 
spirits that are attached for entire ages, as I may say, to particular dwellings 
and places, whether by a sort of magical force or by their own natural 
wickedness? Are we not compelled by reason to set down as evil such spirits as 
employ the power of prophesying--a power in itself neither good nor bad -for the 
purpose of deceiving men, and thus turn them away from God, and from the purity 
of His service? It is moreover evident that this is their character, when we add 
that they delight in the blood of victims, and in the smoke odour of sacrifices, 
and that they feed their bodies on these, and that they take pleasure in such 
haunts as these, as though they sought in them the sustenance of their lives; in 
this resembling those depraved men who despise the purity of a life apart from 
the senses, and who have no inclination except for the pleasures of the body, 
and for that earthly and bodily life in which these pleasures are found. If the 
Delphian Apollo were a god, as the Greeks suppose, would he not rather have 
chosen as his prophet some wise man? or if such an one was not to be found, then 
one who was endeavouring to become wise How came he not to prefer a man to a 
woman for the utterance of his prophesies? And if he preferred the latter sex, 
as though he could only find pleasure in the breast of a woman, why did he not 
choose among women a virgin to interpret his will? 
CHAP. VI. 
But no; the Pythian, so much admired among the Greeks, judged no wise man, 
nay, no man at all, worthy of the divine possession, as they call it. And among 
women he did not choose a virgin, or one recommended by her wisdom, or by her 
attainments in philosophy; but he selects a common woman. Perhaps the better 
class of men were too good to become the subjects of the inspiration. Besides, 
if he were a god, he should have employed his prophetic power as a bait, so to 
speak, with which he might draw men to a change of life, and to the practice of 
virtue. But history nowhere makes mention of anything of the kind. For if the 
oracle did call Socrates the wisest of all men, it takes from the value of that 
eulogy by what is said in regard to Euripides and Sophocles. The words are:- 
"Sophocles is wise, and Euripides is wiser, But wiser than all men is Socrates." 

As, then, he gives the designation "wise" to the tragic poets, it is not on 
account of his philosophy that he holds up Socrates to veneration, or because of 
his love of truth and virtue. It is poor praise of Socrates to say that he 
prefers him to men who for a paltry reward compete upon the stage, and who by 
their representations excite the spectators at one time to tears and grief, and 
at another to unseemly laughter (for such is the intention of the satyric 
drama). And perhaps it was not so much in regard to his philosophy that he 
called Socrates the wisest of all men, as on account of the victims which he 
sacrificed to him and the other demons. For it seems that the demons pay more 
regard in distributing their favours to the sacrifices which are offered them 
than to deeds of virtue. Accordingly, Homer, the best of the poets, who 
describes what usually took place, when, wishing to show us what most influenced 
the demons to grant an answer to the wishes of their votaries, introduces 
Chryses, who, for a few garlands and the 'thighs of bulls and goats, obtained an 
answer to his prayers for his daughter Chryseis, so that the Greeks were driven 
by a pestilence to restore her back to him. And I remember reading in the book 
of a certain Pythagorean, when writing on the hidden meanings in that poet, that 
the prayer of Chryses to Apollo, and the plague which Apollo afterwards sent 
upon the Greeks, are proofs that Homer knew of certain evil demons who delight 
in the smoke of sacrifices, and who, to reward those who offer them, grant in 
answer to their prayers the destruction of others. "He," that is, Jupiter, "who 
rules over wintry Dodona, where his prophets have ever unwashed feet, and sleep 
upon the ground," has rejected the male sex, and, as Celsus observes, employs 
the women of Dodona for the prophetic office. Granting that there are oracles 
similar to these, as that at Clarus, another in Branchidae, another in the 
temple of Jupiter Ammon, or anywhere else; yet how shall it be proved that these 
are gods, and not demons? 
CHAP. VII. 
In regard to the prophets among the Jews, some of them were wise men before 
they became divinely inspired prophets, while others became wise by the 
illumination which their minds received when divinely inspired. They were 
selected by Divine Providence to receive the Divine Spirit, and to be the 
depositaries of His holy oracles, on the ground of their leading a life of 
almost unapproachable excellence, intrepid, noble, unmoved by danger or death. 
For reason teaches that such ought to be the character of the prophets of the 
Most High, in comparison with which the firmness of Antisthenes, Crates, and 
Diogenes will seem but as child's play. It was therefore for their firm 
adherence to truth, and their faithfulness in the reproof of the wicked, that 
"they were stoned; they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the 
sword; they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, 
afflicted, tormented; they wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in dens and 
caves of the earth, of whom the world was not worthy:" for they looked always to 
God and to His blessings, which, being invisible, and not to be perceived by the 
senses, are eternal. We have the history of the life of each of the prophets; 
but it will be enough at present to direct attention to the life of Moses, whose 
prophecies are contained in the law; to that of Jeremiah, as it is given in the 
book which bears his name; to that of Isaiah, who with unexampled austerity 
walked naked and barefooted for the space of three years. Read and consider the 
severe life of those children, Daniel and his companions, how they abstained 
from flesh, and lived on water and pulse. Or if you will go back to more remote 
times, think of the life of Noah, who prophesied; and of Isaac, who gave his son 
a prophetic blessing; or of Jacob, who addressed each of his twelve sons, 
beginning with "Come, that I may tell you what shall befall you in the last 
days." These, and a multitude of others, prophesying on behalf of God, foretold 
events relating to Jesus Christ. We therefore for this reason set at nought the 
oracles of the Pythian priestess, or those delivered at Dodona, at Clarus, at 
Branchidae, at the temple of Jupiter Ammon, or by a multitude of other so-called 
prophets; whilst we regard with reverent awe the Jewish prophets: for we see 
that the noble, earnest, and devout lives of these men were worthy of the 
inspiration of the Divine Spirit, whose wonderful effects were widely different 
from the divination of demons. 
CHAP. VIII. 
I do not know what led Celsus, when saying, "But what things were spoken or 
not spoken in the land of Judea, according to the custom of the country," to use 
the words "or not spoken," as though implying that he was incredulous, and that 
he suspected that those things which were written were never spoken. In fact, he 
is unacquainted with these times; and he does not know that those prophets who 
foretold the coming of Christ, predicted a multitude of other events many years 
beforehand. He adds, with the view of casting a slight upon the ancient 
prophets, that "they prophesied in the same way as we find them still doing 
among the inhabitants of Phoenicia and Palestine." But he does not tell us 
whether he refers to persons who are of different principles from those of the 
Jews and Christians, or to persons whose prophecies are of the same character as 
those of the Jewish prophets. However it be, his statement is false, taken in 
either way. For never have any of those who have not embraced our faith done any 
thing approaching to what was done by the ancient prophets; and in more recent 
times, since the coming of Christ, no prophets have arisen among the Jews, who 
have confessedly been abandoned by the Holy Spirit on account of their impiety 
towards God, and towards Him of whom their prophets spoke. Moreover, the Holy 
Spirit gave signs of His presence at the beginning of Christ's ministry, and 
after His ascension He gave still more; but since that time these signs have 
diminished, although there are still traces of His presence in a few who have 
had their souls purified by the Gospel, and their actions regulated by its 
influence. "For the holy Spirit of discipline will flee deceit, and remove from 
thoughts that are without understanding." 
CHAP. IX. 
But as Celsus promises to give an account of the manner in which prophecies 
are delivered in Phoenicia and Palestine, speaking as though it were a matter 
with which he had a full and personal acquaintance, let us see what he has to 
say on the subject. First he lays it down that there arc several kinds of 
prophecies, but he does not specify what they arc; indeed, he could not do so, 
and the statement is a piece of pure ostentation. However, let us see what he 
considers the most perfect kind of prophecy among these nations. "There are 
many," he says, "who, although of no name, with the greatest facility and on the 
slightest occasion, whether within or without temples, assume the motions and 
gestures of inspired persons; while others do it in cities or among armies, for 
the purpose of attracting attention and exciting surprise. These are accustomed 
to say, each for himself, 'I am God; I am the Son of God; or, I am the Divine 
Spirit; I have come because the world is perishing, and you, O men, are 
perishing for your iniquities. But I wish to save you, and you shall see me 
returning again with heavenly power. Blessed is he who now does me homage. On 
all the rest I will send down eternal fire, both on cities and on countries. And 
those who know not the punishments which await. them shall repent and grieve in 
vain; while those who are faithful to me I will preserve eternally.'" Then he 
goes on to say: "To these promises are added strange, fanatical, and quite 
unintelligible words, of which no rational person can find the meaning: for so 
dark are they, as to have no meaning at all; but they give occasion to every 
fool or impostor to apply them to suit his own purposes." 
CHAP. X. 
But if he were dealing honestly in his accusations, he ought to have given 
the exact terms of the prophecies, whether those in which the speaker is 
introduced as claiming to be God Almighty, or those in which the Son of God 
speaks, or finally those under the name of the Holy Spirit. For thus he might 
have endeavoured to overthrow these assertions, and have shown that there was no 
divine inspiration in those words which urged men to forsake their sins, which 
condemned the past and foretold the future. For the prophecies were recorded and 
preserved by men living at the time, that those who came after might read and 
admire them as the oracles of God, and that they might profit not only by the 
warnings and admonitions, but also by the predictions, which, being shown by 
events to have proceeded from the Spirit of God, bind men to the practice of 
piety as set forth in the law and the prophets. The prophets have therefore, as 
God commanded them, declared with all plainness those things which it was 
desirable that the hearers should understand at once for the regulation of their 
conduct; while in regard to deeper and more mysterious subjects, which lay 
beyond the reach of the common understanding, they set them forth in the form of 
enigmas and allegories, or of what are called dark sayings, parables, or 
similitudes. And this plan they have followed, that those who are ready to shun 
no labour and spare no pains in their endeavours after truth and virtue might 
search into their meaning, and having found it, might apply it as reason 
requires. But Celsus, ever vigorous in his denunciations, as though he were 
angry at his inability to understand the language of the prophets, scoffs at 
them thus: "To these grand promises are added strange, fanatical, and quite 
unintelligible words, of which no rational person can find the meaning; for so 
dark are they as to have no meaning at all; but they give occasion to every fool 
or impostor to apply them so as to suit his own purposes." This statement of 
Celsus seems ingeniously designed to dissuade readers from attempting any 
inquiry or careful search into their meaning. And in this he is not unlike 
certain persons, who said to a man whom a prophet had visited to announce future 
events, "Wherefore came this mad fellow to thee?" 
CHAP. XI. 
I am convinced, indeed, that much better arguments could be adduced than any 
I have been able to bring forward, to show the falsehood of these allegations of 
Celsus, and to set forth the divine inspiration of the prophecies; but we have 
according to our ability, in our commentaries on Isaiah, Ezekiel, and some of 
the twelve minor prophets, explained literally and in detail what he calls 
"those fanatical and utterly unintelligible passages." And if God give us grace 
in the time that He appoints for us, to advance in the knowledge of His word, we 
shall continue our investigation into the parts which remain, or into such at 
least as we are able to make plain. And other persons of intelligence who wish 
to study Scripture may also find out its meaning for themselves; for although 
there are many places in which the meaning is not obvious, yet there are none 
where, as Celsus affirms, "there is no sense at all." Neither is it true that 
"any fool or impostor can explain the passages so as to make them suit his own 
purposes." For it belongs only to those who are wise in the truth of Christ (and 
to all them it does belong) to unfold the connection and meaning of even the 
obscure parts of prophecy, "comparing spiritual things with spiritual," and 
interpreting each passage according to the usage of Scripture writers. And 
Celsus is not to be believed when he says that he has heard such men prophesy; 
for no prophets bearing any resemblance to the ancient prophets have appeared in 
the time of Celsus. If there had been any, those who heard and admired them 
would have followed the example of the ancients, and have recorded the 
prophecies in writing. And it seems quite clear that Celsus is speaking falsely, 
when he says that "those prophets whom he had heard, on being pressed by him, 
confessed their true motives, and acknowledged that the ambiguous words they 
used really meant nothing." He ought to have given the names of those whom he 
says he had heard, if he had any to give, so that those who were competent to 
judge might decide whether his allegations were true or false. 
CHAP. XII. 
He thinks, besides, that those who support the cause of Christ by a reference 
to the writings of the prophets can give no proper answer in regard to 
statements in them which attribute to God that which is wicked, shameful, or 
impure; and assuming that no answer can be given, he proceeds to draw a whole 
train of inferences, none of which can be allowed. But he ought to know that 
those who wish to live according to the teaching of sacred Scripture understand 
the saying, "The knowledge of the unwise is as talk without sense," and have 
learnt "to be ready always to give an answer to every one that asketh us a 
reason for the hope that is in us." And they are not satisfied with affirming 
that such and such things have been predicted; but they endeavour to remove any 
apparent inconsistencies, and to show that, so far from there being anything 
evil, shameful, or impure in these predictions, everything is worthy of being 
received by those who understand the sacred Scriptures. But Celsus ought to have 
adduced from the prophets examples of what he thought bad, or shameful, or 
impure, if he saw any such passages; for then his argument would have had much 
more force, and would have furthered his purpose much better. He gives no 
instances, however, but contents himself with loudly asserting the false charge 
that these things are to be found in Scripture. There is no reason, then, for us 
to defend ourselves against groundless charges, which are but empty sounds, or 
to take the trouble of showing that in the writings of the prophets there is 
nothing evil, shameful, impure, or abominable. 
CHAP. XIII. 
And there is no truth in the statement of Celsus, that "God does the most 
shameless deeds, or suffers the most shameless sufferings" or that "He favours 
the commission of evil; for whatever he may say, no such things have ever been 
foretold. He ought to have cited from the prophets the passages in which God is 
represented as favouring evil, or as doing and enduring the most shameless 
deeds, and not to have sought without foundation to prejudice the minds of his 
readers. The prophets, indeed, foretold what Christ should suffer, and set forth 
the reason why He should suffer. God therefore also knew what Christ would 
suffer; but where has he learnt that those things which the Christ of God should 
suffer were most base and dishonourable? He goes on to explain what those most 
shameful and degrading things were which Christ suffered, in these words: "For 
what better was it for God to eat the flesh of sheep, or to drink vinegar and 
gall, than to feed on filth?" But God, according to us, did not eat the flesh of 
sheep; and while it may seem that Jesus ate, He did so only as possessing a 
body. But in regard to the vinegar and gall mentioned in the prophecy, "They 
gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink," 
we have already referred to this point; and as Celsus compels us to recur to it 
again, we would only say further, that those who resist the word of truth do 
ever offer to Christ the Son of God the gall of their own wickedness, and the 
vinegar of their evil inclinations; but though He tastes of it, yet He will not 
drink it. 
CHAP. XIV. 
In the next place, wishing to shake the faith of those who believe in Jesus 
on the ground of the prophecies which were delivered in regard to Him, Celsus 
says: "But pray, if the prophets foretold that the great God--not to put it more 
harshly--would become a slave, or become sick or die; would there be therefore 
any necessity that God should die, or suffer sickness, or become a slave, simply 
because such things had been foretold? Must he die in order to prove his 
divinity? But the prophets never would utter predictions so wicked and impious. 
We need not therefore inquire whether a thing has been predicted or not, but 
whether the thing is honourable in itself, and worthy of God. In that which is 
evil and base, although it seemed that all men in the world had foretold it in a 
fit of madness, we must not believe. How then can the pious mind admit that 
those things which are said to have happened to him, could have happened to one 
who is God?" From this it is plain that Celsus feels the argument from prophecy 
to be very effective for convincing those to whom Christ is preached; but he 
seems to endeavour to overthrow it by an opposite probability, namely," that the 
question is not whether the prophets uttered these predictions or not." But if 
he wished to reason justly and without evasion, he ought rather to have said, 
"We must show that these things were never predicted, or that those things which 
were predicted of Christ have never been fulfilled in him," and in that way he 
would have established the position which he holds. In that way it would have 
been made plain what those prophecies are which we apply to Jesus, and how 
Celsus could justify himself in asserting that that application was false. And 
we should thus have seen whether he fairly disproved all that we bring from the 
prophets in behalf of Jesus, or whether he himself is convicted of a shameless 
endeavour to resist the plainest truths by violent assertions. 
CHAP. XV. 
After assuming that some things were foretold which are impossible in 
themselves, and inconsistent with the character of God, he says: "If these 
things were predicted of the Most High God, are we bound to believe them of God 
simply because they were predicted?" And thus he thinks he proves, that although 
the prophets may have foretold truly such things of the Son of God, yet it is 
impossible for us to believe in those prophecies declaring that He would do or 
suffer such things. To this our answer is that the supposition is absurd, for it 
combines two lines of reasoning which are opposed to each other, and therefore 
mutually destructive. This may be shown as follows. The one argument is: "If any 
true prophets of the Most High say that God will become a slave, or suffer 
sickness, or die, these things will come to God; for it is impossible that the 
prophets of the great God should utter lies." The other is: "If even true 
prophets of the Most High God say that these same things shall come to pass, 
seeing that these things foretold are by the nature of things impossible, the 
prophecies are not true, and therefore those things which have been foretold 
will not happen to God." When, then, we find two processes of reasoning in both 
of which the major premiss is the same, leading to two contradictory 
conclusions, we use the form of argument called "the theorem of two 
propositions," to prove that the major premiss is false, which in the case 
before us is this, "that the prophets have foretold that the great God should 
become a slave, suffer sickness, or die." We conclude, then, that the prophets 
never foretold such things; and the argument is formally expressed as follows: 
1st, Of two things, if the first is true, the second is true; 2d, if the first 
is true, the second is not true, therefore the first is not true. The concrete 
example which the Stoics give to illustrate this form of argument is the 
following: 1st, If you know that you are dead, you are dead; 2d, if you know 
that you are dead, you are not dead. And the conclusion is--"you do not know 
that you are dead." These propositions are worked out as follows: If you know 
that you are dead, that which you know is certain; therefore you are dead. 
Again, if you know that you are dead, your death is an object of knowledge; but 
as the dead know nothing, your knowing this proves that you are not dead. 
Accordingly, by joining the two arguments together, you arrive at the 
conclusion--"you do not know that you are dead." Now the hypothesis of Celsus 
which we have given above is much of the same kind. 
CHAP. XVI. 
But besides, the prophecies which he introduces into his argument are very 
different from what the prophets actually foretold of Jesus Christ. For the 
prophecies do not foretell that God will be crucified, when they say of Him who 
should suffer, "We beheld Him, and He had no form or comeliness; but His form 
was dishonoured and marred more than the sons of men; He was a man of sorrows, 
and acquainted with grief." Observe, then, how distinctly they say that it was a 
man who should endure these human sufferings. And Jesus Himself, who knew 
perfectly that one who was to die must be a man, said to His accusers: "But now 
ye seek to kill Me, a man that hath spoken unto you the truth which I heard of 
God." And if in that man as He appeared among men there was something divine, 
namely the only-begotten Son of God, the first-born of all creation, one who 
said of Himself, "I am the truth," "I am the life," "I am the door," "I am the 
way," "I am the living bread which came down from heaven," of this Being and His 
nature we must judge and reason in a way quite different from that in which we 
judge of the man who was seen in Jesus Christ. Accordingly, you will find no 
Christian, however simple he may be, and however little versed in critical 
studies, who would say that He who died was "the truth," "the life," "the way," 
"the living bread which came down from heaven," "the resurrection;" for it was 
He who appeared to us in the form of the man Jesus, who taught us, saying, "I am 
the resurrection." There is no one amongst us, I say, so extravagant as to 
affirm "the Life died," "the Resurrection died." The supposition of Celsus would 
have some foundation if we were to say that it had been foretold by the prophets 
that death would befall God the Word, the Truth, the Life, the Resurrection, or 
any other name which is assumed by the Son of God. 
CHAP. XVII. 
In one point alone is Celsus correct in his statements on this subject. It is 
that in which he says: "The prophets would not foretell this, because it 
involves that which is wicked and impious,"--namely, that the great God should 
become a slave or suffer death. But that which is predicted by the prophets is 
worthy of God, that He who is the brightness and express image of the divine 
nature should come into the world with the holy human soul which was to animate 
the body of Jesus, to sow the seed of His word, which might bring all who 
received and cherished it into union with the Most High God, and which would 
lead to perfect blessedness all those who felt within them the power of God the 
Word, who was to be in the body and soul of a man. He was to be in it indeed, 
but not in such a way as to confine therein all the rays of His glory; and we 
are not to suppose that the light of Him who is God the Word is shed forth in no 
other way than in this. If, then, we consider Jesus in relation to the divinity 
that was in Him, the things which He did in this capacity present nothing to 
offend our ideas of God, nothing but what is holy; and if we consider Him as 
man, distinguished beyond all other men by an intimate communion with the 
Eternal Word, with absolute Wisdom, He suffered as one who was wise and perfect, 
whatever it behoved Him to suffer who did all for the good of the human race, 
yea, even for the good of all intelligent beings. And there is nothing absurd in 
a man having died, and in His death being not only an example of death endured 
for the sake of piety, but also the first blow in the conflict which is to 
overthrow the power of that evil spirit the devil, who had obtained dominion 
over the whole world. For we have signs and pledges of the destruction of his 
empire, in those who through the coming of Christ are everywhere escaping from 
the power of demons, and who, after their deliverance from this bondage in which 
they were held, consecrate themselves to God, and earnestly devote themselves 
day by day to advancement in a life of piety. 
CHAP. XVIII. 
Celsus adds: "Will they not besides make this reflection? If the prophets of 
the God of the Jews foretold that he who should come into the world would be the 
Son of this same God, how could he command them through Moses to gather wealth, 
to extend their dominion, to fill the earth, to put their enemies of every age 
to the sword, and to destroy them utterly, which indeed he himself did--as Moses 
says--threatening them, moreover, that if they did not obey his commands, he 
would treat them as his avowed enemies; whilst, on the other hand, his Son, the 
man of Nazareth, promulgated laws quite op posed to these, declaring that no one 
can come to the Father who loves power, or riches, or glory; that men ought not 
to be more careful in providing food than the ravens; that they were to be less 
concerned about their raiment than the lilies; that to him who has given them 
one blow, they should offer to receive another? Whether is it Moses or Jesus who 
teaches falsely? Did the Father, when he sent Jesus, forget the commands which 
he had given to Moses? 
Or did he change his mind, condemn his own laws, and send forth a messenger 
with counter instructions?" Celsus, with all his boasts of universal knowledge, 
has here fallen into the most vulgar of errors, in supposing that in the law and 
the prophets there is not a meaning deeper than that afforded by a literal 
rendering of the words. He does not see how manifestly incredible it is that 
worldly riches should be promised to those who lead upright lives, when it is a 
matter of common observation that the best of men have lived in extreme poverty. 
Indeed, the prophets themselves, who for the purity of their lives received the 
Divine Spirit, "wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, 
afflicted, tormented: they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens 
and caves of the earth." For, as the Psalmist, says, "many are the afflictions 
of the righteous." If Celsus had read the writings of Moses, he would, I 
daresay, have supposed that when it is said to him who kept the law, "Thou shalt 
lend unto many nations, and thou thyself shalt not borrow," the promise is made 
to the just man, that his temporal riches should be so abundant, that he would 
be able to lend not only to the Jews, not only to two or three nations, but "to 
many nations." What, then, must have been the wealth which the just man received 
according to the law for his righteousness, if he could lend to many nations? 
And must we not suppose also, in accordance with this interpretation, that the 
just man would never borrow anything? For it is written, "and thou shalt thyself 
borrow nothing." Did then that nation remain for so long a period attached to 
the religion which was taught by Moses, whilst, according to the supposition of 
Celsus, they saw themselves so grievously deceived by that lawgiver? For nowhere 
is it said of any one that he was so rich as to lend to many nations. It is not 
to be believed that they would have fought so zealously in defence of a law 
whose promises had proved glaringly false, if they understood them in the sense 
which Celsus gives to them. And if any one should say that the sins which are 
recorded to have been committed by the people are a proof that they despised the 
law, doubtless from the feeling that they had been deceived by it, we may reply 
that we have only to read the history of the times in order to find it shown 
that the whole people, after having done that which was evil in the sight of the 
Lord, returned afterwards to their duty, and to the religion prescribed by the 
law. 
CHAP. XIX. 
Now if these words in the law, "Thou shalt have dominion over many nations, 
and no one shall rule over thee," were simply a promise to them of dominion, and 
if they contain no deeper meaning than this, then it is certain that the people 
would have had still stronger grounds for despising the promises of the law. 
Celsus brings forward another passage, although he changes the terms of it, 
where it is said that the whole earth shall be filled with the Hebrew race; 
which indeed, according to the testimony of history, did actually happen after 
the coming of Christ, although rather as a result of God's anger, if I may so 
say, than of His blessing. As to the promise made to the Jews that they should 
slay their enemies, it may be answered that any one who examines carefully into 
the meaning of this passage will find himself unable to interpret it literally. 
It is sufficient at present to refer to the manner in which in the Psalms the 
just man is represented as saying, among other things, "Every morning will I 
destroy the wicked of the land; that I may cut off all workers of iniquity from 
the city of Jehovah." Judge, then, from the words and spirit of the speaker, 
whether it is conceivable that, after having in the preceding part of the Psalm, 
as any one may read for himself, uttered the noblest thoughts and purposes, he 
should in the sequel, according to the literal rendering of his words, say that 
in the morning, and at no other period of the day, he would destroy all sinners 
from the earth, and leave none of them alive, and that he would slay every one 
in Jerusalem who did iniquity. And there are many similar expressions to be 
found in the law, as this, for example: "We left not anything alive." 
CHAP. XX. 
Celsus adds, that it was foretold to the Jews, that if they did not obey the 
law, they would be treated in the same way as they treated their enemies; and 
then he quotes from the teaching of Christ some precepts which he considers 
contrary to those of the law, and uses that as an argument against us. But 
before proceeding to this point, we must speak of that which precedes. We hold, 
then, that the law has a twofold sense, 
--the one literal, the other spiritual,--as has been shown by some before us. 
Of the first or literal sense it is said, not by us, but by God, speaking in one 
of the prophets, that "the statutes are not good, and the judgments not good;" 
whereas, taken in a spiritual sense, the same prophet makes God say that "His 
statutes are good, and His judgments good." Yet evidently the prophet is not 
saying things which are contradictory of each other. Paul in like manner says, 
that "the letter killeth, and the spirit giveth life," meaning by "the letter" 
the literal sense, and by "the spirit" the spiritual sense of Scripture. We may 
therefore find in Paul, as well as in the prophet, apparent contradictions. 
Indeed, if Ezekiel says in one place, "I gave them commandments which were not 
good, and judgments whereby they should not live," and in another, "I gave them 
good commandments and judgments, which if a man shall do, he shall live by 
them," Paul in like manner, when he wishes to disparage the law taken literally, 
says, "If the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was 
glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of 
Moses for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away; how 
shall not the ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious?" But when in 
another place he wishes to praise and recommend the law, he calls it 
"spiritual," and says, "We know that the law is spiritual;" and, "Wherefore the 
law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good." 
CHAP. XXI. 
When, then, the letter of the law promises riches to the just, Celsus may 
follow the letter which killeth, and understand it of worldly riches, which 
blind men; but we say that it refers to those riches which enlighten the eyes, 
and which enrich a man "in all utterance and in all knowledge." And in this 
sense we "charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, 
nor trust in uncertain riches but in the living God, who giveth us richly all 
things to enjoy; that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to 
distribute, willing to communicate." For, as Solomon says, "riches" are the true 
good, which "are the ransom of the life of a man;" but the poverty which is the 
opposite of these riches is destructive, for by it "the poor cannot bear 
rebuke." And what has been said of riches applies to dominion, in regard to 
which it is said, "The just man shall chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand 
to flight." Now if riches are to be taken in the sense we have just explained, 
consider if it is not according to God's promise that he who is rich in all 
utterance, in all knowledge, in all wisdom, in all good works, may not out of 
these treasures of utterance, of wisdom, and of knowledge, lend to many nations. 
It was thus that Paul lent to all the nations that he visited, "carrying the 
Gospel of Christ from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum." And as the 
divine knowledge was given to him by revelation, and his mind was illumined by 
the Divine Word, he himself therefore needed to borrow from no one, and required 
not the ministry to any man to teach him the word of truth. Thus, as it had been 
written, "Thou shalt have dominion over many nations, and they shall not have 
dominion over thee," he ruled over the Gentiles whom he brought under the 
teaching Of Jesus Christ; and he never "gave place by subjection to men, no, not 
for an hour, as being himself mightier than they. And thus also he "filled the 
earth." 
CHAP. XXII. 
If I must now explain how the just man "slays his enemies," and prevails 
everywhere, it is to be observed that, when he says, "Every morning will I 
destroy the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all workers of iniquity from 
the city of Jehovah," by "the land" he means the flesh whose lusts are at enmity 
with God; and by "the city of Jehovah" he designates his own soul, in which was 
the temple of God, containing the true idea and conception of God, which makes 
it to be admired by all who look upon it. As soon, then, as the rays of the Sun 
of righteousness shine into his soul, feeling strengthened and invigorated by 
their influence, he sets himself to destroy all the lusts of the flesh, which 
are called "the wicked of the land," and drives out of that city of the Lord 
which is in his soul all thoughts which work iniquity, and all suggestions which 
are opposed to the truth. And in this way also the just give up to destruction 
all their enemies, which are their vices, so that they do not spare even the 
children, that is, the early beginnings and promptings of evil. In this sense 
also we understand the language of the 137th Psalm: "O daughter of Babylon, who 
art to be destroyed; happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served 
us: happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the 
stones." For "the little ones" of Babylon 
(which signifies confusion) are those troublesome sinful thoughts which arise 
in the soul and he who subdues them by striking, as it were, their heads against 
the firm and solid strength of reason and truth, is the man who "dasheth the 
little ones against the stones;" and he is therefore truly blessed. God may 
therefore have commanded men to destroy all their vices utterly, even at their 
birth, without having enjoined anything contrary to the teaching of Christ; and 
He may Himself have destroyed before the eyes of those who were "Jews inwardly" 
all the offspring of evil as His enemies. And, in like manner, those who disobey 
the law and word of God may well be compared to His enemies led astray by sin; 
and they may well be said to suffer the same fate as they deserve who have 
proved traitors to the truth of God. 
CHAP. XXIII. 
From what has been said, it is clear then that Jesus, "the man of Nazareth," 
did not promulgate laws opposed to those just considered in regard to riches, 
when He said, "It is hard for the rich man to enter into the kingdom of God;'' 
whether we take the word "rich" in its simplest sense, as referring to the man 
whose mind is distracted by his wealth, and, as it were, entangled with thorns, 
so that he brings forth no spiritual fruit; or whether it is the man who is rich 
in the sense of abounding in false notions, of whom it is written in the 
Proverbs, "Better is the poor man who is just, than the rich man who is false." 
Perhaps it is the following passages which have led Celsus to suppose that Jesus 
forbids ambition to His disciples: "Whoever of you will be the chiefest, shall 
be servant of all;" "The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them," 
and "they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors." But there 
is nothing here inconsistent with the promise, "Thou shalt rule over many 
nations, and they shall not rule over thee," especially after the explanation 
which we have given of these words. Celsus next throws in an expression in 
regard to wisdom, as though he thought that, according to the teaching of 
Christ, no wise man could come to the Father. But we would ask in what sense he 
speaks of a wise man. For if he means one who is wise in "the wisdom of this 
world," as it is called, "which is foolishness with God," then we would agree 
with him in saying that access to the Father is denied to one who is wise in 
that sense. But if by wisdom any one means Christ, who is "the power and wisdom 
of God," far from such a wise man being refused access to the Father, we hold 
that he who is adorned by the Holy Spirit with that gift which is called "the 
word of wisdom," far excels all those who have not received the same grace. 
CHAP. XXIV. 
The pursuit of human glory, we maintain, is forbidden not only by the 
teaching of Jesus, but also by the Old Testament. Accordingly we find one of the 
prophets, when imprecating upon himself certain punishments for the commission 
of certain sins, includes among the punishments this one of earthly glory. He 
says, "O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands; if 
I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me; (yea, rather, I have 
delivered him that without cause is mine enemy;) let the enemy persecute my 
soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth, and set my 
glory up an high." And these precepts of our Lord, "Take no thought what ye 
shall eat, or what ye shall drink. Behold the fowls of the air, or behold the 
ravens: for they sow not, neither do they reap; yet your heavenly Father feedeth 
them. How much better are ye than they! And why take ye thought for raiment? 
Consider the lilies of the field;"--these precepts, and those which follow, are 
not inconsistent with the promised blessings of the law, which teaches that the 
just "shall eat their bread to the full; nor with that saying of Solomon, "The 
righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the wicked 
shall want." For we must consider the food promised in the law as the food of 
the soul, which is to satisfy not both parts of man's nature, but the soul only. 
And the words of the Gospel, although probably containing a deeper meaning, may 
yet be taken in their more simple and obvious sense. as teaching us not to be 
disturbed with anxieties about our food and clothing, but, while living in 
plainness, and desiring only what is needful, to put our trust in the providence 
of God. 
CHAP. XXV. 
Celsus then extracts from the Gospel the precept, "To him who strikes thee 
once, thou shalt offer thyself to be struck again," although without giving any 
passage from the Old Testament which he considers opposed to it. On the one 
hand, we know that "it was said to them in old time, An eye for an eye, and a 
tooth for a tooth;" and on the other, we have read, "I say unto you, Whoever 
shall smite thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also." But as there is 
reason to believe that Celsus produces the objections which he has heard from 
those who wish to make a difference between the God of the Gospel and the God of 
the law, we must say in reply, that this precept, "Whosoever shall strike thee 
on the one cheek, turn to him the other," is not unknown in the older 
Scriptures. For thus, in the Lamentations of Jeremiah, it is said, "It is good 
for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth: he sitteth alone, and keepeth 
silence, because he hath borne it upon him. He giveth his cheek to him that 
smiteth him; he is filled full with reproach." There is no discrepancy, then, 
between the God of the Gospel and the God of the law, even when we take 
literally the precept regarding the blow on the face. So, then, we infer that 
neither "Jesus nor Moses has taught falsely." The Father in sending Jesus did 
not "forget the commands which He had given to Moses:" He did not "change His 
mind, condemn His own laws, and send by His messenger counter instructions." 
CHAP. XXVI. 
However, if we must refer briefly to the difference between the constitution 
which was given to the Jews of old by Moses, and that which the Christians, 
under the direction of Christ's teaching, wish now to establish, we would 
observe that it must be impossible for the legislation of Moses, taken 
literally, to harmonize with the calling of the Gentiles, and with their 
subjection to the Roman government; and on the other hand, it would be 
impossible for the Jews to preserve their civil economy unchanged, supposing 
that they should embrace the Gospel. For Christians could not slay their 
enemies, or condemn to be burned or stoned, as Moses commands, those who had 
broken the law, and were therefore condemned as deserving of these punishments; 
since the Jews themselves, however desirous of carrying out their law, are not 
able to inflict these. punishments. But in the case of the ancient Jews, who had 
a land and a form of government of their own, to take from them the right of 
making war upon their enemies, of fighting for their country, of putting to 
death or otherwise punishing adulterers, murderers, or others who were guilty of 
similar crimes, would be to subject them to sudden and utter destruction 
whenever the enemy fell upon them; for their very laws would in that case 
restrain them, and prevent them from resisting the enemy. 
And that same providence which of old gave the law, and has now given the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ, not wishing the Jewish state to continue longer, has 
destroyed their city and their temple: it has abolished the worship which was 
offered to God in that temple by the sacrifice of victims, and other ceremonies 
which He had prescribed. And as it has destroyed these things, not wishing that 
they should longer continue, in like manner it has extended day by day the 
Christian religion, so that it is now preached everywhere with boldness, and 
that in spite of the numerous obstacles which oppose the spread of Christ's 
teaching in the world. But since it was the purpose of God that the nations 
should receive the benefits of Christ's teaching, all the devices of men against 
Christians have been brought to sought; for the more that kings, and rulers, and 
peoples have persecuted them everywhere, the more have they increased in number 
and grown in strength. 
CHAP. XXVII. 
After this Celsus relates at length opinions which he ascribes to us, but 
which we do not hold, regarding the Divine Being, to the effect that "he is 
corporeal in his nature, and possesses a body like a man." As he undertakes to 
refute opinions which are none of ours, it would be needless to give either the 
opinions themselves or their refutation. Indeed, if we did hold those views of 
God which he ascribes to us, and which he opposes, we would be bound to quote 
his words, to adduce our own arguments, and to refute his. But if he brings 
forward opinions which he has either heard from no one, or if it be assumed that 
he has heard them, it must have been from those who are very simple and ignorant 
of the meaning of Scripture, then we need not undertake so superfluous a task as 
that of refuting them. For the Scriptures plainly speak of God as of a being 
without body. Hence it is said, "No man hath seen God at any time;" and the 
First-born of all creation is called "the image of the invisible God,"s which is 
the same as if it were said that He is incorporeal. However, we have already 
said something on the nature of God while examining into the meaning of the 
words, "God is a Spirit, and they who worship Him must worship Him in spirit and 
in truth." 
CHAP. XXVIII. 
After thus misrepresenting our views of the nature of God, Celsus goes on to 
ask of us "where we hope to go after death;" and he makes our answer to be, "to 
another land better than this." On this he comments as follows: 

"The divine men of a former age have spoken of a happy life reserved for the 
souls of the blessed. Some designated it 'the isles of the blest,' and others 
'the Elysian plain,' so called because they were there to be delivered from 
their present evils. Thus Homer says: 'But the gods shall send thee to the 
Elysian plain, on the borders of the earth, where they lead a most quiet life.' 
Plato also, who believed in the immortality of the soul, distinctly gives the 
name 'land' to the place where it is sent. 'The extent of it,' a says he, 'is 
immense, and we only occupy a small portion of it, from the Phasis to the 
Pillars of Hercules, where we dwell along the shores of the sea, as grasshoppers 
and frogs beside a marsh. But there are many other places inhabited in like 
manner by other men. For there are in different parts of the earth cavities, 
varying in form and in magnitude, into which run water, and clouds, and air. But 
that land which is pure lies in the pure region of heaven.'" Celsus therefore 
supposes that what we say of a land which is much better and more excellent than 
this, has been borrowed from certain ancient writers whom he styles "divine," 
and chiefly from Plato, who in his Phaedon discourses on the pure land lying in 
a pure heaven. But he does not see that Moses, who is much older than the Greek 
literature, introduces God as promising to those who lived according to His law 
the holy land, which is "a good land and a large, a land flowing with milk and 
honey;" which promise is not to be understood to refer, as some suppose, to that 
part of the earth which we call Judea; for it, however good it may be, still 
forms part of the earth, which was originally cursed for the transgression of 
Adam. For these words, "Cursed shall the ground be for what thou hast done; with 
grief, that is, with labour, shalt thou eat of the fruit of it all the days of 
thy life," were spoken of the whole earth, the fruit of which every man who died 
in Adam eats with sorrow or labour all the days of his life. And as all the 
earth has been cursed, it brings forth thorns and briers all the days of the 
life of those who in Adam were driven out of paradise; and in the sweat of his 
face every man eats bread until he returns to the ground from which he was 
taken. For the full exposition of all that is contained in this passage much 
might be said; but we have confined ourselves to these few words at present, 
which are intended to remove the idea, that what is said of the good land 
promised by God to the righteous, refers to the land of Judea. 
CHAP. XXIX. 
If, then, the whole earth has been cursed in the deeds of Adam and of those 
who died in him, it is plain that all parts of the earth share in the curse, and 
among others the land of Judea; so that the words, "a good land and a large, a 
land flowing with milk and honey, cannot apply to it, although we may say of it, 
that both Judea and Jerusalem were the shadow and figure of that pure land, 
goodly and large, in the pure region of heaven, in which is the heavenly 
Jerusalem. And it is in reference to this Jerusalem that the apostle spoke, as 
one who, "being risen with Christ, and seeking those things which are above," 
had found a truth which formed no part of the Jewish mythology. "Ye are come," 
says he, "unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly 
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels." And in order to be assured 
that our explanation of "the good and large land" of Moses is not contrary to 
the intention of the Divine Spirit, we have only to read in all the prophets 
what they say of those who, after having left Jerusalem, and wandered astray 
from it, should afterwards return and be settled in the place which is called 
the habitation and city of God, as in the words, "His dwelling is in the holy 
place;" and, "Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our 
God, in the mountain of His holiness, beautiful for situation, the joy of the 
whole earth." It is enough at present to quote the words of the thirty-seventh 
Psalm, which speaks thus of the land of the righteous, "Those that wait upon the 
Lord they shall inherit the earth;" and a little after, "But the meek shall 
inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace;" and 
again, "Those who bless Him shall inherit the earth;" and, "The righteous shall 
inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever." And consider whether it is not 
evident to intelligent readers that the following words from this same Psalm 
refer to the pure land in the pure heaven: "Wait on the Lord, and keep His way; 
and He shall exalt thee to inherit the land." 
CHAP. XXX. 
It seems to me also that the fancy of Plato, that those stones which we call 
precious stones derive their lustre from a reflection, as it were, of the stones 
in that better land, is taken from the words of Isaiah in describing the city of 
God, "I will make thy battlements of jasper, thy stones shall be crystal, and 
thy borders of precious stones;" and, "I will lay thy foundations with 
sapphires." Those who hold in greatest reverence the teaching of Plato, explain 
this myth of his as an allegory. And the prophecies from which, as we 
conjecture, Plato has borrowed, will be explained by those who, leading a godly 
life like that of the prophets, devote all their time to the study of the sacred 
Scriptures, to those who are qualified to learn by purity of life, and their 
desire to advance in divine knowledge. For our part, our purpose has been simply 
to say that what we affirm of that sacred land has not been taken from Plato or 
any of the Greeks, but that they rather--living as they did not only after 
Moses, who was the oldest, but even after most of the prophets--borrowed from 
them, and in so doing either misunderstood their obscure intimations on such 
subjects, or else endeavoured, in their allusions to the better land, to imitate 
those portions of Scripture which had fallen into their hands. Haggai expressly 
makes a distinction between the earth and the dry land, meaning by the latter 
the land in which we live. He says: "Yet once, and I will shake the heavens, and 
the earth, and the dry land, and the sea." 
CHAP. XXXI. 
Referring to the passage in the Phaedon of Plato, Celsus says: "It is not 
easy for every one to understand the meaning of Plato's words, when he says that 
on account of our weakness and slowness we are unable to reach the highest 
region of the air; but that if our nature were capable of so sublime a 
contemplation, we would then be able to understand that that is the true heaven, 
and that the true light." As Celsus has deferred to another opportunity the 
explanation of Plato's idea, we also think that it does not fall within our 
purpose at present to enter into any full description of that holy and good 
land, and of the city of God which is in it; but reserve the consideration of it 
for our Commentary on the Prophets, having already in part, according to our 
power, treated of the city of God in our remarks on the forty-sixth and 
forty-eighth Psalms. The writings of Moses and the prophets--the most ancient of 
all books--teach us that all things here on earth which are in common use among 
men, have other things corresponding to them in name which are alone real. Thus, 
for instance, there is the true light, and another heaven beyond the firmament, 
and a Sun of righteousness other than the sun we see. In a word, to distinguish 
those things from the objects of sense, which have no true reality, they say of 
God that "His works are truth;" thus making a distinction between the works of 
God and the works of God's hands, which latter are of an inferior sort. 
Accordingly, God in Isaiah complains of men, that "they regard not the works of 
the Lord, nor consider the operation of His hands." But enough on this point. 
CHAP. XXXII. 
Celsus next assails the doctrine of the resurrection, which is a high and 
difficult doctrine, and one which more than others requires a high and advanced 
degree of wisdom to set forth how worthy it is of God; and how sublime a truth 
it is which teaches us that there is a seminal principle lodged in that which 
Scripture speaks of as the "tabernacle" of the soul, in which the righteous "do 
groan, being burdened, not for that they would be unclothed, but clothed upon." 
Celsus ridicules this doctrine because he does not understand it, and because he 
has learnt it from ignorant persons, who were unable to support it on any 
reasonable grounds. It will be profitable, therefore, that in addition to what 
we have said above, we should make this one remark. Our teaching on the subject 
of the resurrection is not, as Celsus imagines, derived from anything that we 
have heard on the doctrine of metempsychosis; but we know that the soul, which 
is immaterial and invisible in its nature, exists in no material place, without 
having a body suited to the nature of that place. Accordingly, it at one time 
puts off one body which was necessary before, but which is no longer adequate in 
its changed state, and it exchanges it for a second; and at another time it 
assumes another in addition to the former, which is needed as a better covering, 
suited to the purer ethereal regions of heaven. When it comes into the world at 
birth, it casts off the integuments which it needed in the womb; and before 
doing this, it puts on another body suited for its life upon earth. Then, again, 
as there is "a tabernacle" and "an earthly house" which is in some sort 
necessary for this tabernacle, Scripture teaches us that "the earthly house of 
this tabernacle shall be dissolved," but that the tabernacle shall "be clothed 
upon with a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." The men of God 
say also that "the corruptible shall put on incorruption," which is a different 
thing from "the incorruptible;" and "the mortal shall put on immortality," which 
is different from "the immortal." 
Indeed, what "wisdom" is to "the wise," and "justice" to "the just," and 
"peace" to "the peaceable," the same relation does "incorruption" hold to "the 
incorruptible," and "immortality" to "the immortal." 

Behold, then, to what a prospect Scripture encourages us to look, when it 
speaks to us of being clothed with incorruption and immortality, which are, as 
it were, vestments which will not suffer those who are covered with them to come 
to corruption or death. Thus far I have taken the liberty of referring to this 
subject, in answer to one who assails the doctrine of the resurrection without 
understanding it, and who, simply because he knew nothing about it, made it the 
object of contempt and ridicule. 
CHAP. XXXIII. 
As Celsus supposes that we uphold the doctrine of the resurrection in order 
that we may see and know God, he thus follows out his notions on the subject: 
"After they have been utterly refuted and vanquished, they still, as if 
regardless of all objections, come back again to the same question, 'How then 
shall we see and know God? how shall we go to Him?'" Let any, however, who are 
disposed to hear us observe, that if we have need of a body for other purposes, 
as for occupying a material locality to which this body must be adapted, and if 
on that account the "tabernacle" is clothed in the way we have shown, we have no 
need of a body in order to know God. For that which sees God is not the eye of 
the body; it is the mind which is made in the image of the Creator, and which 
God has in His providence rendered capable of that knowledge. To see God belongs 
to the pure heart, out of which no longer proceed "evil thoughts, murders, 
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies, the evil eye," or 
any other evil thing. Wherefore it is said, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for 
they shall see God." But as the strength of our will is not sufficient to 
procure the perfectly pure heart, and as we need that God should create it, he 
therefore who prays as he ought, offers this petition to God, "Create in me a 
clean heart, O God." 
CHAP. XXXIV. 
And we do not ask the question, "How shall we go to God?" as though we 
thought that God existed in some place. God is of too excellent a nature for any 
place: He holds all things in His power, and is Himself not confined by anything 
whatever. The precept, therefore, "Thou shall walk after the Lord thy God," does 
not command a bodily approach to God; neither does the prophet refer to physical 
nearness to God, when he says in his prayer, "My soul followeth hard after 
Thee." Celsus therefore misrepresents us, when he says that we expect to see God 
with our bodily eyes, to hear Him with our ears, and to touch Him sensibly with 
our hands. We know that the holy Scriptures make mention of eyes, of ears, and 
of hands, which have nothing but the name in common with the bodily organs; and 
what is more wonderful, they speak of a diviner sense, which is very different 
from the senses as commonly spoken of. For when the prophet says, "Open Thou 
mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of Thy law," or, "The 
commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes," or, "Lighten mine eyes, 
lest I sleep the sleep of death," no one is so foolish as to suppose that the 
eyes of the body behold the wonders of the divine law, or that the law of the 
Lord gives light to the bodily eyes, or that the sleep of death falls on the 
eyes of the body. When our Saviour says, "He that hath ears to hear, let him 
hear," any one will understand that the ears spoken of are of a diviner kind. 
When it is said that the word of the Lord was "in the hand" of Jeremiah or of 
some other prophet; or when the expression is used, "the law by the hand of 
Moses," or, "I sought the Lord with my hands, and was not deceived,--no one is 
so foolish as not to see that the word "hands" is taken figuratively, as when 
John says, "Our hands have handled the Word of life." And if you wish further to 
learn from the sacred writings that there is a diviner sense than the senses of 
the body, you have only to hear what Solomon says, "Thou shalt find a divine 
sense." 
CHAP. XXXV. 
Seeking God, then, in this way, we have no need to visit the oracles of 
Trophonius, of Amphiaraus, and of Mopsus, to which Celsus would send us, 
assuring us that we would there "see the gods in human form, appearing to us 
with all distinctness, and without illusion." For we know that these are demons, 
feeding on the blood, and smoke, and odour of victims, and shut up by their base 
desires in prisons, which the Greeks call temples of the gods, but which we know 
are only the dwellings of deceitful demons. To this Celsus maliciously adds, in 
regard to these gods which, according to him, are in human form, "they do not 
show themselves for once, or at intervals, like him who has deceived men, but 
they are ever open to intercourse with those who desire it." From this remark, 
it would seem that Celsus supposes that the appearance of Christ to His 
disciples after His resurrection was like that of a spectre flitting before 
their eyes; whereas these gods, as he calls them, in human shape always present 
themselves to those who desire it. But how is it possible that a phantom which, 
as he describes it, flew past to deceive the beholders, could produce such 
effects after it had passed away, and could so turn the hearts of men as to lead 
them to regulate their actions according to the will of God, as in view of being 
hereafter judged by Him? And how could a phantom drive away demons, and show 
other indisputable evidences of power, and that not in any one place, like these 
so-called gods in human form, but making its divine power felt through the whole 
world, in drawing and congregating together all who are found disposed to lead a 
good and noble life? 
CHAP. XXXVI. 
After these remarks of Celsus, which we have endeavoured to answer as we 
could, he goes on to say, speaking of us: "Again they will ask, 'How can we know 
God, unless by the perception of the senses? for how otherwise than through the 
senses are we able to gain any knowledge?'" To this he replies: "This is not the 
language of a man; it comes not from the soul, but from the flesh. Let them 
hearken to us, if such a spiritless and carnal race are able to do so: if, 
instead of exercising the senses, you look upwards with the soul; if, turning 
away the eye of the body, you open the eye of the mind thus and thus only will 
you be able to see God. And if you seek one to be your guide along this way, you 
must shun all deceivers and jugglers, who will introduce you to phantoms. 
Otherwise you will be acting the most ridiculous part, if, whilst you pronounce 
imprecatious upon those others that are recognised as gods, treating them as 
idols, you yet do homage to a more wretched idol than any of these, which indeed 
is not even an idol or a phantom, but a dead man, and you seek a father like to 
him." The first remark which we have to make on this passage is in regard to his 
use of personification, by which he makes us m defend in this way the doctrine 
of the resurrection. This figure of speech is properly employed when the 
character and sentiments of the person introduced are faithfully preserved; but 
it is an abuse of the figure when these do not agree with the character and 
opinions of the speaker. Thus we should justly condemn a man who put into the 
mouths of barbarians, slaves, or uneducated'. people the language of philosophy; 
because we know that the philosophy belonged to the author, and not to such 
persons, who could not know anything of philosophy. And in like manner we should 
condemn a man for introducing persons who are represented as wise and well 
versed in divine knowledge, and should make them give expression to language 
which could only come out of the mouths of those who are ignorant or under the 
influence of vulgar passions. Hence Homer is admired, among other things, for 
preserving a consistency of character in his heroes, as in Nestor, Ulysses, 
Diomede, Agamemnon, Telemachus, Penelope, and the rest. Euripides, on the 
contrary, was assailed in the comedies of Aristophanes as a frivolous talker, 
often putting into the mouth of a barbarian woman, a wretched slave, the wise 
maxims which he had learned from Anaxagoras or some other philosophers. 
CHAP. XXXVII. 
Now if this is a true account of what constitutes the right and the wrong use 
of personification, have we not grounds for holding Celsus up to ridicule for 
thus ascribing to Christians words which they never uttered? For if those whom 
he represents as speaking are the unlearned, how is it possible that such 
persons could distinguish between "sense" and "reason," between "objects of 
sense" and "objects of the reason?" To argue in this way, they would require to 
have studied under the Stoics, who deny all intellectual existences, and 
maintain that all that we apprehend is apprehended through the senses, and that 
all knowledge comes through the senses. But if, on the other hand, he puts these 
words into the mouth of philosophers who search carefully into the meaning of 
Christian doctrines, the statements in question do not agree with their 
character and principles. For no one who has learnt that God is invisible, and 
that certain of His works are invisible, that is to say, apprehended by the 
reason, can say, as if to justify his faith in a resurrection, "How can they 
know God, except by the perception of the senses?" or, "How otherwise than 
through the senses can they gain any knowledge?" For it is not in any secret 
writings, perused only by a few wise men, but in such as are most widely 
diffused and most commonly known among the people, that these words are written: 
"The invisible things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen, 
being understood by the things that are made." From whence it is to be inferred, 
that though men who live upon the earth have to begin with the use of the senses 
upon sensible objects, in order to go on from them to a knowledge of the nature 
of things intellectual, yet their knowledge must not stop short with the objects 
of sense. 

And thus, while Christians would not say that it is impossible to have a 
knowledge of intellectual objects without the senses, but rather that the senses 
supply the first means of obtaining knowledge, they might well ask the question, 
"Who can gain any knowledge without the senses?" without deserving the abuse of 
Celsus, when he adds, "This is not the language of a man; it comes not from the 
soul, but from the flesh." 
CHAP. XXXVIII. 
Since we hold that the great God is in essence simple, invisible, and 
incorporeal, Himself pure intelligence, or something transcending intelligence 
and existence, we can never say that God is apprehended by any other means than 
through the intelligence which is formed in His image, though now, in the words 
of Paul, "we see in a glass obscurely, but then face to face." And if we use the 
expression "face to face," let no one pervert its meaning; but let it be 
explained by this passage, "Beholding with open face the glory of the Lord, we 
are changed into the same image, from glory to glory," which shows that we do 
not use the word in this connection to mean the visible face, but take it 
figuratively, in the same way as we have shown that the eyes, the ears, and the 
other parts of the body are employed. And it is certain that a man--I mean a 
soul using a body, otherwise called "the inner man," or simply "the soul"--would 
answer, not as Celsus makes us answer, but as the man of God himself teaches. It 
is certain also that a Christian will not make use of "the language of the 
flesh," having learnt as he has "to mortify the deeds of the body" by the 
spirit, and "to bear about in his body the dying of Jesus;" and "mortify your 
members which are on the earth," and with a true knowledge of these words, "My 
spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh," and again, 
"They that are in the flesh cannot please God," he strives in every way to live 
no longer according to the flesh, but only according to the Spirit. 
CHAP. XXXIX. 
Now let us hear what it is that he invites us to learn, that we may ascertain 
from him how we are to know God, although he thinks that his words are beyond 
the. capacity of all Christians. "Let them hear," says he, "if they are able to 
do so." We have then to consider what the philosopher wishes us to hear from 
him. But instead of instructing us as he ought, he abuses us; and while he 
should have shown his goodwill to those whom he addresses at the outset of his 
discourse, he stigmatizes as "a cowardly race" men who would rather die than 
abjure Christianity even by a word, and who are ready to suffer every form of 
torture, or any kind of death. He also applies to us that epithet "carnal" or 
"flesh-indulging," "although," as we are wont to say, "we have known Christ 
after the flesh, yet now henceforth we know Him no more," and although we are so 
ready to lay down our lives for the cause of religion, that no philosopher could 
lay aside his robes more readily. He then addresses to us these words: "If, 
instead of exercising your senses, you look upwards with the soul; if, turning 
away the eye of the body, you open the eye of the mind, thus and thus only you 
will be able to see God." He is not aware that this reference to the two eyes, 
the eye of the body and the eye of the mind, which he has borrowed from the 
Greeks, was in use among our own writers; for Moses, in his account of the 
creation of the world, introduces man before his transgression as both seeing 
and not seeing: seeing, when it is said of the woman, "The woman saw that the 
tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be 
desired to make one wise;" and again not seeing, as when he introduces the 
serpent saying to the woman, as if she and her husband had been blind, "God 
knows that on the day that ye eat thereof your eyes shall be opened;" and also 
when it is said, "They did eat, and the eyes of both of them were opened." The 
eyes of sense were then opened, which they had done well to keep shut, that they 
might not be distracted, and hindered from seeing with the eyes of the mind; and 
it was those eyes of the mind which in consequence of sin, as I imagine, were 
then closed, with which they had up to that time enjoyed the delight of 
beholding God and His paradise. This twofold kind of vision in us was familiar 
to our Saviour, who says," For judgment I am come into this world, that they 
which see not, might see, and that they which see might be made 
blind,"--meaning, by the eyes that see not; the eyes of the mind, which are 
enlightened by His teaching; and the eyes which see are the eyes of sense, which 
His words do render blind, in order that the soul may look without distraction 
upon proper objects. All true Christians therefore have the eye of the mind 
sharpened, and the eye of sense closed; so that each one, according to the 
degree in which his better eye is quickened, and the eye of sense darkened, sees 
and knows the Supreme 
God, and His Son, who is the Word, Wisdom, and so forth. 
CHAP. XL. 
Next to the remarks of Celsus on which we have already commented, come others 
which he addresses to all Christians, but which, if applicable to any, ought to 
be addressed to persons whose doctrines differ entirely from those taught by 
Jesus. For it is the Ophians who, as we have before shown, have utterly 
renounced Jesus, and perhaps some others of similar opinions who are "the 
impostors and jugglers, leading men away to idols and phantoms;" and it is they 
who with miserable pains learn off the names of the heavenly doorkeepers. These 
words are therefore quite inappropriate as addressed to Christians: "If you seek 
one to be your guide along this way, you must shun all deceivers and jugglers, 
who will introduce you to phantoms." And, as though quite unaware that these 
impostors entirely agree with him, and are not behind him in speaking ill of 
Jesus and His religion, he thus continues, confounding us with them: "otherwise 
you will be acting the most ridiculous part, if, whilst you pronounce 
imprecations upon those other recognised gods, treating them as idols, you yet 
do homage to a more wretched idol than any of these, which indeed is not even an 
idol or a phantom, but a dead man, and you seek a father like to himself." That 
he is ignorant of the wide difference between our opinions and those of the 
inventors of these fables, and that he imagines the charges which he makes 
against them applicable to us, is evident from the following passage: "For the 
sake of such a monstrous delusion, and in support of those wonderful advisers, 
and those wonderful words which you address to the lion, to the amphibious 
creature, to the creature in the form of an ass, and to others, for the sake of 
those divine doorkeepers whose names you commit to memory with such pains, in 
such a cause as this you suffer cruel tortures, and perish at the stake." 
Surely, then, he is unaware that none of those who regard beings in the form of 
an ass a lion, or an amphibious animal, as the doorkeepers or guides on the way 
to heaven, ever expose themselves to death in defence of that which they think 
the truth. That excess of zeal, if it may be so called, which leads us for the 
sake of religion to submit to every kind of death, and to perish at the stake, 
is ascribed by Celsus to those who endure no such sufferings; and he reproaches 
us who suffer crucifixion for our faith, with believing in fabulous 
creatures--in the lion, the amphibious animal, and other such monsters. If we 
reject all these fables, it is not out of deference to Celsus, for we have never 
at any time held any such fancies; but it is in accordance with the teaching of 
Jesus that we oppose all such notions, and will not allow to Michael, or to any 
others that have been referred to, a form and figure of that sort. 
CHAP. XLI. 
But let us consider who those persons are whose guidance Celsus would have us 
to follow, so that we may not be in want of guides who are recommended both by 
their antiquity and sanctity. He refers us to divinely inspired poets, as he 
calls them, to wise men and philosophers, without mentioning their names; so 
that, after promising to point out those who should guide us, he simply hands us 
over in a general way to divinely inspired poets, wise men, and philosophers. If 
he had specified their names in particular, we should have felt ourselves bound 
to show him that he wished to give us as guides men who were blinded to the 
truth, and who must therefore lead us into error; or that if not wholly blinded, 
yet they are in error in many matters of belief. But whether Orpheus, 
Parmenides, Empedocles, or even Homer himself, and Hesiod, are the persons whom 
he means by "inspired poets," let any one show how those who follow their 
guidance walk in a better way, or lead a more excellent life, than those who, 
being taught in the school of Jesus Christ, have rejected all images and 
statues, and even all Jewish superstition, that they may look upward through the 
Word of God to the one God, who is the Father of the Word. Who, then, are those 
wise men and philosophers from whom Celsus would have us to learn so many divine 
truths, and for whom we are to give up Moses the servant of God, the prophets of 
the Creator of the world, who have spoken so many things by a truly divine 
inspiration, and even Him who has given light and taught the way of piety to the 
whole human race, so that no one can reproach Him if he remains without a share 
in the knowledge of His mysteries? Such, indeed, was the abounding love which He 
had for men, that He gave to the more learned a theology capable of raising the 
soul far above all earthly things; while with no less consideration He comes 
down to the weaker capacities of ignorant men, of simple women, of slaves, and, 
in short, of all those who from Jesus alone could have received that help for 
the better regulation of their lives which is supplied by his instructions in 
regard to the Divine Being, adapted to their wants and capacities. 
CHAP. XLII. 
Celsus next refers us to Plato as to a more effective teacher of theological 
truth, and quotes the following passage from the Timaeus: "It is a hard matter 
to find out the Maker and Father of this universe; and after having found Him, 
it is impossible to make Him known to all." To which he himself adds this 
remark: "You perceive, then, how divine men seek after the way of truth, and how 
well Plato knew that it was impossible for all men to walk in it. But as wise 
men have found it for the express purpose of being able to convey to us some 
notion of Him who is the first, the unspeakable Being,--a notion, namely; which 
may represent Him to us through the medium of other objects,--they endeavour 
either by synthesis, which is the combining of various qualities, or by 
analysis, which is the separation and setting aside of some qualities, or 
finally by analogy;--in these ways, I say, they endeavour to set before us that 
which it is impossible to express in words. I should therefore be surprised if 
you could follow in that course, since you are so completely wedded to the flesh 
as to be incapable of seeing ought but what is impure." These words of Plato are 
noble and admirable; but see if Scripture does not give us an example of a 
regard for mankind still greater in God the Word, who was "in the beginning with 
God," and "who was made flesh," in order that He might reveal to all men truths 
which, according to Plato, it would be impossible to make known to all men, even 
after he had found them himself. Plato may say that "it is a hard thing to find 
out the Creator and Father of this universe;" by which language he implies that 
it is not wholly beyond the power of human nature to attain to such a knowledge 
as is either worthy of God, or if not, is far beyond that which is commonly 
attained (although if it were true that Plato or any other of the Greeks had 
found God. they would never have given homage and worship, or ascribed the name 
of God, to any other than to Him: they would have abandoned all others, and 
would not have associated with this great God objects which can have nothing in 
common with Him). For ourselves, we maintain that human nature is in no way able 
to seek after God, or to attain a clear knowledge of Him without the help of Him 
whom it seeks. He makes Himself known to those who, after doing all that their 
powers will allow, confess that they need help from Him, who discovers Himself 
to those whom He approves, in so far as it is possible for man and the soul 
still dwelling in the body to know God. 
CHAP. XLIII. 
Observe that when Plato says, that "after having found out the Creator and 
Father of the universe, it is impossible to make Him known to all men," he does 
not speak of Him as unspeakable, and as incapable of being expressed in words. 
On the contrary, he implies that He may be spoken of, and that there are a few 
to whom He may be made known. But Celsus, as if forgetting the language which he 
had just quoted from Plato, immediately gives God the name of "the unspeakable." 
He says: "since the wise men have found out this way, in order to be able to 
give us some idea of the First of Beings, who is unspeakable." For ourselves, we 
hold that not God alone is unspeakable, but other things also which are inferior 
to Him. Such are the things which Paul labours to express when he says, "I heard 
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter," where the word 
"heard" is used in the sense of "understood;" as in the passage, "He who hath 
ears to hear, let him hear." We also hold that it is a hard matter to see the 
Creator and Father of the universe; but it is possible to see Him in the way 
thus referred to, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God;" and 
not only so, but also in the sense of the words of Him "who is the image of the 
invisible God; "He who hath seen Me hath seen the Father who sent Me." No 
sensible person could suppose that these last words were spoken in reference to 
His bodily presence, which was open to the view of all; otherwise all those who 
said, "Crucify him, crucify him," and Pilate, who had power over the humanity of 
Jesus, were among those who saw God the Father, which is absurd. Moreover, that 
these words, "He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father who sent Me," are not 
to be taken in their grosser sense, is plain from the answer which He gave to 
Philip, "Have I been so long time with you, and yet dost thou not know Me, 
Philip?" after Philip had asked, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." He, 
then, who perceives how these words, "The Word was made flesh," are to be 
understood of the only-begotten Son of God, the first-born of all creation, will 
also understand how, in seeing the image of the invisible God, we see "the 
Creator and Father of the universe." 
CHAP. XLIV. 
Celsus supposes that we may arrive at a knowledge of God either by combining 
or separating certain things after the methods which mathematicians call 
synthesis and analysis, or again by analogy, which is employed by them also, and 
that in this way we may as it were gain admission to the chief good. 
But when the Word of God says, "No man knoweth the Father but the Son, and he 
to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him," He declares that no one can know God but 
by the help of divine grace coming from above, with a certain divine 
inspiration. Indeed, it is reasonable to suppose that the knowledge of God is 
beyond the reach of human nature, and hence the many errors into which men have 
fallen in their views of God. It is, then, through the goodness and love of God 
to mankind, and by a marvellous exercise of divine grace to those whom He saw in 
His foreknowledge, and knew that they would walk worthy of Him who had made 
Himself known to them, and that they would never swerve from a faithful 
attachment to His service, although they were condemned to death or held up to 
ridicule by those who, in ignorance of what true religion is, give that name to 
what deserves to be called anything rather than religion. God doubtless saw the 
pride and arrogance of those who, with contempt for all others, boast of their 
knowledge of God, and of their profound acquaintance with divine things obtained 
from philosophy, but who still, not less even than the most ignorant, run after 
their images, and temples, and famous mysteries; and seeing this, He "has chosen 
the foolish things of this world"--the simplest of Christians, who lead, 
however, a life of greater moderation and purity than many philosophers--"to 
confound the wise," who are not ashamed to address inanimate things as gods or 
images of the gods. For what reasonable man can refrain from smiling when he 
sees that one who has learned from philosophy such profound and noble sentiments 
about God or the gods, turns straightway to images and offers to them his 
prayers, or imagines that by gazing upon these material things he can ascend 
from the visible symbol to that which is spiritual and immaterial. But a 
Christian, even of the common people, is assured that every place forms part of 
the universe, and that the whole universe is God's temple. In whatever part of 
the world he is, he prays; but he rises above the universe, "shutting the eyes 
of sense, and raising upwards the eyes of the soul." And he stops not at the 
vault of heaven; but passing in thought beyond the heavens, under the guidance 
of the Spirit of God, and having thus as it were gone beyond the visible 
universe, he offers prayers to God. But he prays for no trivial blessings, for 
he has learnt from Jesus to seek for nothing small or mean, that is, sensible 
objects, but to ask only for what is great and truly divine; and these things 
God grants to us, to lead us to l that blessedness which is found only with Him 
through His Son, the Word, who is God. 
CHAP. XLV. 
But let us see further what the things are which he proposes to teach us, if 
indeed we can comprehend them, since he speaks of us as being "utterly wedded to 
the flesh;" although if we live well, and in accordance with the teaching of 
Jesus, we hear this said of us: "Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if 
the Spirit of God dwelleth in you." He says also that we look upon nothing that 
is pure, although our endeavour is to keep even our thoughts free from all 
defilement of sin, and although in prayer we say, "Create in me a clean heart, O 
God, and renew a right spirit within me," so that we may behold Him with that 
"pure heart" to which alone is granted the privilege of seeing Him. This, then, 
is what he proposes for our instruction: "Things are either intelligible, which 
we call substance--being; or visible, which we call becoming: with the former is 
truth; from the latter arises error. Truth is the object of knowledge; truth and 
error form opinion. Intelligible objects are known by the reason, visible 
objects by the eyes; the action of the reason is called intelligent perception, 
that of the eyes vision. As, then, among visible things the sun is neither the 
eye nor vision, but that which enables the eye to see, and renders vision 
possible, and in consequence of it visible things are seen, all sensible things 
exist and itself is rendered visible; so among things intelligible, that which 
is neither reason, nor intelligent perception, nor knowledge, is yet the cause 
which enables the reason to know, which renders intelligent perception possible; 
and in consequence of it knowledge arises, all things intelligible, truth itself 
and substance have their existence; and itself, which is above all these things, 
becomes in some ineffable way intelligible. These things are offered to the 
consideration of the intelligent; and if even you can understand any of them, it 
is well. And if you think that a Divine Spirit has descended from God to 
announce divine things to men, it is doubtless this same Spirit that reveals 
these truths, and it was under the same influence that men of old made known 
many important truths. But if you cannot comprehend these things, then keep 
silence; do not expose your own ignorance, and do not accuse of blindness those 
who see, or of lameness those who run, while you yourselves are utterly lamed 
and mutilated in mind, and lead a merely animal life--the life of the body, 
which is the dead part of our nature." 

CHAP. XLVI. 
We are careful not to oppose fair arguments even if they proceed from those 
who are not of our faith; we strive not to be captious, or to seek to overthrow 
any sound reasonings. But here we have to reply to those who slander the 
character of persons wishing to do their best in the service of God, who accepts 
the faith which the meanest place in Him, as well as the more refined and 
intelligent piety of the learned; seeing that both alike address to the Creator 
of the world their prayers and thanksgivings through the High Priest who has set 
before men the nature of pure religion. We say, then, that those who are 
stigmatized as "lamed and mutilated in spirit," as "living only for the sake of 
the body which is dead," are persons whose endeavour it is to say with 
sincerity: "For though we live' in the flesh, we do not war according to the 
flesh; for the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly, but mighty through God." 
It is for those who throw out such vile accusations against men' who desire to 
be God's servants, to beware lest, by the calumnies which they cast upon others 
who strive to live well, they "lame" their own souls, and "mutilate" the inner 
man, by severing from it that justice and moderation of mind which the Creator 
has planted in the nature of all His rational creatures. As for those, however, 
who, along with other lessons given by the Divine Word, have learned and 
practised this, "when reviled to bless, when persecuted to endure, when defamed 
to entreat," they may be said to be walking in spirit in the ways of 
uprightness, to be purifying and setting in order the whole soul. They 
distinguish--and to them the distinction is not one of words merely--between 
"substance," or that which is, and that which is "becoming;" between things 
apprehended by reason, and things apprehended by sense; and they connect truth 
with the one, and avoid the errors arising out of the other; looking, as they 
have been taught, not at the things "becoming" or phenomenal, which are seen, 
and therefore temporary, but at better things than these, whether we call them 
"substance," or "spiritual" things, as being apprehended by reason, or 
"invisible," because they lie out of the reach of the senses. The disciples of 
Jesus regard these phenomenal things only that they may use them as steps to 
ascend to the knowledge of the things of reason. For "the invisible things of 
God," that is, the objects of the reason, "from the creation of the world are 
clearly seen" by the reason, "being understood by the things that are made." And 
when they have risen from the created things of this world to the invisible 
things of God, they do not stay there; but after they have sufficiently 
exercised their minds upon these, and have understood their nature, they ascend 
to "the eternal power of God," in a word, to His divinity. For they know that 
God, in His love to men, has "manifested" His truth, and "that which is known of 
Him," not only to those who devote themselves to His service, but also to some 
who are far removed from the purity of worship and service which He requires; 
and that some of those who by the providence of God had attained a knowledge of 
them truths, were yet doing things unworthy of, that knowledge, and "holding the 
truth in unrighteousness," and who are unable to find any excuse before God 
after the knowledge of such great truths which He has given them. 
CHAP. XLVII. 
For Scripture testifies, in regard to those who have a knowledge of those 
things of which Celsus speaks, and who profess a philosophy founded on these 
principles, that they, "when they knew God, glorified Him not as God, neither 
were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations;" and notwithstanding the 
bright light of knowledge with which God had enlightened them, "their foolish 
heart" was carried away, and became "darkened." Thus we may see how those who 
accounted themselves wise gave proofs of great folly, when, alter such grand 
arguments delivered in the schools on God and on things apprehended by the 
reason, they "changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like 
to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things." 
As, then, they lived in a way unworthy of the knowledge which they had received 
from God, His providence leaving them to themselves, they were given "up to 
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts to dishonour their own 
bodies," in shamelessness and licentiousness, because they "changed the truth of 
God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator." 
CHAP. XLVIII. 
But those who are despised for their ignorance, and set down as fools and 
abject slaves, no sooner commit themselves to God's guidance by accepting the 
teaching of Jesus, than, so far from defiling themselves by licentious 
indulgence or the gratification of shameless passion, they in many cases, like 
perfect priests, for whom such pleasures have no charm, keep themselves in act 
and in thought in a state of virgin purity. The Athenians have one hierophant, 
who, not having confidence in his power to restrain his passions within the 
limits he, prescribed for himself, determined to check them at their seat by the 
application of hemlock; and thus he was accounted pure, and fit for the 
celebration of religious worship among the Athenians. But among Christians may 
be found men who have no need of hemlock to fit them for the pure service of 
God, and for whom the Word in place of hemlock is able to drive all evil desires 
from their thoughts, so that they may present their prayers to the Divine Being. 
And attached to the other so-called gods are a select number of virgins, who are 
guarded by men, or it may be not guarded (for that is not the point in question 
at present), and who are supposed to live in purity for the honour of the god 
they serve. But among Christians, those who maintain a perpetual virginity do so 
for no human honours, for no fee or reward, from no motive of vainglory; but "as 
they choose to retain God in their knowledge," they are preserved by God in a 
spirit well-pleasing to Him, and in the discharge of every duty, being filled 
with all righteousness and goodness. 
CHAP. XLIX. 
What I have now said, then, is offered not for the purpose of cavilling with 
any right opinions or sound doctrines held even by Greeks, but with the desire 
of showing that the same things, and indeed much better and diviner things than 
these, have been said by those divine men, the prophets of God and the apostles 
of Jesus. These truths are fully investigated by all who wish to attain a 
perfect knowledge of Christianity, and who know that "the mouth of the righteous 
speaketh wisdom, and his tongue talketh of judgment; the law of his God is in 
his heart." But even in regard to those who, either from deficiency or knowledge 
or want of inclination, or from not having Jesus to lead them to a rational view 
of religion, have not gone into these deep questions, we find that they believe 
in the Most High God, and in His Only-begotten Son, the Word and God, and that 
they often exhibit in their character a high degree of gravity, of purity, and 
integrity; while those who call themselves wise have despised these virtues, and 
have wallowed in the filth of sodomy, in lawless lust, "men with men working 
that which is unseemly." 
CHAP. L. 
Celsus has not explained how error accompanies the "becoming," or product of 
generation; nor has he expressed himself with sufficient clearness to enable us 
to compare his ideas with ours, and to pass judgment on them. But the prophets, 
who have given some wise suggestions on the subject of things produced by 
generation, tell us that a sacrifice for sin was offered even for new-born 
infants, as not being free from sin. They say, "I was shapen in iniquity, and in 
sin did my mother conceive me;" also, "They are estranged from the womb;" which 
is followed by the singular expression, "They go astray as soon as they are 
born, speaking lies." Besides, our wise men have such a contempt for all 
sensible objects, that sometimes they speak of all material things as vanity: 
thus, "For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason 
of him that subjected the same in hope;" at other times as vanity of vanities, 
"Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, all is vanity." Who has given so severe 
an estimate of the life of the human soul here on earth, as he who says: "Verily 
every man at his best estate is altogether vanity?" He does not hesitate at all 
as to the difference between the present life of the soul and that which it is 
to lead hereafter. He does not say, "Who knows if to die is not to live, and if 
to live is not death" But he boldly proclaims the truth, and says, "Our soul is 
bowed down to the dust;" and, "Thou hast brought me into the dust of death;" and 
similarly, "Who will deliver me from the body of this death?" also, "Who will 
change the body of our humiliation." It is a prophet also who says, "Thou hast 
brought us down in a place of affliction;" meaning by the "place of affliction" 
this earthly region, to which Adam, that is to say, man, came after he was 
driven out of paradise for sin. Observe also how well the different life of the 
soul here and hereafter has been recognised by him who says, "Now we see in a 
glass, obscurely, but then face to face;" and, "Whilst we are in our home in the 
body, we are away from our home in the Lord;" wherefore "we are well content to 
go from our home in the body, and to come to our home with the Lord." 
CHAP. LI. 
But what need is there to quote any more passages against Celsus, in order to 
prove that his words contain nothing which was not said long before among 
themselves, since that has been sufficiently established by what we have said? 
It seems that what follows has some reference to this: "If you think that a 
Divine Spirit has descended from God to announce divine things to men, it is 
doubtless this same Spirit that reveals these truths; and it was under the same 
influence that men of old made known many important truths." But he does not 
know how great is the difference between those things and the clear and certain 
teaching of those who say to us, "Thine incorruptible spirit is in all things, 
wherefore God chasteneth them by little and little that offend;" and of those 
who, among their other instructions, teach us that words, "Receive ye the Holy 
Ghost," refer to a degree of spiritual influence higher than that in the 
passage, "Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." But it 
is a difficult matter, even after much careful consideration, to perceive the 
difference between those who have received a knowledge of the truth and a notion 
of God at different intervals and for short periods of time, and those who are 
more fully inspired by God, who have constant communion with Him, and are always 
led by His Spirit. Had Celsus set himself to understand this, he would not have 
reproached as with ignorance, or forbidden us to characterize as "blind" those 
who believe that religion shows itself in such products of man's mechanical art 
as images. For every one who sees with eyes of his soul serves the Divine Being 
in no other way than in that which leads him ever to have regard to the Creator 
of all, to address his prayers to Him alone, and to do all things as in the 
sight of God, who sees us altogether, even to our thoughts. Our earnest desire 
then is both to see for ourselves, and to be leaders of the blind, to bring them 
to the Word of God, that He may take away from their minds the blindness of 
ignorance. And if our actions are worthy of Him who taught His disciples, "Ye 
are the light of the world," and of the Word, who says, "The light shineth in 
darkness," then we shall be light to those who are in darkness we shall give 
wisdom to those who are without it, and we shall instruct the ignorant. 
CHAP. LII. 
And let not Celsus be angry if we describe as Fame and mutilated in soul 
those who run to the temples as to places having a real sacredness and who 
cannot see that no mere mechanical work of man can be truly sacred. Those whose 
piety is grounded on the teaching of Jesus also run until they come to the end 
of their course, when they can say in all truth and confidence: "I have fought a 
good fight, I have finished my course I have kept the faith; henceforth there is 
laid up for me a crown of righteousness." And each of us runs "not as 
uncertain," and he so fights with evil "not as one beating the air," but as 
against those who are subject to "the prince of the power of the air, the spirit 
that now worketh in the children of disobedience." Celsus may indeed say of us 
that we "live with the body which is a dead thing;" but we have learnt, "If ye 
live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye by the Spirit do mortify the deeds 
of the body, ye shall live;" and, "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in 
the Spirit." Would that we might convince him by our actions that he did us 
wrong, when he said that we "live with the body which is dead!" 
CHAP. LIII. 
After these remarks of Celsus, which we have done our best to refute, he goes 
on to address us thus: "Seeing you are so eager for some novelty, how much 
better it would have been if you had chosen as the object of your zealous homage 
some one of those who died a glorious death, and whose divinity might have 
received the support of some myth to perpetuate his memory! Why, if you were not 
satisfied with Hercules or Aesculapius, and other heroes of antiquity, you had 
Orpheus, who was confessedly a divinely inspired man, who died a violent death. 
But perhaps some others have taken him up before you. You may then take 
Anaxarchus, who, when cast into a mortar, and beaten most barbarously, showed a 
noble contempt for his suffering, and said, 'Beat, beat the shell of Anaxarchus, 
for himself you do not beat,'--a speech surely of a spirit truly divine. But 
others were before you in following his interpretation of the laws of nature. 
Might you not, then, take Epictetus, who, when his master was twisting his leg, 
said, smiling and. unmoved, 'You will break my leg;' and when it was broken, he 
added, Did I not tell you that you would break it?' What saying equal to these 
did your god' utter under suffering? If you had said even of the Sibyl, whose 
authority some of you acknowledge, that she was a child of God, you would have 
said something more reasonable. But you have had the presumption to include in 
her writings many impious things, and set up as a god one who ended a most 
infamous life by a most miserable death. How much more suitable than he would 
have been Jonah in the whale's belly, or Daniel delivered from the wild beasts, 
or any of a still more portentous kind!" 
CHAP. LIV. 
But since he sends us to Hercules, let him repeat to us any of his sayings, 
and let him justify his shameful subjection to Omphale. Let him show that divine 
honours should be paid to one who, like a highway robber, carries off a farmer's 
ox by force, and afterwards devours it, amusing himself meanwhile with the 
curses of the owner; in memory of which even to this day sacrifices offered to 
the demon of Hercules are accompanied with curses. Again he proposes Aesculapius 
to us, as if to oblige us to repeat what we have said already; but we forbear. 
In regard to Orpheus, what does he admire in him to make him assert that, by 
common consent, he was regarded as a divinely inspired man, and lived a noble 
life? I am greatly deceived if it is not the desire which Celsus has to oppose 
us and put down Jesus that leads him to sound forth the praises of Orpheus; and 
whether, when he made himself acquainted with his impious fables about the gods, 
he did not cast them aside as deserving, even more than the poems of Homer, to 
be excluded from a well-ordered state. For, indeed, Orpheus says much Worse 
things than Homer of those whom they call gods. Noble, indeed, it was in 
Anaxarchus to say to Aristocreon, tyrant of Cyprus, "Beat on, beat the shell of 
Anaxarchus," but it is the one admirable incident in the life of Anaxarchus 
known to the Greeks; and although, on the strength of that, some like Celsus 
might deservedly honour the man for his courage, yet to look up to Anaxarchus as 
a god is not consistent with reason. He also directs us to Epictetus, whose 
firmness is justly admired, although his saying when his leg was broken by his 
master is not to be compared with the marvellous acts and words of Jesus which 
Celsus refuses to believe; and these words were accompanied by such a divine 
power, that even to this day they convert not only some of the more ignorant and 
simple, but many also of the most enlightened of men. 
CHAP. LV. 
When, to his enumeration of those to whom he would send us, he adds, "What 
saying equal to these did your god utter under sufferings?" we would reply, that 
the silence of Jesus under scourgings, and amidst all His sufferings, spoke more 
for His firmness and submission than all that was said by the Greeks when beset 
by calamity. Perhaps Celsus may believe what was recorded with all sincerity by 
trustworthy men, who, while giving a truthful account of all the wonders 
performed by Jesus, specify among these the silence which He preserved when 
subjected to scourgings; showing the same singular meekness Under the insults 
which were heaped upon Him, when they put upon Him the purple robe, and set the 
crown of thorns upon His head, and when they put in His hand a reed in place of 
a sceptre: no unworthy or angry word escaped Him against those who subjected Him 
to such outrages. Since, then, He received the scourgings with silent firmness, 
and bore with meekness all the insults of those who outraged Him, it cannot be 
said, as is said by some, that it was in cowardly weakness that He uttered the 
words: "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me: nevertheless, not 
as I will, but as Thou wilt." The prayer which seems to be contained in these 
words for the removal of what He calls "the cup" bears a sense which we have 
elsewhere examined and set forth at large. But taking it in its more obvious 
sense, consider if it be not a prayer offered to God with all piety. For no man 
naturally regards anything which may befall him as necessary and inevitable; 
though he may submit to what is not inevitable, if occasion requires. Besides, 
these words, "nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt," are not the 
language of one who yielded to necessity, but of one who was contented with what 
was befalling Him, and who submitted with reverence to the arrangements of 
Providence. 
CHAP. LVI. 
Celsus then adds, for what reason I know not, that instead of calling Jesus 
the Son of God, we had better have given that honour to the Sibyl, in whose 
books he maintains we have interpolated many impious statements, though he does 
not mention what those interpolations are. He might have proved his assertion by 
producing some older copies which are free from the interpolations which he 
attributes to us; but he does not do so even to justify his statement that these 
passages are of an impious character. Moreover, he again speaks of the life of 
Jesus as "a most infamous life," as he has done before, not once or twice, but 
many times, although he does not stay to specify any of the actions of His life 
which he thinks most infamous. He seems to think that he may in this way make 
assertions without proving them, and rail against one of whom he knows nothing. 
Had he set himself to show what sort of infamy he found in the actions of Jesus, 
we should have repelled the several charges brought against Him. Jesus did 
indeed meet with a most sad death; but the same might be said of Socrates, and 
of Anaxarchus, whom he had just mentioned, and a multitude of others. If the 
death of Jesus was a miserable one, was not that of the others so too? And if 
their death was not miserable, can it be said that the death of Jesus was? You 
see from this, then, that the object of Celsus is to vilify the character of 
Jesus; and I can only suppose that he is driven to it by some spirit akin to 
those whose power has been broken and vanquished by Jesus, and which now finds 
itself deprived of the smoke and blood on which it lived, whilst deceiving those 
who sought for God here upon earth in images, instead of looking up to the true 
God, the Governor of all things. 
CHAP. LVII. 
After this, as though his object was to swell the size of his book, he 
advises us "to choose Jonah rather than Jesus as our God;" thus setting Jonah, 
who preached repentance to the single city of Nineveh, before Jesus, who has 
preached repentance to the whole world, and with much greater results. He would 
have us to regard as God a man who, by a strange miracle, passed three days and 
three nights in the whale's belly; and he is unwilling that He who submitted to 
death for the sake of men, He to whom God bore testimony through the prophets, 
and who has done great things in heaven and earth, should receive on that ground 
honour second only to that which is given to the Most High God. Moreover, Jonah 
was swallowed by the whale for refusing to preach as God had commanded him; 
while Jesus suffered death for men after He had given the instructions which God 
wished Him to give. Still further, he adds that Daniel rescued from the lions is 
more worthy of our adoration than Jesus, who subdued the fierceness of every 
opposing power, and gave to us "authority to tread on serpents and scorpions, 
and over all the power of the enemy." 
Finally, having no other names to offer us, he adds, "and others of a still 
more monstrous kind," thus casting a slight upon both Jonah and Daniel, for the 
spirit which is in Celsus cannot speak well of the righteous. 
CHAP. LVIII. 
Let us now consider what follows. "They have also," says he, "a precept to 
this effect, that we ought not to avenge ourselves on one who injures us, or, as 
he expresses it, 'Whosoever shall strike thee on the one cheek, turn to him the 
other also.' This is an ancient saying, which had been admirably expressed long 
before, and which they have only reported in a coarser way. For Plato introduces 
Socrates conversing with Crito as follows: 'Must we never do injustice to any?' 
'Certainly not.' 'And since we must never do injustice, must we not return 
injustice for an injustice that has been done to us, as most people think?' 'It 
seems to me that we should not.' 'But tell me, Crito, may we do evil to any one 
or not?' 'Certainly not, O Socrates.' 'Well, is it just, as is commonly said, 
for one who has suffered wrong to do wrong in return, or is it unjust?' 'It is 
unjust. Yes; for to do harm to a man is the same as to do him injustice.' 'You 
speak truly. We must then not do injustice in return for injustice, nor must we 
do evil to any one, whatever evil we may have suffered from him.' Thus Plato 
speaks; and he adds, 'Consider, then, whether you are at one with me, and 
whether, starting from this principle, we may not come to the conclusion.that it 
is never right to do injustice, even in return for an injustice which has been 
received; or whether, on the other hand, you differ from me, and do not admit 
the principle from which we started. That has always been my opinion, and is so 
still.' Such are the sentiments of Plato, and indeed they were held by divine 
men before his time. 
But let this suffice as one example of the way in which this and other truths 
have been borrowed and corrupted. Any one who wishes can easily by searching 
find more of them." 
CHAP. LIX. 
When Celsus here or elsewhere finds himself unable to dispute the truth of 
what we say, but avers that the same things were said by the Greeks, our answer 
is, that if the doctrine be sound, and the effect of it good, whether it was, 
made known to the Greeks by Plato or any of the wise men of Greece, or whether 
it was delivered to the Jews by Moses or any of the prophets, or whether it was 
given to the Christians in the recorded teaching of Jesus Christ, or in the 
instructions of His apostles, that does not affect the value of the truth 
communicated. It is no objection to the principles of Jews or Christians, that 
the same things were also said by the Greeks, especially if it be proved that 
the writings of the Jews are older than those of the Greeks. And further, we are 
not to imagine that a truth adorned with the graces of Grecian speech is 
necessarily better than the same when expressed in the more humble and 
unpretending language used by Jews and Christians, although indeed the language 
of the Jews, in which the prophets wrote the books which have come down to us, 
has a grace of expression peculiar tO the genius of the Hebrew tongue. And even 
if we were required to show that the same doctrines have been better expressed 
among the Jewish prophets or in Christian writings, however paradoxical it may 
seem, we are prepared to prove this by an illustration taken from different 
kinds of food, and from the different modes of preparing them. Suppose that a 
kind of food which is wholesome and nutritious has been prepared and seasoned in 
such a way as to be fit, not for the simple tastes of peasants and poor 
labourers, but for those only who are rich and dainty in their tastes. Suppose, 
again, that that same food is prepared not to suit the tastes of the more 
delicate, but for the peasants, the poor labourers, and the common people 
generally, in short, so that myriads of persons might eat of it. Now if, 
according to the supposition, the food prepared in the one way promotes the 
health of those only who are styled the better classes, while none of the others 
could taste it, whereas when prepared in the other way it promoted the health of 
great multitudes of men, which shall we esteem as most contributing to the 
public welfare,--those who prepare food for persons of mark, or those who 
prepare it for the multitudes?--taking for granted that in both cases the food 
is equally wholesome and nourishing; while it is evident that the welfare of 
mankind and the common good are promoted better by that physician who attends to 
the health of the many, than by one who confines his attention to a few. 
CHAP. LX. 
Now, after understanding this illustration, we have to apply it to the 
qualities of spiritual food with which the rational part of man is nourished. 
See, then, if Plato and the wise men among the Greeks, in the beautiful 
things they say, are not like those physicians who confine their attentions to 
what are called the better classes of society, and despise the multitude; 
whereas the prophets among the Jews, and the disciples of Jesus, who despise 
mere elegances of style, and what is called in Scripture "the wisdom of men," 
"the wisdom according to the flesh," which delights in what is obscure, resemble 
those who study to provide the most wholesome food for the largest number of 
persons. For this purpose they adapt their language and style to the capacities 
of the common people, and avoid whatever would seem foreign to them, lest by the 
introduction of strange forms of expression they should produce a distaste for 
their teaching. Indeed, if the true use of spiritual food, to keep up the 
figure, is to produce in him who partakes of it the virtues of patience and 
gentleness, must that discourse not be better prepared when it produces patience 
and gentleness in multitudes, or makes them grow in these virtues, than that 
which confines its effects to a select few, supposing that it does really make 
them gentle and patient? If a Greek wished by wholesome instruction to benefit 
people who understood only Egyptian or Syriac, the first thing that he would do 
would be to learn their language; and he would rather pass for a Barbarian among 
the Greeks, by speaking as the Egyptians or Syrians, in order to be useful to 
them, than always remain Greek, and be without the means of helping them. In the 
same way the divine nature, having the purpose of instructing not only those who 
are reputed to be learned in the literature of Greece, but also the rest of 
mankind, accommodated itself to the capacities of the simple multitudes whom it 
addressed. It seeks to win the attention of the more ignorant by the use of 
language which is familiar to them, so that they may easily be induced, after 
their first introduction, to strive after an acquaintance with the deeper truths 
which lie hidden in Scripture. For even the ordinary reader of Scripture may see 
that it contains many things which are too deep to be apprehended at first; but 
these are understood by such as devote themselves to a careful study of the 
divine word, and they become plain to them in proportion to the pains and zeal 
which they expend upon its investigation. 
CHAP. LXI. 
From these remarks it is evident, that when Jesus said "coarsely," as Celsus 
terms it, "To him who shall strike thee on the one cheek, turn the other also; 
and if any man be minded to sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him 
have thy cloak also," He expressed Himself in such a way as to make the precept 
have more practical effect than the words of Plato in the Crito; for the latter 
is so far from being intelligible to ordinary persons, that even those have a 
difficulty in understanding him, who have been brought up in the schools of 
learning, and have been initiated into the famous philosophy of Greece. It may 
also be observed, that the precept enjoining patience under injuries is in no 
way corrupted or degraded by the plain and simple language which our Lord 
employs, but that in this, as in other cases, it is a mere calumny against our 
religion which he utters when he says: "But let this suffice as one example of 
the way in which this and other truths have been borrowed and corrupted. Any one 
who wishes can easily by searching find more of them." 
CHAP. LXII. 
Let us now see what follows. "Let us pass on," says he, "to another point. 
They cannot tolerate temples, altars, or images. In this they are like the 
Scythians, the nomadic tribes of Libya, the Seres who worship no god, and some 
other of the most barbarous and impious nations in the world. That the Persians 
hold the same notions is shown by Herodotus in these words: 'I know that among 
the Persians it is considered unlawful to erect images, altars, or temples; but 
they charge those with folly who do so, because, as I conjecture, they do not, 
like the Greeks, suppose the gods to be of the nature of men.' Heraclitus also 
says in one place: 'Persons who address prayers to these images act like those 
who speak to the walls, without knowing who the gods or the heroes are.' And 
what wiser lesson have they to teach us than Heraclitus? He certainly plainly 
enough implies that it is a foolish thing for a man to offer prayers to images, 
whilst he knows not who the gods and heroes are. This is the opinion of 
Heraclitus; but as for them, they go further, and despise without exception all 
images. If they merely mean that the stone, wood, brass, or gold which has been 
wrought by this or that workman cannot be a god, they are ridiculous with their 
wisdom. For who, unless he be utterly childish in his simpliCity, can take these 
for gods, and not for offerings consecrated to the service of the gods, or 
images representing them? But if we are not to regard these as representing the 
Divine Being, seeing that God has a different form, as the Persians concur with 
them in saying, then let them take care that they do not contradict themselves; 
for they say that God made man His own image, and that He gave him a form like 
to Himself. However, they will admit that these images, whether they are like or 
not, are made and dedicated to the honour of certain beings. But they will hold 
that the beings to whom they are dedicated are not gods, but demons, and that a 
worshipper of God ought not to worship demons." 
CHAP. LXIII. 
To this our answer is, that if the Scythians, the nomadic tribes of Libya, 
the Seres, who according to Celsus have no god, if those other most barbarous 
and impious nations in the world, and if the Persians even cannot bear the sight 
of temples, altars, and images, it does not follow because we cannot suffer them 
any more than they, that the grounds on which we object to them are the same as 
theirs. We must inquire into the principles on which the objection to temples 
and images is rounded, in order that we may approve of those who object on sound 
principles, and condemn those whose principles are false. For one and the same 
thing may be done for different reasons. For example, the philosophers who 
follow Zeno of Citium abstain from committing adultery, the followers of 
Epicurus do so too, as well as others again who do so on no philosophical 
principles; but observe what different reasons determine the conduct of these 
different classes. The first consider the interests of society, and hold it to 
be forbidden by nature that a man who is a reasonable being should corrupt a 
woman whom the laws have already given to another, and should thus break up the 
household of another man. The Epicureans do not reason in this way; but if they 
abstain from adultery, it is because, regarding pleasure as the chief end of 
man, they perceive that one who gives himself up to, adultery, encounters for 
the sake of this one pleasure a multitude of obstacles to pleasure, such as 
imprisonment, exile, and death itself. They often, indeed, run considerable risk 
at the outset, while watching for the departure from the house of the master and 
those in his interest. So that, supposing it possible for a man to commit 
adultery, and escape the knowledge of the husband, of his servants, and of 
others whose esteem he would forfeit, then the Epicurean would yield to the 
commission of the crime for the sake of pleasure. The man of no philosophical 
system, again, who abstains from adultery when the opportunity comes to him, 
does so generally from dread of the law and its penalties, and not for the sake 
of enjoying a greater number of other pleasures. You see, then, that an act 
which passes for being one and the same--namely, abstinence from adultery--is 
not the same, but differs in different men according to the motives which 
actuate it: one man refraining for sound reasons, another for such bad and 
impious ones as those of the Epicurean, and the common person of whom we have 
spoken. 
CHAP. LXIV. 
As, then, this act of self-restraint, which in appearance is one and the 
same, is found in fact to be different in different persons, according to the 
principles and motives which lead to it; so in the same way with those who 
cannot allow in the worship of the Divine Being altars, or temples, or images. 
The Scythians, the Nomadic Libyans, the godless Seres, and the Persians, agree 
in this with the Christians and Jews, but they are actuated by very different 
principles. For none of these former abhor altars and images on the ground that 
they arc afraid of degrading the worship of God, and reducing it to the worship 
of material things wrought by the hands of men. Neither do they object to them 
from a belief that the demons choose certain forms and places, whether because 
they are detained there by virtue of certain charms, or because for some other 
possible reason they have selected these haunts, where they may pursue their 
criminal pleasures, in partaking of the smoke of sacrificial victims. But 
Christians and Jews have regard to this command, "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy 
God, and serve Him alone;" and this other, "Thou shalt have no other gods before 
Me: thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything 
that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the 
water under the earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them;" 
and again, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve." 
It is in consideration of these and many other such commands, that they not only 
avoid temples, altars, and images, but are ready to suffer death when it is 
necessary, rather than debase by any such impiety the conception which they have 
of the Most High God. 
CHAP. LXV. 
In regard to the Persians, we have already said that though they do not build 
temples, yet they worship the sun and the other works of God. This is forbidden 
to us, for we have been taught not to worship the creature instead of the 
Creator, but to know that "the creation shall be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God;" and "the 
earnest expectation of the creation is waiting for the revelation of the sons of 
God;" and "the creation was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by; 
reason of him who made it subject:, in hope." We believe, therefore, that things 
"under the bondage of corruption," and "subject to vanity," which remain in this 
condition "in hope" of a better state, ought not in our worship to hold the 
place of God, the all-sufficient, and of His Son, the First-born of all 
creation. Let this suffice, in addition to what we have already said of the 
Persians, who abhor altars and images, but who serve the creature instead of the 
Creator. As to the passage quoted by Celsus from Heraclitus, the purport of 
which he represents as being, "that it is childish folly for one to offer 
prayers to images, whilst he knows not who the gods and heroes are," we may 
reply that it is easy to know that God and the Only-begotten Son of God, and 
those whom God has honoured with the title of God, and who partake of His divine 
nature, are very different from all the gods of the nations which are demons; 
but it is not possible at the same time to know God and to address prayers to 
images. 
CHAP. LXVI. 
And the charge of folly applies not only to those who offer prayers to 
images, but also to such as pretend to do so in compliance with the example of 
the multitude: and to this class belong the Peripatetic philosophers and the 
followers of Epicurus and Democritus. For there is no falsehood or pretence in 
the soul which is possessed with true piety towards God. Another reason also why 
we abstain from doing honour to images, is that we may give no support to the 
notion that the images are gods. It is on this ground that we condemn Celsus, 
and all others who, while admitting that they are not gods, yet, with the 
reputation of being wise men, render to them what passes for homage. In this way 
they lead into sin the multitude who follow their example, and who worship these 
images not simply out of deference to custom, but from a belief into which they 
have fallen that they are true gods, and that those are not to be listened to 
who hold that the objects of their worship are not true gods. Celsus, indeed, 
says that "they do not take them for gods, but only as offerings dedicated to 
the gods." But he does not prove that they are not rather dedicated to men than, 
as he says, to the honour of the gods themselves; for it is clear that they are 
the offerings of men who were in error in their views of the Divine Being. 
Moreover, we do not imagine that these images are representations of God, for 
they cannot represent a being who is invisible and incorporeal. But as Celsus 
supposes that we fall into a contradiction, whilst on the one hand we say that 
God has not a human form, and on the other we profess to believe that God made 
man the image of Himself, and created man the image of God; our answer is the 
same as has been given already, that we hold the resemblance to God to be 
preserved in the reasonable soul, which is formed to virtue, although Celsus, 
who does not see the difference between "being the image of God," and "being 
created after the image of God," pretends that we said, "God made man His own 
image, and gave him a form like to His own." But this also has been examined 
before. 
CHAP. LXVII. 
His next remark upon the Christians is: "They will admit that these images, 
whether they are like or not, are made and dedicated to the honour of certain 
beings; but they will hold that the beings to whom they are dedicated are not 
gods, but demons, and that a worshipper of God ought not to worship demons." If 
he had been acquainted with the nature of demons, and with their several 
operations, whether led on to them by the conjurations of those who are skilled 
in the art, or urged on by their own inclination to act according to their power 
and inclination; if, I say, he had thoroughly understood this subject, which is 
both wide in extent and difficult for human comprehension, he would not have 
condemned us for saying that those who worship the Supreme Being should not 
serve demons. For ourselves, so far are we from wishing to serve demons, that by 
the use of prayers and other means which we learn from Scripture, we drive them 
out of the souls of men, out of places where they have established themselves, 
and even sometimes from the bodies of animals; for even these creatures often 
suffer from injuries inflicted upon them by demons. 
CHAP. LXVIII. 
After all that we have already said concerning Jesus, it would be a useless 
repetition for us to answer these words of Celsus: "It is easy to convict them 
of worshipping not a god, not even demons, but a dead person." Leaving, then, 
this objection for the reason assigned, let us pass on to what follows: "In the 
first place, I would ask why we are not to serve demons? Is it not true that all 
things are ordered according to God's will, and that His providence governs all 
things? Is not everything which happens in the universe, whether it be the work 
of God, of angels, of other demons, or of heroes, regulated by the law of the 
Most High God? Have these not had assigned them various departments of which 
they were severally deemed worthy? it not just, therefore, that he who worships 
God should serve those also to whom God has assigned such power? Yet it is 
impossible, he says, for a man to serve many masters." Observe here again how he 
settles at once a number of questions which require considerable research, and a 
profound acquaintance with what is most mysterious in the government of the 
universe. For we must inquire into the meaning of the statement, that "all 
things are ordered according to God's will," and ascertain whether sins are or 
are not included among the things which God orders. For if God's government 
extends to sins not only in men, but also in demons and in any other spiritual 
beings who are capable of sin, it is for those who speak in this manner to see 
how inconvenient is the expression that "all things are ordered by the will of 
God." For it follows from it that all sins and all their consequences are 
ordered by the will of God, which is a different thing from saying that they 
come to pass with God's permission. For if we take the word "ordered" in its 
proper signification, and say that "all the results of sin were ordered," then 
it is evident that all things are ordered according to God's will, and that all, 
therefore, who do evil do not offend against His government. And the same 
distinction holds in regard to "providence." When we say that "the providence of 
God regulates all things," we utter a great truth if we attribute to that 
providence nothing but what is just and right. But if we ascribe to the 
providence of God all things whatsoever, however unjust they rusty be, then it 
is no longer true that the providence of God regulates all things, unless we 
refer directly to God's providence things which flow as results from His 
arrangements. Celsus maintains also, that "whatever happens in the universe, 
whether it be the work of God, of angels, of other demons, or of heroes, is 
regulated by the law of the Most High God." But this also is incorrect; for we 
cannot say that transgressors follow the law of God when they transgress; and 
Scripture declares that it is not only wicked men who are transgressors, but 
also wicked demons and wicked angels. 
CHAP. LXIX. 
And it is not we alone who speak of wicked demons, but almost all who 
acknowledge the existence of demons. Thus, then, it is not true that all observe 
the law of the Most High; for all who fall away from the divine law, whether 
through heedlessness, or through depravity and vice, or through ignorance of 
what is right, all such do not keep the law of God, but, to use a new phrase 
which we find in Scripture, "the law of sin. I say, then, that in the opinion of 
most of those who believe in the existence of demons, some of them are wicked; 
and these, instead of keeping the law of God, offend against it. But, according 
to our belief, it is true of all demons, that they were not demons originally, 
but they became so in departing from the true way; so that the name "demons" is 
given to those beings who have fallen away from God. Accordingly, those who 
worship God must not serve demons. We may also learn the true nature of demons 
if we consider the practice of those who call upon them by charms to prevent 
certain things, or for many other purposes. For this is the method they adopt, 
in order by means of incantations and magical arts to invoke the demons, and 
induce them to further their wishes. Wherefore, the worship of all demons would 
be inconsistent in us who worship the Supreme God; and the service of demons is 
the service of so-called gods, for "all the gods of the heathen are demons.'' 
The same thing also appears from the fact that the dedication of the most famous 
of the so-called sacred places, whether temples or statues, was accompanied by 
curious magical incantations, which were performed by those who zealously served 
the demons with magical arts. Hence we are determined to avoid the worship of 
demons even as we would avoid death; and we hold that the worship, which is 
supposed among the Greeks to be rendered to gods at the altars, and images, and 
temples, is in reality offered to demons. 
CHAP. LXX. 
His next remark was, "Have not these inferior powers had assigned to them by 
God different departments, according as each was deemed worthy?" But this is a 
question which requires a very profound knowledge. For we must determine whether 
the Word of God, who governs all things, has appointed wicked demons for certain 
employments, in the same way as in states executioners are appointed, and other 
officers with creel but needful duties to discharge; or whether as among 
robbers, who infest desert places, it is customary for them to choose out of 
their number one who may be their leader,--so the demons, who are scattered as 
it were in troops in different parts of the earth, have chosen for themselves a 
chief under whose command they may plunder and pillage the souls of men. To 
explain this fully, and to justify the conduct of the Christians in refusing 
homage to any object except the Most High God, and the First-born of all 
creation, who is His Word and God, we must quote this from Scripture, "All that 
ever came before Me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them;" 
and again, "The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to 
destroy;"' and other similar passages, as, "Behold, I have given you authority 
to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power. of the enemy: and 
nothing shall by any means hurt you;" and again, "Thou shall tread upon the lion 
and adder: the young lion and the dragon shall thou trample under feet." But of 
these things Celsus knew nothing, or he would not have made use of language like 
this: "Is not everything which happens in the universe, whether it be the work 
of God, of angels, of other demons, or of heroes, regulated by the law of the 
Most High God? Have these not had assigned to them various departments of which 
they were severally deemed worthy? Is it not just, therefore, that he who serves 
God should serve those also to whom God has assigned such power?" To which he 
adds, "It is impossible, they say, for a man to serve many masters." This last 
point we must postpone to the next book; for this, which is the seventh book 
which we have written in answer to the treatise of Celsus, is already of 
sufficient length. 

