
Origen












Origen. Contra Celsus
BOOK IV. 
CHAP. I. 
HAVING, in the three preceding books, fully stated what occurred to us by way 
of answer to the treatise of Celsus, we now, reverend Ambrosius, with prayer to 
God through Christ, offer this fourth book as a reply to what follows. And we 
pray that words may be given us, as it is written in the book of Jeremiah that 
the Lord said to the prophet: "Behold, I have put My words in thy mouth as fire. 
See, I have set thee this day over the nations, and over the kingdoms, to root 
out and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, and to build and to 
plant." For we need words now which will root out of every wounded soul the 
reproaches uttered against the truth by this treatise of Celsus, or which 
proceed from opinions like his. And we need also thoughts which will pull down 
all edifices based on false opinions, and especially the edifice raised by 
Celsus in his work which resembles the building of those who said "Come, let us 
build us a city, and a tower whose top shall reach to heaven." Yea, we even 
require a wisdom which will throw down all high things that rise against the 
knowledge of God, and especially that height of arrogance which Celsus displays 
against us. And in the next place, as we must not stop with rooting out and 
pulling down the hindrances which have just been mentioned, but must, in room of 
what has been rooted out, plant the plants of "God's husbandry;" mad in place of 
what has been pulled down, rear up the building of God, and the temple of His 
glory,--we must for that reason pray also to the Lord, who bestowed the gifts 
named in the book of Jeremiah, that He may grant even to us words adapted both 
for building up the (temple) of Christ, and for planting the spiritual law, and 
the prophetic words referring to the same. And above all is it necessary to 
show, as against the assertions of Celsus which follow those he has already 
made, that the prophecies regarding Christ are true predictions. For, arraying 
himself at the same time against both parties--against the Jews on the one hand, 
who deny that the advent of Christ has taken place, but who expect it as future, 
and against Christians on the other, who acknowledge that Jesus is the Christ 
spoken of in prophecy--he makes the following statement:- CHAP. II. 
"But that certain Christians and (all) Jews should maintain, the former that 
there has already descended, the latter that there will descend, upon the earth 
a certain God, or Son of a God, who will make the inhabitants of the earth 
righteous, is a most shameless assertion, and one the refutation of which does 
not need many words." Now here he appears to pronounce correctly regarding not 
"certain" of the Jews, but all of them, that they imagine that there is a 
certain (God) who will descend upon the earth; and with regard to Christians, 
that certain of them say that He has already come down. For he means those who 
prove from the Jewish Scriptures that the advent of Christ has already taken 
place, and he seems to know that there are certain heretical sects which deny 
that Christ Jesus was predicted by the prophets. In the preceding pages, 
however, we have already discussed, to the best of our ability, the question of 
Christ having been the subject of prophecy, and therefore, to avoid tautology, 
we do not repeat much that might be advanced upon this head. Observe, now, that 
if he had wished with a kind of apparent force to subvert faith in the prophetic 
writings, either with regard to the future or past advent of Christ, he ought to 
have set forth the prophecies themselves which we Christians and Jews quote in 
our discussions with each other. For in this way he would have appeared to turn 
aside those who are carried away by the plausible character of the prophetic 
statements, as he regards it, from assenting to their truth, and from believing, 
on account of these prophecies, that Jesus is the Christ; whereas now, being 
unable to answer the prophecies relating to Christ, or else not knowing at all 
what are the prophecies relating to Him, he brings forward no prophetic 
declaration, although there are countless numbers which refer to Christ; but he 
thinks that he prefers an accusation against the prophetic Scriptures, while he 
does not even state what he himself would call their "plausible character!" He 
is not, however, aware that it is not at all the Jews who say that Christ will 
descend as a God, or the Son of a God, as we have shown in the foregoing pages. 
And when he asserts that "he is said by us to have already come, but by the Jews 
that his advent as Messiah is still future," he appears by the very charge to 
censure our statement as one that is most shameless, and which needs no 
lengthened refutation. 
CHAP. III. 
And he continues: "What is the meaning of such a descent upon the part of 
God?" not observing that, according to our teaching, the meaning of the descent 
is pre-eminently to convert what are called in the Gospel the lost "sheep of the 
house of Israel;" and secondly, to take away from them, on account of their 
disobedience, what is called the "kingdom of God," and to give to other 
husbandmen than the ancient Jews, viz. to the Christians, who will render to God 
the fruits of His kingdom in due season (each action being a "fruit of the 
kingdom"). We shall therefore, out of a greater number, select a few remarks by 
way of answer to the question of Celsus, when he says, "What is the meaning of 
such a descent upon the part of God?" And Celsus here returns to himself an 
answer which would have been given neither by Jews nor by us, when he asks, "Was 
it in order to learn what goes on amongst men?" For not one of us asserts that 
it was in order to learn what goes on amongst men that Christ entered into this 
life. Immediately after, however, as if some would reply that it was "in order 
to learn what goes on among men," he makes this objection to his own statement: 
"Does he not know all things?" Then, as if we were to answer that He does know 
all things, he raises a new question, saying, "Then he does know, but does not 
make (men) better, nor is it possible for him by means of his divine power to 
make (men) better." Now all this on his part is silly talk; for God, by means of 
His word, which is continually passing from generation to generation into holy 
souls, and constituting them friends of God and prophets, does improve those who 
listen to His words; and by the coming of Christ He improves, through the 
doctrine of Christianity, not those who are unwilling, but those who have chosen 
the better life, and that which is pleasing to God. I do not know, moreover, 
what kind of improvement Celsus wished to take place when he raised the 
objection, asking, "Is it then not possible for him, by means of his divine 
power, to make (men) better, unless he send some one for that special purpose?" 
Would he then have the improvement to take place by God's filling the minds 
of men with new ideas, removing at once the (inherent) wickedness, and 
implanting virtue (in its stead)? Another person now would inquire whether this 
was not inconsistent or impossible in the very nature of things; we, however, 
would say, "Grant it to be so, and let it be possible." Where, then, is our free 
will? and what credit is there in assenting to the truth? or how is the 
rejection of what is false praiseworthy? But even if it were once granted that 
such a course was not only possible, but could be accomplished with propriety 
(by God), why would not one rather inquire (asking a question like that of 
Celsus) why it was not possible for God, by means of His divine power, to create 
men who needed no improvement, but who were of themselves virtuous and perfect, 
evil being altogether non-existent? These questions may perplex ignorant and 
foolish individuals, but not him who sees into the nature of things; for if you 
take away the spontaneity of virtue, you destroy its essence. But it would need 
an entire treatise to discuss these matters; and on this subject the Greeks have 
expressed themselves at great length in their works on providence. They truly 
would not say what Celsus has expressed in words, that "God knows (all things) 
indeed, but does not make (men) better, nor is able to do so by His divine 
power." We ourselves have spoken in many parts of our writings on these points 
to the best of our ability, and the Holy Scriptures have established the same to 
those who are able to understand them. 
CHAP. IV. 
The argument which Celsus employs against us and the Jews will be turned 
against himself thus: My good sir, does the God who is over all things know what 
takes place among men, or does He not know? Now if you admit the existence of a 
God and of providence, as your treatise indicates, He must of necessity know. 
And if He does know, why does He not make (men) better? Is it obligatory, then, 
on us to defend God's procedure in not making men better, although He knows 
their state, but not equally binding on you, who do not distinctly show by your 
treatise that you are an Epicurean, but pretend to recognise a providence, to 
explain why God, although knowing all that takes place among men, does not make 
them better, nor by divine power liberate all men from evil? We are not ashamed, 
however, to say that God is constantly sending (instructors) in order to make 
men better; for there are to be found amongst men reasons given by God which 
exhort them to enter on a better life. But there are many diversities amongst 
those who serve God, and they are few in number who are perfect and pure 
ambassadors of the truth, and who produce a complete reformation, as did Moses 
and the prophets. But above all these, great was the reformation effected by 
Jesus, who desired to heal not only those who lived in one corner of the world, 
but as far as in Him lay, men in every country, for He came as the Saviour of 
all men. 
CHAP. V. 
The illustrious Celsus, taking occasion I know not from what, next raises an 
additional objection against us, as if we asserted that "God Himself will come 
down to men." He imagines also that it follows from this, that "He has left His 
own abode;" for he does not know the power of God, and that "the Spirit of the 
Lord filleth the world, and that which upholdeth all things hath knowledge of 
the voice." Nor is he able to understand the words, "Do I not fill heaven and 
earth? saith the LORD." Nor does he see that, according to the doctrine of 
Christianity, we all "in Him live, and move, and have our being," as Paul also 
taught in his address to the Athenians; and therefore, although the God of the 
universe should through His own power descend with Jesus into the life of men, 
and although the Word which was in the beginning with God, which is also God 
Himself, should come to us, He does not give His place or vacate His own seat, 
so that one place should be empty of Him, and another which did not formerly 
contain Him be filled. But the power and divinity of God comes through him whom 
God chooses, and resides in him in whom it finds a place, not changing its 
situation, nor leaving its own place empty and filling another: for, in speaking 
of His quitting one place and occupying another, we do not mean such expressions 
to be taken logically; but we say that the soul of the bad man, and of him who 
is overwhelmed in wickedness, is abandoned by God, while we mean that the soul 
of him who wishes to live virtuously, or of him who is making progress (in a 
virtuous life), or who is already living conform-ably thereto, is filled with or 
becomes a partaker of the Divine Spirit. It is not necessary, then, for the 
descent of Christ, or for the coming of God to men, that He should abandon a 
greater seat, and that things on earth should be changed, as Celsus imagines 
when he says, "If you were to change a single one, even the least, of things on 
earth, all things would be overturned and disappear." And if we must speak of a 
change in any one by the appearing of the power of God, and by the entrance of 
the word among men, we shall not be reluctant to speak of changing from a wicked 
to a virtuous, from a dissolute to a temperate, and from a superstitious to a 
religious life, the person who has allowed the word of God to find entrance into 
his soul. 
CHAP. VI 
But if you will have us to meet the most ridiculous among the charges of 
Celsus, listen to him when he says: "Now God, being unknown amongst men, and 
deeming himself on that account to have less than his due, would desire to make 
himself known, and to make trial both of those who believe upon him and of those 
who do not, like those of mankind who have recently come into the possession of 
riches, and who make a display of their wealth; and thus they testify to an 
excessive but very mortal ambition on the part of God." We answer, then, that 
God, not being known by wicked men, would desire to make Himself known, not 
because He thinks that He meets with less than His due, but because the 
knowledge of Him will free the possessor from unhappiness. Nay, not even with 
the desire to try those who do or who do not believe upon Him, does He, by His 
unspeakable and divine power, Himself take up His abode in certain individuals, 
or send His Christ; but He does this in order to liberate from all their 
wretchedness those who do believe upon Him, and who accept His divinity, and 
that those who do not believe may no longer have this as a ground of excuse, 
viz., that their unbelief is the consequence of their not having heard the word 
of instruction. What argument, then, proves that it follows from our views that 
God, according to our representations, is "like those of mankind who have 
recently come into the possession of riches, and who make a display of their 
wealth?" For God makes no display towards us, from a desire that we should 
understand and consider His pre-eminence; but desiring that the blessedness 
which results from His being known by us should be implanted in our souls, He 
brings it to pass through Christ, and His ever-indwelling word, that we come to 
an intimate fellowship, with Him. No mortal ambition, then, does the Christian 
doctrine testify as existing on the part of God. 
CHAP. VII. 
I do not know how it is, that after the foolish remarks which he has made 
upon the subject which we have just been discussing, he should add the 
following, that "God does not desire to make himself known for his own sake, but 
because he wishes to bestow upon us the knowledge of himself for the sake of our 
salvation, in order that those who accept it may become virtuous and be saved, 
while those who do not accept may be shown to be wicked and be punished." And 
yet, after making such a statement, he raises a new objection, saying: "After so 
long a period of time, then, did God now bethink himself of making men live 
righteous lives, but neglect to do so before?" To which we answer, that there 
never was a time when God did not wish to make men live righteous lives; but He 
continually evinced His care for the improvement of the rational animal, by 
affording him occasions for the exercise of virtue. For in every generation the 
wisdom of God, passing into those souls which it ascertains to be holy, converts 
them into friends and prophets of God. And there may be found in the sacred book 
(the names of) those who in each generation were holy, and were recipients of 
the Divine Spirit, and who strove to convert their contemporaries so far as in 
their power. 
CHAP. VIII. 
And it is not matter of surprise that in certain generations there have 
existed prophets who, in the reception of divine influence, surpassed, by means 
of their stronger and more powerful (religious) life, other prophets who were 
their contemporaries, and others also who lived before and after them. And so it 
is not at all wonderful that there should also have been a time when something 
of surpassing excellence took up its abode among the human race, and which was 
distinguished above all that preceded or even that followed. But there is an 
element of profound mystery in the account of these things, and one which is 
incapable of being received by the popular understanding. And in order that 
these difficulties should be made to disappear, and that the objections raised 
against the advent of Christ should be answered--viz., that, "after so long a 
period of time, then, did God now bethink himself of making men live righteous 
lives, but neglect to do so before?"--it is necessary to touch upon the 
narrative of the divisions (of the nations), and to make it evident why it was, 
that "when the Most High divided the nations, when He separated the sons of 
Adam, He set the bounds of the nations according to the number of the angels of 
God, and the portion of the LORD was His people Jacob, Israel the cord of His 
inheritance;" and it will be necessary to state the reason why the birth of each 
man took place within each particular boundary, under him who obtained the 
boundary by lot, and how it rightly happened that "the portion of the LORD was 
His people Jacob, and Israel the cord of His inheritance," and why formerly the 
portion of the LORD was His people Jacob, and Israel the cord of His 
inheritance. But with respect to those who come after, it is said to the Saviour 
by the Father, "Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the heathen for Thine 
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession." For there 
are certain connected and related reasons, bearing upon the different treatment 
of human souls, which are difficult to state and to investigate. 
There came, then, although Celsus may not wish to admit it, after the 
numerous prophets who were the reformers of that well-known Israel, the Christ, 
the Reformer of the whole world, who did not need to employ against men whips, 
and chains, and tortures, as was the case under the former economy. For when the 
sower went forth to sow, the doctrine sufficed to sow the word everywhere. But 
if there is a time coming which will necessarily circumscribe the duration of 
the world, by reason of its having had a beginning, and if there is to be an end 
to the world, and after the end a just judgment of all things, it will be 
incumbent on him who treats the declarations of the Gospels philosophically, to 
establish these doctrines by arguments of all kinds, not only derived directly 
from the sacred Scrip-tares, but also by inferences deducible from them; while 
the more numerous and simpler class of believers, and those who are unable to 
comprehend the many varied aspects of the divine wisdom, must entrust themselves 
to God, and to the Saviour of our race, and be contented with His "ipse dixit," 
instead of this or any other demonstration whatever. 
CHAP. X. 
In the next place, Celsus, as is his custom having neither proved nor 
established anything, proceeds to say, as if we talked of God in a manner that 
was neither holy nor pious, that "it is perfectly manifest that they babble 
about God in a way that is neither holy nor reverential;" and he imagines that 
we do these things to excite the astonishment of the ignorant, and that we do 
not speak the truth regarding the necessity of punishments for those who have 
sinned. And accordingly he likens us to those who "in the Bacchic mysteries 
introduce phantoms and objects of terror." With respect to the mysteries of 
Bacchus, whether there is any trustworthy account of them, or none that is such, 
let the Greeks tell, and let Celsus and his boon-companions listen. But we 
defend our own procedure, When we say that our object is to reform the human 
race, either by the threats of punishments which we are persuaded are necessary 
for the whole world, and which perhaps are not without use s to those who are to 
endure them; or by the promises made to those who have lived virtuous lives, and 
in which are contained the statements regarding the blessed termination which is 
to be found in the kingdom of God, reserved for those who are worthy of becoming 
His subjects. 
CHAP. XI. 
After this, being desirous to show that it is nothing either wonderful or new 
which we state regarding floods or conflagrations, but that, from 
misunderstanding the accounts of these things which are current among Greeks or 
barbarous nations, we have accorded our belief to our own Scriptures when 
treating of them, he writes as follows: "The belief has spread among them, from 
a misunderstanding of the accounts of these occurrences, that after lengthened 
cycles of time, and the returns and conjunctions of planets, conflagrations and 
floods are wont to happen, and because after the last flood, which took place in 
the time of Deucalion, the lapse of time, agreeably to the vicissitude of all 
things, requires a conflagration and this made them give utterance to the 
erroneous opinion that God will descend, bringing fire like a torturer." Now in 
answer to this we say, that I do not understand how Celsus, who has read a great 
deal, and who shows that he has perused many histories, had not his attention 
arrested by the antiquity of Moses, who is related by certain Greek historians 
to have lived about the time of Inachus the son of Phoroneus, and is 
acknowledged by the Egyptians to be a man of great antiquity, as well as by 
those who have studied the history of the Phoenicians. And any one who likes may 
peruse the two books of Flavius Josephus on the antiquities of the Jews, in 
order that he may see in what way Moses was more ancient than those who asserted 
that floods and conflagrations take place in the world after long intervals of 
time; which statement Celsus alleges the Jews and Christians to have 
misunderstood, and, not comprehending what was said about a conflagration, to 
have declared that "God will descend, bringing fire like a torturer." 
CHAP. XII. 
Whether, then, there are cycles of time, and floods, or conflagrations which 
occur periodically or not, and whether the Scripture is aware of this, not only 
in many passages, but especially where Solomon says, "What is the thing which 
hath been? Even that which shall be. And what is the thing which hath been done? 
Even that which shall be done," etc., etc., belongs not to the present occasion 
to discuss. For it is sufficient only to observe, that Moses and certain of the 
prophets, being men of very great antiquity, did not receive from others the 
statements relating to the (future) conflagration of the world; but, on the 
contrary (if we must attend to the matter of time), others rather 
misunderstanding them, and not inquiring accurately into their statements, 
invented the fiction of the same events recurring at certain intervals, and 
differing neither in their essential nor accidental qualities. 
But we do not refer either the deluge or the conflagration to cycles and 
planetary periods; but the cause of them we declare to be the extensive 
prevalence of wickedness, and its (consequent) removal by a deluge or a 
conflagration. And if the voices of the prophets say that God "comes down," who 
has said, "Do I not fill heaven and earth? saith the LORD," the term is used in 
a figurative sense. For God "comes down" from His own height and greatness when 
He arranges the affairs of men, and especially those of the wicked. And as 
custom leads men to say that teachers "condescend" to children, and wise men to 
those youths who have just be-taken themselves to philosophy, not by 
"descending" in a bodily manner; so, if God is said anywhere in the holy 
Scriptures to "come down," it is understood as spoken in conformity with the 
usage which so employs the word, and, in like manner also with the expression 
"go Up." 
CHAP. XIII. 
But as it is in mockery that Celsus says we speak of "God coming down like a 
torturer bearing fire," and thus compels us unseasonably to investigate words of 
deeper meaning, we shall make a few remarks, sufficient to enable our hearers to 
form an idea of the defence which disposes of the ridicule of Celsus against us, 
and then we shall turn to what follows. The divine word says that our God is "a 
consuming fire," and that "He draws rivers of fire before Him;" nay, that He 
even entereth in as "a refiner's fire, and as a fuller's herb," to purify His 
own people. But when He is said to be a "consuming fire," we inquire what are 
the things which are appropriate to be consumed by God. And we assert that they 
are wickedness, and the works which result from it, and which, being 
figuratively called "wood, hay, stubble," 
God consumes as a fire. The wicked man, accordingly, is said to build up on 
the previously-laid foundation of reason, "wood, and hay, and stubble." If, 
then, any one can show that these words were differently understood by the 
writer, and can prove that the wicked man literally builds up "wood, or hay, or 
stubble," it is evident that the fire must be understood to be material, and an 
object of sense. But if, on the contrary, the works of the wicked man are spoken 
of figuratively under the names of "wood, or hay, or stubble," why does it not 
at once occur (to inquire) in what sense the word "fire" is to be taken, so that 
"wood" of such a kind should be consumed? for (the Scripture) says: "The fire 
will try each man's work of what sort it is. 
If any man's work abide. which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a 
reward. If any man's work be burned, he shall suffer loss." But what work can be 
spoken of in these words as being "burned," save all that results from 
wickedness? Therefore our God is a "consuming fire" in the sense in which we 
have taken the word; and thus He enters in as a "refiner's fire," to refine the 
rational nature, which has been filled with the lead of wickedness, and to free 
it from the other impure materials, which adulterate the natural gold or silver, 
so to speak, of the soul. And, in like manner, "rivers of fire" are said to be 
before God, who will thoroughly cleanse away the evil which is intermingled 
throughout the whole soul. But these remarks are sufficient in answer to the 
assertion, "that thus they were made to give expression to the erroneous opinion 
that God will come down bearing fire like a torturer." 
CHAP. XIV. 
But let us look at what Celsus next with great ostentation announces in the 
following fashion: "And again," he says, "let us resume the subject from the 
beginning, with a larger array of proofs. And I make no new statement, but say 
what has been long settled. God is good, and beautiful, and blessed, and that in 
the best and most beautiful degree. But if he come down among men, he must 
undergo a change, and a change from good to evil, from virtue to vice, from 
happiness to misery, and from best to worst. Who, then, would make choice of 
such a change? It is the nature of a mortal, indeed, to undergo change and 
remoulding, but of an immortal to remain the same and unaltered. God, then, 
could not admit of such a change." Now it appears to me that the fitting answer 
has been returned to these objections, when I have related what is called in 
Scripture the "condescension" of God to human affairs; for which purpose He did 
not need to undergo a transformation, as Celsus thinks we assert, nor a change 
from good to evil, nor from virtue to vice, nor from happiness to misery, nor 
from best to worst. For, continuing unchangeable in His essence, He condescends 
to human affairs by the economy of His providence. We show, accordingly, that 
the holy Scriptures represent God as unchangeable, both by such words as "Thou 
art the same," and" I change not;" whereas the gods of Epicurus, being composed 
of atoms, and, so far as their structure is concerned, capable of dissolution, 
endeavour to throw off the atoms which contain the elements of destruction. Nay, 
even the god of the Stoics, as being corporeal, at one time has his whole 
essence composed of the guiding principle when the conflagration (of the world) 
takes place; and at another, when a re-arrangement of things occurs, he again 
becomes partly material. For even the Stoics were unable distinctly to 
comprehend the natural idea of God, as of a being altogether incorruptible and 
simple, and uncompounded and indivisible. 
CHAP. XV. 
And with respect to His having descended among men, He was "previously in the 
form of God;" and through benevolence, divested Himself (of His glory), that He 
might be capable of being received by men. But He did not, I imagine, undergo 
any change from "good to evil," for "He did no sin;" nor from "virtue to vice," 
for "He knew no sin." Nor did He pass from "happiness to misery," but He humbled 
Himself, and nevertheless was blessed, even when His humiliation was undergone 
in order to benefit our race. Nor was there any change in Him from "best to 
worst," for how can goodness and benevolence be of "the worst?" Is it befitting 
to say of the physician, who looks on dreadful sights and handles unsightly 
objects in order to cure the sufferers, that he passes from "good to evil," or 
from "virtue to vice," or from "happiness to misery?" And yet the physician, in 
looking on dreadful sights and handling unsightly objects, does not wholly 
escape the possibility of being involved in the same fate. But He who heals the 
wounds of our souls, through the word of God that is in Him, is Himself 
incapable of admitting any wickedness. But if the immortal God--the Word--by 
assuming a mortal body and a human soul, appears to Celsus to undergo a change 
and transformation, let him learn that the Word, still remaining essentially the 
Word, suffers none of those things which are suffered by the body or the soul; 
but, condescending occasionally to (the weakness of) him who is unable to look 
upon the splendours and brilliancy of Deity, He becomes as it were flesh, 
speaking with a literal voice, until he who has received Him in such a form is 
able, through being elevated in some slight degree by the teaching of the Word, 
to gaze upon what is, so to speak, His real and pre-eminent appearance. 
CHAP. XVI. 
For there are different appearances, as it were, of the Word, according as He 
shows Himself to each one of those who come to His doctrine; and this in a 
manner corresponding to the condition of him who is just becoming a disciple, or 
of him who has made a little progress, or of him who has advanced further, or of 
him who has already nearly attained to virtue, or who has even already attained 
it. And hence it is not the case, as Celsus and those like him would have it, 
that our God was transformed, and ascending the lofty mountain, showed that His 
real appearance was something different, and far more excellent than what those 
who remained below, and were unable to follow Him on high, beheld. For those 
below did not possess eyes capable of seeing the transformation of the Word into 
His glorious and more divine condition. But with difficulty were they able to 
receive Him as He was; so that it might be said of Him by those who were unable 
to behold His more excellent nature: "We saw Him, and He had no form nor 
comeliness; but His form was mean, and inferior to that of the sons of men." And 
let these remarks be an answer to the suppositions of Celsus, who does not 
understand the changes or transformations of Jesus, as related in the histories, 
nor His mortal and immortal nature. 
CHAP. XVII. 
But will not those narratives, especially when they are understood in their 
proper sense, appear far more worthy of respect than the story that Dionysus was 
deceived by the Titans, and expelled from the throne of Jupiter, and torn in 
pieces by them, and his remains being afterwards put together again, he returned 
as it were once more to life, and ascended to heaven? Or are the Greeks at 
liberty to refer such stories to the doctrine of the soul, and to interpret them 
figuratively, while the door of a consistent explanation, and one everywhere in 
accord and harmony with the writings of the Divine Spirit, who had His abode in 
pure souls, is closed against us? Celsus, then, is altogether ignorant of the 
purpose of our writings, and it is therefore upon his own acceptation of them 
that he casts discredit, and not upon their real meaning; whereas, if he had 
reflected on what is appropriate to a soul which is to enjoy an everlasting 
life, and on the opinion which we are to form of its essence and principles, he 
would not so have ridiculed the entrance of the immortal into a mortal body, 
which took place not according to the metempsychosis of Plato, but agreeably to 
another and higher view of things. And he would have observed one "descent," 
distinguished by its great benevolence, undertaken to convert (as the Scripture 
mystically terms them) 
the "lost sheep of the house of Israel," which had strayed down from the 
mountains, and to which the Shepherd is said in certain parables to have gone 
down, leaving on the mountains those "which had not strayed." 
CHAP. XVIII. 
But Celsus, lingering over matters which he does not understand, leads us to 
be guilty of tautology, as we do not wish even in appearance to leave any one of 
his objections unexamined. He proceeds, accordingly, as follows: "God either 
really changes himself, as these assert, into a mortal body, and the 
impossibility of that has been already declared; Or else he does not undergo a 
change, but only causes the beholders to imagine so, and thus deceives them, and 
is guilty of falsehood. Now deceit and falsehood are nothing but evils, and 
would only be employed as a medicine, either in the case of sick and lunatic 
friends, with a view to their cure, or in that of enemies when one is taking 
measures to escape danger. But no sick man or lunatic is a friend of God, nor 
does God fear any one to such a degree as to shun danger by leading him into 
error." Now the answer to these statements might have respect partly to the 
nature of the Divine Word, who is God, and partly to the soul of Jesus. 
As respects the nature of the Word, in the same way as the quality of the 
food changes in the nurse into milk with reference to the nature of the child, 
or is arranged by the physician with a view to the good of his health in the 
case of a sick man or (is specially) prepared for a stronger man, because he 
possesses greater vigour, so does God appropriately change, in the case of each 
individual, the power of the Word to which belongs the natural property of 
nourishing the human soul. And to one is given, as the Scripture terms it, "the 
sincere milk of the word;" and to another, who is weaker, as it were, "herbs;" 
and to another who is full-grown, "strong meat." And the Word does not, I 
imagine, prove false to His own nature, in contributing nourishment to each one, 
according as he is capable of receiving Him. Nor does He mislead or prove false. 
But if one were to take the change as referring to the soul of Jesus after it 
had entered the body, we would inquire in what sense the term "change" is used. 
For if it be meant to apply to its essence, such a supposition is inadmissible, 
not only in relation to the soul of Jesus, but also to the rational soul of any 
other being. And if it be alleged that it suffers anything from the body when 
united with it, or from the place to which it has come, then what inconvenience 
can happen to the Word who, in great benevolence, brought down a Saviour to the 
human race?--seeing none of those who formerly professed to effect a cure could 
accomplish so much as that soul showed it could do, by what it performed, even 
by voluntarily descending to the level of human destinies for the benefit of our 
race. And the Divine Word, well knowing this, speaks to that effect in many 
passages of Scripture, although it is sufficient at present to quote one 
testimony of Paul to the following effect: "Let this mind be in you which was 
also in Christ Jesus; who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to 
be equal with God, but made Himself of no reputation, and took upon Him the form 
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion as 
a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the 
cross. 
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a name which is 
above every name." 
CHAP. XIX. 
Others, then, may concede to Celsus that God does not undergo a change, but 
leads the spectators to imagine that He does; whereas we who are persuaded that 
the advent of Jesus among men was no mere appearance, but a real manifestation, 
are not affected by this charge of Celsus. We nevertheless will attempt a reply, 
because you assert, Celsus, do you not, that it is sometimes allowable to employ 
deceit and falsehood by way, as it were, of medicine? Where, then, is the 
absurdity, if such a saving result were to be accomplished, that some such 
events should have taken place? For certain words, when savouring of falsehood, 
produce upon such characters a corrective effect (like the similar declarations 
of physicians to their patients), rather than when spoken in the spirit of 
truth. This, however, must be our defence against other opponents. For there is 
no absurdity in Him who healed sick friends, healing the dear human race by 
means of such remedies as He would not employ preferentially, but only according 
to circumstances. The human race, moreover, when in a state of mental 
alienation, had to be cured by methods which the Word saw would aid in bringing 
back those so afflicted to a sound state of mind. But Celsus says also, that 
"one acts thus towards enemies when taking measures to escape danger. But God 
does not fear any one, so as to escape danger by leading into error those who 
conspire against him." Now it is altogether unnecessary and absurd to answer a 
charge which is advanced by no one against our Saviour. And we have already 
replied, when answering other charges, to the statement that "no one who is 
either in a state of sickness or mental alienation is a friend of God." For the 
answer is, that such arrangements have been made, not for the sake of those who, 
being already friends, afterwards fell sick or became afflicted with mental 
disease, but in order that those who were still enemies through sickness of the 
soul, and alienation of the natural reason, might become the friends of God. For 
it is distinctly stated that Jesus endured all things on behalf of sinners, that 
He might free them from sin, and convert them to righteousness. 
CHAP. XX. 
In the next place, as he represents the Jews accounting in a way peculiar to 
themselves for their belief that the advent of Christ among them is still in the 
future, and the Christians as maintaining in their way that the coming of the 
Son of God into the life of men has already taken place, let us, as far as we 
can, briefly consider these points. According to Celsus, the Jews say that " 
(human) life, being filled with all wickedness, needed one sent from God, that 
the wicked might be punished, and all things purified in a manner analogous to 
the first deluge which happened." And as the Christians are said to make 
statements additional to this, it is evident that he alleges that they admit 
these. Now, where is the absurdity in the coming of one who is, on account of 
the prevailing flood of wickedness, to purify the world, and to treat every one 
according to his deserts? For it is not in keeping with the character of God 
that the diffusion of wickedness should not cease, and all things be renewed. 
The Greeks, moreover, know of the earth's being purified at certain times by a 
deluge or a fire, as Plato, too, says somewhere to this effect: "And when the 
gods overwhelm the earth, purifying it with water, some of them on the 
mountains," etc., etc. Must it be said, then, that if the Greeks make such 
assertions, they are to be deemed worthy of respect and consideration, but that 
if we too maintain certain of these views, which are quoted with approval by the 
Greeks, they cease to be honourable? And yet they who care to attend to the 
connection and truth of all our records, will endeavour to establish not only 
the antiquity of the writers, but the venerable nature of their writings, and 
the consistency of their several parts. 
CHAP. XXI. 
But I do not understand how he can imagine the overturning of the tower (of 
Babel) to have happened with a similar object to that of the deluge, which 
effected a purification of the earth, according to the accounts both of Jews and 
Christians. For, in order that the narrative contained in Genesis respecting the 
tower may be held to convey no secret meaning, but, as Celsus supposes, may be 
taken as true to the letter, the event does not on such a view appear to have 
taken place for the purpose of purifying the earth; unless, indeed, he imagines 
that the so-called confusion of tongues is such a purificatory process. But on 
this point, he who has the opportunity will treat more seasonably when his 
object is to show not only what is the meaning of the narrative in its 
historical connection, but what metaphorical meaning may be deduced from it. 
Seeing that he imagines, however, that Moses, who wrote the account of the 
tower, and the confusion of tongues, has perverted the story of the sons of 
Aloeus, and referred it to the tower, we must remark that I do not think any one 
prior to the time of Homer s has mentioned the sons of Aloeus, while I am 
persuaded that what is related about the tower has been recorded by Moses as 
being much older not only than Homer, but even than the invention of letters 
among the Greeks. Who, then, are the perverters of each other's narratives? 
Whether do they who relate the story of the Aloadae pervert the history of the 
time, or he who wrote the account of the tower and the confusion of tongues the 
story of the Aloadae? Now to impartial hearers Moses appears to be more ancient 
than Homer. The destruction by fire, moreover, of Sodom and Gomorrah on account 
of their sins, related by Moses in Genesis, is compared by Celsus to the story 
of Phaethon,--all these statements of his resulting from one blunder, viz., his 
not attending to the (greater) antiquity of Moses. For they who relate the story 
of Phaethon seem to be younger even than Homer, who, again, is much younger than 
Moses. We do not deny, then, that the purificatory fire and the destruction of 
the world took place in order that evil might be swept away, and all things be 
renewed; for we assert that we have learned these things from the sacred books 
of the prophets. But since, as we have said in the preceding pages, the 
prophets, in uttering many predictions regarding future events, show that they 
have spoken the truth concerning many things that are past, and thus give 
evidence of the indwelling of the Divine Spirit, it is manifest that, with 
respect to things still future, we should repose faith in them, or rather in the 
Divine Spirit that is in them. 

CHAP. XXII. 
But, according to Celsus, "the Christians, making certain additional 
statements to those of the Jews, assert that the Son of God has been already 
sent on account of the sins of the Jews; and that the Jews hating chastised 
Jesus, and given him gall to drink, have brought upon themselves the divine 
wrath." And any one who likes may convict this statement of falsehood, if it be 
not the case that the whole Jewish nation was overthrown within one single 
generation after Jesus had undergone these sufferings at their hands. For forty 
and two years, I think, after the date of the crucifixion of Jesus, did the 
destruction of Jerusalem take place. Now it has never been recorded, since the 
Jewish nation began to exist, that they have been expelled for so long a period 
from their venerable temple-worship and service, and enslaved by more powerful 
nations; for if at any time they appeared to be abandoned because of their sins, 
they were notwithstanding visited (by God), and returned to their own country, 
and recovered their possessions, and performed unhindered the observances of 
their law. One fact, then, which proves that Jesus was something divine and 
sacred, is this, that Jews should have suffered on His account now for a 
lengthened time calamities of such severity. And we say with confidence that 
they will never be restored to their former condition. For they committed a 
crime of the most unhallowed kind, in conspiring against the Saviour of the 
human race in that city where they offered up to God a worship containing the 
symbols of mighty mysteries. It accordingly behoved that city where Jesus 
underwent these sufferings to perish utterly, and the Jewish nation to be 
overthrown, and the invitation to happiness offered them by God to pass to 
others,--the Christians, I mean, to whom has come the doctrine of a pure and 
holy worship, and who have obtained new laws, in harmony with the established 
constitution in all countries; seeing those which were formerly imposed, as on a 
single nation which was ruled by princes of its own race and of similar manners, 
could not now be observed in all their entireness. 
CHAP. XXIII. 
In the next place, ridiculing after his usual style the race of Jews and 
Christians, he compares them all "to a flight of bats or to a swarm of ants 
issuing out of their nest, or to frogs holding council in a marsh, or to worms 
crawling together in the comer of a dunghill, and quarrelling with one another 
as to which of them were the greater sinners, and asserting that God shows and 
announces to us all things beforehand; and that, abandoning the whole world, and 
the regions of heaven, and this great earth, he becomes a citizen among us 
alone, and to us alone makes his intimations, and does not cease sending and 
inquiring, in what way we may be associated with him for ever." And in his 
fictitious representation, he compares us to " worms which assert that there is 
a God, and that immediately after him, we who are made by him are altogether 
like unto God, and that all things have been made subject to us,--earth, and 
water, and air, and stars,--and that all things exist for our sake, and are 
ordained to be subject to us." And, according to his representation, the 
worms--that is, we ourselves--say that "now, since certain amongst us commit 
sin, God will come or will send his Son to consume the wicked with fire, that 
the rest of us may have eternal life with him." And to all this he subjoins the 
remark, that "such wranglings would be more endurable amongst worms and frogs 
than betwixt Jews and Christians." 
CHAP. XXIV. 
In reply to these, we ask of those who accept such aspersions as are 
scattered against us, Do you regard all men as a collection of bats, or as 
frogs, or as worms, in consequence of the pre-eminence of God? or do you not 
include the rest of mankind in this proposed comparison, but on account of their 
possession of reason, and of the established laws, treat them as men, while you 
hold cheap Christians and Jews, because their opinions are distasteful to you, 
and compare them to the animals above mentioned? And whatever answer you may 
return to our question, we shall reply by endeavouring to show that such 
assertions are most unbecoming, whether spoken of all men in general, or of us 
in particular. For, let it be supposed that you say justly that all men, as 
compared with God, are (rightly) likened to these worthless animals, since their 
littleness is not at all to be compared with the superiority of God, what then 
do you mean by littleness? Answer me, good sirs. If you refer to littleness of 
body, know that superiority and inferiority, if truth is to be judge, are not 
determined by a bodily standard. For, on such a view, vultures and elephants 
would be superior to us men; for they are larger, and stronger, and longer-lived 
than we. But no sensible person would maintain that these irrational creatures 
are superior to rational beings, merely on account of their bodies: for the 
possession of reason raises a rational being to a vast superiority over all 
irrational creatures. Even the race of virtuous and blessed beings would admit 
this, whether they are, as ye say, good demons, or, as we are accustomed to call 
them, the angels of God, or any other natures whatever superior to that of man, 
since the rational faculty within them has been made perfect, and endowed with 
all virtuous qualities. 
CHAP. XXV. 
But if you depreciate the littleness of man, not on account of his body, but 
of his soul, regarding it as inferior to that of other rational beings, and 
especially of those who are virtuous; and inferior, because evil dwells in 
it,--why should those among Christians who are wicked, and those among the Jews 
who lead sinful lives, be termed a collection of bats, or ants, or worms, or 
frogs, rather than those individuals among other nations who are guilty of 
wickedness?--seeing, in this respect, any individual whatever, especially if 
carried away by the tide of evil, is, in comparison with the rest of mankind, a 
bat, and worm, and frog, and ant. And although a man may be an orator like 
Demosthenes, yet, if stained with wickedness like his, and guilty of deeds 
proceeding, like his, from a wicked nature; or an Antiphon, who was also 
considered to be indeed an orator, yet who annihilated the doctrine of 
providence in his writings, which were entitled Concerning Truth, like that 
discourse of Celsus,--such individuals are notwithstanding worms, rolling in a 
comer of the dung-heap of stupidity and ignorance. Indeed, whatever be the 
nature of the rational faculty, it could not reasonably be compared to a worm, 
because it possesses capabilities of virtue. For these adumbrations towards 
virtue do not allow of those who possess the power of acquiring it, and who are 
incapable of wholly losing its seeds, to be likened to a worm. It appears, 
therefore, that neither can men in general be deemed worms in comparison with 
God. For reason, having its beginning in the reason of God, cannot allow of the 
rational animal being considered wholly alien from Deity. Nor can those among 
Christians and Jews who are wicked, and who, in truth, are neither Christians 
nor Jews, be compared, more than other wicked men, to worms rolling in a corner 
of a dunghill. And if the nature of reason will not permit of such comparisons, 
it is manifest that we must not calumniate human nature, which has been formed 
for virtue, even if it should sin through ignorance, nor liken it to animals of 
the kind described. 
CHAP. XXVI. 
But if it is on account of those opinions of the Christians and Jews-which 
displease Celsus (and which he does not at all appear to understand) that they 
are to be regarded as worms and ants, and the rest of mankind as different, let 
us examine the acknowledged opinions of Christians and Jews, and compare them 
with those of the rest of mankind, and see whether it will not appear to those 
who have once admitted that certain men are worms and ants, that they are the 
worms and ants and frogs who have fallen away from sound views of God, and, 
under a vain appearance of piety, worship either irrational animals, or images, 
or other objects, the works of men's hands; whereas, from the beauty of such, 
they ought to admire the Maker of them, and worship Him: while those are indeed 
men, and more honourable than men (if there be anything that is so), who, in 
obedience to their reason, are able to ascend from stocks and stones, nay, even 
from what is reckoned the most precious of all matter--silver and gold; and who 
ascend up also from the beautiful things in the world to the Maker of all, and 
entrust themselves to Him who alone is able to satisfy all existing things, and 
to overlook the thoughts of all, and to hear the prayers of all; who send up 
their prayers to Him, and do all things as in the presence of Him who beholds 
everything, and who are careful, as in the presence of the Hearer of all things, 
to say nothing which might not with propriety be reported to God. Will not such 
piety as this--which can be overcome neither by labours, nor by the dangers of 
death, nor by logical plausibilities--be of no avail in preventing those who 
have obtained it from being any longer compared to worms, even if they had been 
so represented before their assumption of a piety so remarkable? Will they who 
subdue that fierce longing for sexual pleasures which has reduced the souls of 
many to a weak and feeble condition, and who subdue it because they are 
persuaded that they cannot otherwise have communion with God, unless they ascend 
to Him through the exercise of temperance, appear to you to be the brothers of 
worms, and relatives of ants, and to bear a likeness to frogs? What! is the 
brilliant quality of justice, which keeps inviolate the rights common to our 
neighbour, and our kindred, and which observes fairness, and benevolence, and 
goodness, of no avail in saving him who practises it from being termed a bird of 
the night? And are not they who wallow in dissoluteness, as do the majority of 
mankind, and they who associate promiscuously with common harlots, and who teach 
that such practices are not wholly contrary to propriety, worms who roll in 
mire?--especially when they are compared with those who have been taught not to 
take the "members of Christ," and the body inhabited by the Word, and make them 
the "members of a harlot;" and who have already learned that the body of the 
rational being, as consecrated to the God of all things, is the temple of the 
God whom they worship, becoming such from the pure conceptions which they 
entertain of the Creator, and who also, being careful not to corrupt the temple 
of God by unlawful pleasure; practise temperance as constituting piety towards 
God! 
CHAP. XXVII. 
And I have not yet spoken of the other evils which prevail amongst men, from 
which even those who have the appearance of philosophers are not speedily freed, 
for in philosophy there are many pretenders. Nor do I say anything on the point 
that many such evils are found to exist among those who are neither Jews nor 
Christians. Of a truth, such evil practices do not at all prevail among 
Christians, if you properly examine what constitutes a Christian. Or, if any 
persons of that kind should be discovered, they are at least not to be found 
among those who frequent the assemblies, and come to the public prayers, without 
their being excluded from them, unless it should happen, and that rarely, that 
some one individual of such a character escapes notice in the crowd. We, then, 
are not worms who assemble together; who take our stand against the Jews on 
those Scriptures which they believe to be divine, and who show that He who was 
spoken of in prophecy has come, and that they have been abandoned on account of 
the greatness of their sins, and that we who have accepted the Word have the 
highest hopes in God, both because of our faith in Him, and of His ability to 
receive us into His communion pure from all evil and wickedness of life. If a 
man, then, should call himself a Jew or a Christian, he would not say without 
qualification that God had made the whole world, and the vault of heaven for us 
in particular. But if a man is, as Jesus taught, pure in heart, and meek, and 
peaceful, and cheerfully submits to dangers for the sake of his religion, such 
an one might reasonably have confidence in God, and with a full apprehension of 
the word contained in the prophecies, might say this also: "All these things has 
God shown beforehand, and announced to us who believe." 
CHAP. XXVIII. 
But since he has represented those whom he regards as worms, viz., the 
Christians, as saying that "God, having abandoned the heavenly regions, and 
despising this great earth, takes up His abode amongst us alone, and to us alone 
makes His announcements, and ceases not His messages and inquiries as to how we 
may become His associates for ever," we have to answer that he attributes to us 
words which we never uttered, seeing we both read and know that GOd loves all 
existing things, and loathes nothing which He has made, for He would not have 
created anything in hatred. We have, moreover, read the declaration: "And Thou 
sparest all things, because they ate Thine, O lover of souls. For Thine 
incorruptible Spirit is in all. And therefore those also who have fallen away 
for a little time Thou rebukest, and admonishest, reminding them of their sins." 
How can we assert that "God, leaving the regions of heaven, and the whole world, 
and despising this great earth, takes up His abode amongst us only," when we 
have found that all thoughtful persons must say in their prayers, that "the 
earth is full of the mercy of the LORD," and that "the mercy of the Lord is upon 
all flesh;" and that God, being good, "maketh His sun to arise upon the evil and 
the good, and sendeth His rain upon the just and the unjust;" and that He 
encourages us to a similar course of action, in order that we may become His 
sons, and teaches us to extend the benefits which we enjoy, so far as in our 
power, to all men? For He Himself is said to be the Saviour of all men, 
especially of them that believe; and His Christ to be the "propitiation for our 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." And 
this, then, is our answer to the allegations of Celsus. Certain other 
statements, in keeping with the character of the Jews, might be made by some of 
that nation, but certainly not by the Christians, who have been taught that "God 
commendeth His love towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died 
for us;" and although "scarcely for a righteous man will one die, yet 
peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die." But now is Jesus 
declared to have come for the sake of sinners in all parts of the world (that 
they may forsake their sin, and entrust themselves to God), being called also, 
agreeably to an ancient custom of these Scriptures, the "Christ of God." 
CHAP. XXIX. 
But Celsus perhaps has misunderstood certain of those whom he has termed 
"worms," when they affirm that "God exists, and that we are next to Him." And he 
acts like those who would find fault with an entire sect of philosophers, on 
account of certain words uttered by some rash youth who, after a three days' 
attendance upon the lectures of a philosopher, should exalt himself above other 
people as inferior to himself, and devoid of philosophy. For we know that there 
are many creatures more honourable than man; and we have read that "God standeth 
in the congregation of gods," but of gods who are not worshipped by the nations, 
"for all the gods of the nations are idols." We have read also, that "God, 
standing in the congregation of the gods, judgeth among the gods." We know, 
moreover, that "though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in 
earth (as there be gods many and lords many), but to us there is one God, the 
Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by 
whom are all things, and we by Him." And we know that in this way the angels are 
superior to men; so that men, when made perfect, become like the angels. "For in 
the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but the righteous 
are as the angels in heaven," and also become "equal to the angels." We know, 
too, that in the arrangement of the universe there are certain beings termed 
"thrones," and others "dominions," and others "powers," and others 
"principalities;" and we see that we men, who are far inferior to these, may 
entertain the hope that by a virtuous life, and by acting in all things 
agreeably to reason, we may rise to a likeness with all these. And, lastly, 
because "it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when He shall 
appear, we shall be like God, and shall see Him as He is." And if any one were 
to maintain what is asserted by some (either by those who possess intelligence 
or who do not, but have misconceived sound reason), that "God exists, and we are 
next to Him," I would interpret the word "we," by using in its stead, "We who 
act according to reason," or rather, "We virtuous, who act according to reason." 
For, in our opinion, the same virtue belongs to all the blessed, so that the 
virtue of man and of God is identical. And therefore we are taught to become 
"perfect," as our Father in heaven is perfect. No good and virtuous man, then, 
is a "worm rolling in filth," nor is a pious man an "ant," nor a righteous man a 
"frog;" nor could one whose soul is enlightened with the bright light of truth 
be reasonably likened to a "bird of the night." 
CHAP. XXX. 
It appears to me that Celsus has also misunderstood this statement, "Let Us 
make man in Our image and likeness;" and has therefore represented the "worms" 
as saying that, being created by God, we altogether resemble Him. If, however, 
he had known the difference between man being created "in the image of God" and 
"after His likeness," and that God is recorded to have said, "Let Us make man 
after Our image and likeness," but that He made man "after the image" of God, 
but not then also "after His likeness," he would not have represented us as 
saying that "we are altogether like Him." Moreover, we do not assert that the 
stars are subject to us; since the resurrection which is called the 
"resurrection of the just," and which is understood by wise men, is compared to 
the sun, and moon, and stars, by him who said, "There is one glory of the sun, 
and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star 
differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead." 
Daniel also prophesied long ago regarding these things. Celsus says further, 
that we assert that "all things have been arranged so as to be subject to us," 
having perhaps heard some of the intelligent among us speaking to that effect, 
and perhaps also not understanding the saying, that "he who is the greatest 
amongst us is the servant of all." And if the Greeks say, "Then sun and moon are 
the slaves of mortal men," they express approval of the statement, and give an 
explanation of its meaning; but since such a statement is either not made at all 
by us, or is expressed in a different way, 
Celsus here too falsely accuses us. Moreover, we who, according to Celsus, 
are "worms," are represented by him as saying that, "seeing some among us are 
guilty of sin, God will come to us, or will send His own Son, that He may 
consume the wicked, and that we other frogs may enjoy eternal life with Him." 
Observe how this venerable philosopher, like a low buffoon, turns into ridicule 
and mockery, and a subject of laughter, the announcement of a divine judgment, 
and of the punishment of the wicked, and of the reward of the righteous; and 
subjoins to all this the remark, that "such statements would be more endurable 
if made by worms and flogs than by Christians and Jews who quarrel with one 
another!" We shall not, however, imitate his example, nor say similar things 
regarding those philosophers who profess to know the nature of all things, and 
who discuss with each other the manner in which all things were created, and how 
the heaven and earth originated, and all things in them; and how the souls (of 
men), being either unbegotten, and not created by God, are yet governed by Him, 
and pass from one body to another; or being formed at the same time with the 
body, exist for ever or pass away. For instead of treating with respect and 
accepting the intention of those who have devoted themselves to the 
investigation of the truth, one might mockingly and revilingly say that such men 
were "worms," who did not measure themselves by their comer of their dung-heap 
in human life, and who accordingly gave forth their opinions on matters of such 
importance as if they understood them, and who strenuously assert that they have 
obtained a view of those things which cannot be seen without a higher 
inspiration and a diviner power. "For no man knoweth the things of a man, save 
the spirit of man which is in him: even so the things of God knoweth no man, but 
the Spirit of God." We are not, however, mad, nor do we compare such human 
wisdom (I use the word "wisdom" in the common acceptation), which busies itself 
not about the affairs of the multitude, but in the investigation of truth, to 
the wrigglings of worms or any other such creatures; but in the spirit of truth, 
we testify of certain Greek philosophers that they knew God, seeing "He 
manifested Himself to them," although "they glorified Him not as God, neither 
were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations; and professing themselves 
to be wise, they became foolish, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God 
into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed 
beasts, and creeping things." 
CHAP. XXXI. 
After this, wishing to prove that there is no difference between Jews and 
Christians, and those animals previously enumerated by him, he asserts that the 
Jews were "fugitives from Egypt, who never performed anything worthy of note, 
and never were held in any reputation or account." Now, on the point of their 
not being fugitives, nor Egyptians, but Hebrews who settled in Egypt, we have 
spoken in the preceding pages. But if he thinks his statement, that "they were 
never held in any reputation or account," to be proved, because no remarkable 
event in their history is found recorded by the Greeks, we would answer, that if 
one will examine their polity from its first beginning, and the arrangement of 
their laws, he will find that they were men who represented upon earth the 
shadow of a heavenly life, and that amongst them God is recognised as nothing 
else, save He who is over all things, and that amongst them no maker of images 
was permitted to enjoy the rights of citizenship. For neither painter nor 
image-maker existed in their state, the law expelling all such from it; that 
there might be no pretext for the construction of images,--an art which attracts 
the attention of foolish men, and which drags down the eyes of the soul from God 
to earth. There was, accordingly, amongst them a law to the following effect: 
"Do not transgress the law, and make to yourselves a graven image, any likeness 
of male or female; either a likeness of any one of the creatures that are upon 
the earth, or a likeness of any winged fowl that flieth under the heaven, or a 
likeness of any creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, or a likeness of 
any of the fishes which are in the waters under the earth." The law, indeed, 
wished them to have regard to the truth of each individual thing, and not to 
form representations of things contrary to reality, feigning the appearance 
merely of what was really male or really female, or the nature of animals, or of 
birds, or of creeping things, or of fishes. Venerable, too, and grand was this 
prohibition of theirs: "Lift not up thine eyes unto heaven, lest, when thou 
seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and all the host of heaven, thou 
shouldst be led astray to worship them, and serve them." And what a regime was 
that under which the whole nation was placed, and which rendered it impossible 
for any effeminate person to appear in public; and worthy of admiration, too, 
was the arrangement by which harlots were removed out of the state, those 
incentives to the passions of the youth! Their courts of justice also were 
composed of men of the strictest integrity, who, after having for a lengthened 
period set the example of an unstained life, were entrusted with the duty of 
presiding over the tribunals, and who, on account of the superhuman purity of 
their character, were said to be gods, in conformity with an ancient Jewish 
usage of speech. Here was the spectacle of a whole nation devoted to philosophy; 
and in order that there might be leisure to listen to their sacred laws, the 
days termed "Sabbath," and the other festivals which existed among them, were 
instituted. And why need I speak of the orders of their priests and sacrifices, 
which contain innumerable indications (of deeper truths) to those who wish to 
ascertain the signification of things? 
CHAP. XXXII. 
But since nothing belonging to human nature is permanent, this polity also 
must gradually be corrupted and changed. And Providence, having remodelled their 
venerable system where it needed to be changed, so as to adapt it to men of all 
countries, gave to believers of all nations, in place of the Jews, the venerable 
religion of Jesus, who, being adorned not only with understanding, but also with 
a share of divinity, and having overthrown the doctrine regarding earthly 
demons, who delight in frankincense, and blood, and in the exhalations of 
sacrificial odours, and who, like the fabled Titans or Giants, drag down men 
from thoughts of God; and having Himself disregarded their plots, directed 
chiefly against the better class of men, enacted laws which ensure happiness to 
those who live according to them, and who do not flatter the demons by means of 
sacrifices, but altogether despise them, through help of the word of God, which 
aids those who look upwards to Him. And as it was the will of God that the 
doctrine of Jesus should prevail amongst men, the demons could effect nothing, 
although straining every nerve to accomplish the destruction of Christians; for 
they stirred up both princes, and senates, and rulers in every place,--nay, even 
nations themselves, who did not perceive the irrational and wicked procedure of 
the demons,--against the word, and those who believed in it; yet, 
notwithstanding, the word of God, which is more powerful than all other things, 
even when meeting with opposition, deriving from the opposition, as it were, a 
means of increase, advanced onwards, and won many souls, such being the will of 
God. And we have offered these remarks by way of a necessary digression. For we 
wished to answer the assertion of Celsus concerning the Jews, that they were 
"fugitives from Egypt, and that these men, beloved by God, never accomplished 
anything worthy of note." And further, in answer to the statement that "they 
were never held in any reputation or account," we say, that living apart as a 
"chosen nation and a royal priesthood," and shunning intercourse with the many 
nations around them, in order that their morals might escape corruption, they 
enjoyed the protection of the divine power, neither coveting like the most of 
mankind the acquisition of other kingdoms, nor yet being abandoned so as to 
become, on account of their smallness, an easy object of attack to others, and 
thus be altogether destroyed; and this lasted so long as they were worthy of the 
divine protection. But when it became necessary for them, as a nation wholly 
given to sin, to be brought back by their sufferings to their God, they were 
abandoned (by Him), sometimes for a longer, sometimes for a shorter period, 
until in the time of the Romans, having committed the greatest of sins in 
putting Jesus to death, they were completely deserted. 
CHAP. XXXIII. 
Immediately after this, Celsus, assailing the contents of the first book of 
Moses, which is entitled "Genesis," asserts that "the Jews accordingly 
endeavoured to derive their origin from the first race of jugglers and 
deceivers, appealing to the testimony of dark and ambiguous words, whose meaning 
was veiled in obscurity, and which they misinterpreted s to the unlearned and 
ignorant, and that, too, when such a point had never been called in question 
during the long preceding period." Now Celsus appears to me in these words to 
have expressed very obscurely the meaning which he intended to convey. It is 
probable, indeed, that his obscurity on this subject is intentional, inasmuch as 
he saw the strength of the argument which establishes the descent of the Jews 
from their ancestors; while again, on the other hand, he wished not to appear 
ignorant that the question regarding the Jews and their descent was one that 
could not be lightly disposed of. It is certain, however, that the Jews trace 
their genealogy back to the three fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And the 
names of these individuals possess such efficacy, when united with the name of 
God, that not only do those belonging to the nation employ in their prayers to 
God, and in the exorcising of demons, the words, "God of Abraham, and God of 
Isaac, and God of Jacob," 
but so also do almost all those who occupy themselves with incantations and 
magical rites. For there is found in treatises on magic in many countries such 
an invocation of God, and assumption of the divine name, as implies a familiar 
use of it by these men in their dealings with demons. These facts, then--adduced 
by Jews and Christians to prove the sacred character of Abraham, and Isaac, and 
Jacob, the fathers of the Jewish race--appear to me not to have been altogether 
unknown to Celsus, but not to have been distinctly set forth by him, because he 
was unable to answer the argument which might be founded on them. 
CHAP. XXXIV. 
For we inquire of all those who employ such invocations of God, saying: Tell 
us, friends, who was Abraham, and what sort of person was Isaac, and what power 
did Jacob possess, that the appellation "God," when joined with their name, 
could effect such wonders? And from whom have you learned, or can you learn, the 
facts relating to these individuals? And who has occupied himself with writing a 
history about them, either directly magnifying these men by ascribing to them 
mysterious powers, or hinting obscurely at their possession of certain great and 
marvellous qualities, patent to those who are qualified to see them? And when, 
in answer to our inquiry, no one can show from what history--whether Greek or 
Barbarian--or, if not a history, yet at least from what mystical narrative, the 
accounts of these men are derived, we shall bring forward the book entitled 
"Genesis," which contains the acts of these men, and the divine oracles 
addressed to them, and will say, Does not the use by you of the names of these 
three ancestors of the race, establishing in the clearest manner that effects 
not to be lightly regarded are produced by the invocation of them, evidence the 
divinity of the men? And yet we know them from no other source than the sacred 
books of the Jews! Moreover, the phrases, "the God of Israel," and "the God of 
the Hebrews," and "the God who drowned in the Red Sea the king of Egypt and the 
Egyptians," are formuloe frequently employed against demons and certain wicked 
powers. And we learn the history of the names and their interpretation from 
those Hebrews, who in their national literature and national tongue dwell with 
pride upon these things, and explain their meaning. How, then, should the Jews 
attempt to derive their origin from the first race of those whom Celsus supposed 
to be jugglers and deceivers, and shamelessly endeavour to trace themselves and 
their beginning back to these?--whose names, being Hebrew, are an evidence to 
the Hebrews, who have their sacred books written in the Hebrew language and 
letters, that their nation is akin to these men. For up to the present time, the 
Jewish names belonging to the Hebrew language were either taken from their 
writings, or generally from words the meaning of which was made known by the 
Hebrew language. 
CHAP. XXXV. 
And let any one who peruses the treatise of Celsus observe whether it does 
not convey some such insinuation as the above, when he says: "And they attempted 
to derive their origin from the first race of jugglers and deceivers, appealing 
to the testimony of dark and ambiguous words, whose meaning was veiled in 
obscurity." For these names are indeed obscure, and not within the comprehension 
and knowledge of many, though not in our opinion of doubtful meaning, even 
although assumed by those who are aliens to our religion; but as, according to 
Celsus, they do not s convey any ambiguity, I am at a loss to know why he has 
rejected them. And yet, if he had wished honestly to overturn the genealogy 
which he deemed the Jews to have so shamelessly arrogated, in boasting of 
Abraham and his descendants (as their progenitors), he ought to have quoted all 
the passages bearing on the subject; and, in the first place, to have advocated 
his cause with such arguments as he thought likely to be convincing, and in the 
next to have bravely refuted, by means of what appeared to him to be the true 
meaning, and by arguments in its favour, the errors existing on the subject. But 
neither Celsus nor any one else will be able, by their discussions regarding the 
nature of names employed for miraculous purposes, to lay down the correct 
doctrine regarding them, and to demonstrate that those men were to be lightly 
esteemed whose names merely, not among their countrymen alone, but also amongst 
foreigners, could accomplish (such results). He ought to have shown, moreover, 
how we, in misinterpreting the passages in which these names are found, deceive 
our hearers, as he imagines, while he himself, who boasts that he is not 
ignorant or unintelligent, gives the true interpretation of them. And he 
hazarded the assertion, in speaking of those names, from which the Jews deduce 
their genealogies, that "never, during the long antecedent period, has there 
been any dispute about these names, but that at the present time the Jews 
dispute about them with certain others," whom he does not mention. Now, let him 
who chooses show who these are that dispute with the Jews, and who adduce even 
probable arguments to show that Jews and Christians do not decide correctly on 
the points relating to these names, but that there are others who have discussed 
these questions with the greatest learning and accuracy. But we are well assured 
that none can establish anything of the sort, it being manifest that these names 
are derived from the Hebrew language, which is found only among the Jews. 
CHAP. XXXVI. 
Celsus in the next place, producing from history other than that of the 
divine record, those passages which bear upon the claims to great antiquity put 
forth by many nations, as the Athenians, and Egyptians, and Arcadians, and 
Phrygians, who assert that certain individuals have existed among them who 
sprang from the earth, and who each adduce proOfs of these assertions, says: 
"The Jews, then, leading a grovelling life in some comer of Palestine, and being 
a wholly uneducated people, who had not heard that these matters had been 
committed to verse long ago by Hesiod and innumerable other inspired men, wove 
together some most incredible and insipid stories, viz., that a certain man was 
formed by the hands of God, and had breathed into him the breath of life, and 
that a woman was taken from his side, and that God issued certain commands, and 
that a serpent opposed these, and gained a victory over the commandments of God; 
thus relating certain old wives' fables, and most impiously representing God as 
weak at the very beginning (of things), and unable to convince even a single 
human being whom He Himself had formed." By these instances, indeed, this deeply 
read and learned Celsus, who accuses Jews and Christians of ignorance and want 
of instruction, clearly evinces the accuracy of his knowledge of the chronology 
of the respective historians, whether Greek or Barbarian, since he imagines that 
Hesiod and the "innumerable" others, whom he styles "inspired" men, are older 
than Moses and his writings--that very Moses who is shown to be much older than 
the time of the Trojan war! It is not the Jews, then, who have composed 
incredible and insipid stories regarding the birth of man from the earth, but 
these "inspired" men of Celsus, Hesiod and his other "innumerable" companions, 
who, having neither learned nor heard of the far older and most venerable 
accounts existing in Palestine, have written such histories as their Theogonies, 
attributing, so far as in their power, "generation" to their deities, and 
innumerable other absurdities. And these are the writers whom Plato expels from 
his "State" as being corrupters of the youth,--Homer, viz., and those who have 
composed poems of a similar description! Now it is evident that Plato did not 
regard as "inspired" those men who had left behind them such works. But perhaps 
it was from a desire to cast reproach upon us, that this Epicurean Celsus, who 
is better able to judge than Plato (if it be the same Celsus who composed two 
other books against the Christians), called those individuals "inspired" whom he 
did not in reality regard as such. 
CHAP. XXXVII. 
He charges us, moreover, with introducing "a man formed by the hands of God," 
although the book of Genesis has made no mention of the "hands" of God, either 
when relating the creation or the "fashioning" of the man; white it is Job and 
David who have used the expression, "Thy hands have made me and fashioned me;" 
with reference to which it would need a lengthened discourse to point out the 
sense in which these words were understood by those who used them, both as 
regards the difference between "making" and "fashioning," and also the "hands" 
of God. For those who do not understand these and similar expressions in the 
sacred Scriptures, imagine that we attribute to the God who is over all things a 
form such as that of man; and according to their conceptions, it follows that we 
consider the body of God to be furnished with wings, since the Scriptures, 
literally understood, attribute such appendages to God. The subject before us, 
however, does not require us to interpret these expressions; for, in our 
explanatory remarks upon the book of Genesis, these matters have been made, to 
the best of our ability, a special subject of investigation. Observe next the 
malignity of Celsus in what follows. For the Scripture, speaking of the 
"fashioning" of the man, says, "And breathed into his face the breath of life, 
and the man became a living soul." Whereon Celsus, wishing maliciously to 
ridicule the "inbreathing into his face of the breath of life," and not 
understanding the sense in which the expression was employed, states that "they 
composed a story that a man was fashioned by the hands of God, and was inflated 
by breath blown into him," in order that, taking the word" inflated" to be used 
in a similar way to the inflation of skins, he might ridicule the statement, "He 
breathed into his face the breath of life,"--terms which are used figuratively, 
and require to be explained in order to show that God communicated to man of His 
incorruptible Spirit; as it is said, "For Thine incorruptible Spirit is in all 
things." 
CHAP. XXXVIII. 
In the next place, as it is his object to slander our Scriptures, he 
ridicules the following statement: "And God caused a deep sleep to fall upon 
Adam, and he slept: and He took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead 
thereof. And the rib, which He had taken from the man, made He a woman," and so 
on; without quoting the words, which would give the hearer the impression that 
they are spoken with a figurative meaning. He would not even have it appear that 
the words were used allegorically, although he says afterwards, that "the more 
modest among Jews and Christians are ashamed of these things, and endeavour to 
give them somehow an allegorical signification." Now we might say to him, Are 
the statements of your "inspired" Hesiod, which he makes regarding the woman in 
the form of a myth, to be explained allegorically, in the sense that she was 
given by Jove to men as an evil thing, and as a retribution for the theft of 
"the fire;" while that regarding the woman who was taken from the side of the 
man (after he had been buried in deep slumber), and was formed by God, appears 
to you to be related without any rational meaning and secret signification? But 
is it not uncandid, not to ridicule the former as myths, but to admire them as 
philosophical ideas in a mythical dress, and to treat with contempt the latter, 
as offending the understanding, and to declare that they are of no account? For 
if, because of the mere phraseology, we are to find fault with what is intended 
to have a secret meaning, see whether the following lines of Hesiod, a man, as 
you say," inspired," are not better fitted to excite laughter:- "'Son of 
Iapetus!' with wrathful heart Spake the cloud-gatherer: 'Oh, unmatched in art! 
Exultest thou in this the flame retrieved, And dost thou triumph in the god 
deceived? 
But thou, with the posterity of man, Shalt rue the fraud whence mightier ills 
began; I will send evil for thy stealthy fire, While all embrace it, and their 
bane desire.' 
The sire, who rules the earth, and sways the pole, Had said, and laughter 
fill'd his secret soul. 
He bade the artist-god his best obey, And mould with tempering waters ductile 
clay: 
Infuse, as breathing life and form began, The supple vigour, and the voice of 
man: 
Her aspect fair as goddesses above, A virgin's likeness, with the brows of 
love. 
He bade Minerva teach the skill that dyes The web with colours, as the 
shuttle flies; He called the magic of Love's Queen to shed A nameless grace 
around her courteous head; Instil the wish that longs with restless aim, And 
cares of dress that feed upon the frame: 
Bade Hermes last implant the craft refined Of artful manners, and a shameless 
mind. 
He said; their king th' inferior powers obeyed: 
The fictile likeness of a bashful maid Rose from the temper'd earth, by 
Jove's behest, Under the forming god; the zone and vest Were clasp'd and folded 
by Minerva's hand: 
The heaven-born graces, and persuasion bland Deck'd her round limbs with 
chains of gold: the hours Of loose locks twined her temples with spring flowers. 

The whole attire Minerva's curious care Form'd to her shape, and fitted to 
her air. 
But in her breast the herald from above, Full of the counsels of deep 
thundering Jove, Wrought artful manners, wrought perfidious lies, And speech 
that thrills the blood, and lulls the wise. 
Her did th' interpreter of gods proclaim, And named the woman with Pandora's 
name; Since all the gods conferr'd their gifts, to charm, For man's inventive 
race, this beauteous harm." 
Moreover, what is said also about the casket is fitted of itself to excite 
laughter; for example:- "Whilome on earth the sons of men abode From ills apart, 
and labour's irksome load, And sore diseases, bringing age to man; Now the sad 
life of mortals is a span. 
The woman's hands a mighty casket bear; She lifts the lid; she scatters 
griefs in air: 
Alone, beneath the vessel s rims detained, Hope still within th' unbroken 
cell remained, Nor fled abroad; so will'd cloud-gatherer Jove: 
The woman's hand had dropp'd the lid above." 
Now, to him who would give to these lines a grave allegorical meaning 
(whether any such meaning be contained in them or not), we would say: Are the 
Greeks alone at liberty to convey a philosophic meaning in a secret covering? or 
perhaps also the Egyptians, and those of the Barbarians who pride themselves 
upon their mysteries and the truth (which is concealed within them); while the 
Jews alone, with their lawgiver and historians, appear to you the most 
unintelligent of men? And is this the only nation which has not received a share 
of divine power, and which yet was so grandly instructed how to rise upwards to 
the uncreated nature of God, and to gaze on Him alone, and to expect from Him 
alone (the fulfilment of) their hopes? 

CHAP. XXXIX. 
But as Celsus makes a jest also of the serpent, as counteracting the 
injunctions given by God to the man, taking the narrative to be an old wife's 
fable, and has purposely neither mentioned the paradise of God, nor stated that 
God is said to have planted it in Eden towards the east, and that there 
afterwards sprang up from the earth every tree that was beautiful to the sight, 
and good for food, and the tree of life in the midst of the paradise, and the 
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and the other statements which follow, 
which might of themselves lead a candid reader to see that all these things had 
not inappropriately an allegorical meaning, let us contrast with this the words 
of Socrates regarding Eros in the Symposium of Plato, and which are put in the 
mouth of Socrates as being more appropriate than what was said regarding him by 
all the others at the Symposium. The words of Plato are as follow: "When 
Aphrodite was born, the gods held a banquet, and there was present, along with 
the others, Porus the son of Metis. And after they had dined, Penia came to beg 
for something (seeing there was an entertainment), and she stood at the gate. 
Porus meantime, having become intoxicated with the nectar (for there was then no 
wine), went into the garden of Zeus, and, being heavy with liquor, lay down to 
sleep. Penia accordingly formed a secret plot, with a view of freeing herself 
from her condition of poverty, to get a child by Porus, and accordingly lay down 
beside him, and became pregnant with Eros. And on this account Eros has become 
the follower and attendant of Aphrodite, having been begotten on her birthday 
feast, and being at the same time by nature a lover of the beautiful, because 
Aphrodite too is beautiful. Seeing, then, that Eros is the son of Porus and 
Penia, the following is his condition. In the first place, he is always poor, 
and far from being delicate and beautiful, as most persons imagine; but is 
withered, and sunburnt, and unshod, and without a home, sleeping always upon the 
ground, and without a covering; lying in the open air beside gates, and on 
public roads; possessing the nature of his mother, and dwelling continually with 
indigence. But, on the other hand, in conformity with the character of his 
father, he is given to plotting against the beautiful and the good, being 
courageous, and hasty, and vehement; a keen hunter, perpet-ually devising 
contrivances; both much given to forethought, and also fertile in resources; 
acting like a philosopher throughout the whole of his life; a terrible sorcerer, 
and dealer in drugs, and a sophist as well; neither immortal by nature nor yet 
mortal, but on the same day, at one time he flourishes and lives when he has 
plenty, and again at another time dies, and once more is recalled to life 
through possessing the nature of his father. But the supplies furnished to him 
are always gradually disappearing, so that he is never at any time in want, nor 
yet rich; and, on the other hand, he occupies an intermediate position between 
wisdom and ignorance." Now, if those who read these words were to imitate the 
malignity of Celsus--which be it far from Christians to do!--they would ridicule 
the myth, and would turn this great Plato into a subject of jest; but if, on 
investigating in a philosophic spirit what is conveyed in the dress of a myth, 
they should be able to discover the meaning of Plato, (they will admire) the 
manner in which he was able to conceal, on account of the multitude, in the form 
of this myth, the great ideas which presented themselves to him, and to speak in 
a befitting manner to those who know how to ascertain from the myths the true 
meaning of him who wove them together. Now I have brought forward this myth 
occurring in the writings of Plato, because of the mention in it of the garden 
of Zeus, which appears to bear some resemblance to the paradise of God, and of 
the comparison between Penia and the serpent, and the plot against Porus by 
Penia, which may be compared with the plot of the serpent against the man. It is 
not very clear, indeed, whether Plato fell in with these stories by chance, or 
whether, as some think, meeting during his visit to Egypt with certain 
individuals who philosophized on the Jewish mysteries, and learning some things 
from them, he may have preserved a few of their ideas, and thrown others aside, 
being careful not to offend the Greeks by a complete adoption of all the points 
of the philosophy of the Jews, who were in bad repute with the multitude, on 
account of the foreign character of their laws and their peculiar polity. The 
present, however, is not the proper time for explaining either the myth of 
Plato, or the story of the serpent and the paradise of God, and all that is 
related to have taken place in it, as in our exposition of the book of Genesis 
we have especially occupied ourselves as we best could with these matters. 

CHAP. XL. 
But as he asserts that "the Mosaic narrative most impiously represents God as 
in a state of weakness from the very commencement (of things), and as unable to 
gain over (to obedience) even one single man whom He Himself had formed," we say 
in answer that the objection is much the same as if one were to find fault with 
the existence of evil, which God has not been able to prevent even in the case 
of a single individual, so that one man might be found from the very beginning 
of things who was born into the world untainted by sin. For as those whose 
business it is to defend the doctrine of providence do so by means of arguments 
which are not to be despised, so also the subjects of Adam and his son will be 
philosophically dealt with by those who are aware that in the Hebrew language 
Adam signifies man; and that in those parts of the narrative which appear to 
refer to Adam as an individual, Moses is discoursing upon the nature of man in 
general. For "in Adam" (as the Scripture says) "all die," and were condemned in 
the likeness of Adam's transgression, the word of God asserting this not so much 
of one particular individual as of the whole human race. For in the connected 
series of statements which appears to apply as to one particular individual, the 
curse pronounced upon Adam is regarded as common to all (the members of the 
race), and what was spoken with reference to the woman is spoken of every woman 
without exception. And the expulsion of the man and woman from paradise, and 
their being clothed with tunics of skins (which God, because of the 
transgression of men, made for those who had sinned), contain a certain secret 
and mystical doctrine (far transcending that of Plato) of the souls losing its 
wings, and being borne downwards to earth, until it can lay hold of some stable 
resting-place. 
CHAP. XLI. 
After this he continues as follows: "They speak, in the next place, of a 
deluge, and of a monstrous ark, having within it all things, and of a dove and a 
crow as messengers, falsifying and recklessly altering the story of Deucalion; 
not expecting, I suppose, that these things would come to light, but imagining 
that they were inventing stories merely for young children." Now in these 
remarks observe the hostility--so unbecoming a philosopher--displayed by this 
man towards this very ancient Jewish narrative. For, not being able to say 
anything against the history of the deluge, and not perceiving what he might 
have urged against the ark and its dimensions,--viz., that, according to the 
general opinion, which accepted the statements that it was three hundred cubits 
in length, and fifty in breadth, and thirty in height, it was impossible to 
maintain that it contained (all) the animals that were upon the earth, fourteen 
specimens of every clean and four of every unclean beast,--he merely termed it 
"monstrous, containing all things within it." Now wherein was its "monstrous" 
character, seeing it is related to have been a hundred years in building, and to 
have had the three hundred cubits of its length and the fifty of its breadth 
contracted, until the thirty cubits of its height terminated in a top one cubit 
long and one cubit broad? Why should we not rather admire a structure which 
resembled an extensive city, if its measurements be taken to mean what they are 
capable of meaning, so that it was nine myriads of cubits long in the base, and 
two thousand five hundred in breadth? And why should we not admire the design 
evinced in having it so compactly built, and rendered capable of sustaining a 
tempest which caused a deluge? For it was not daubed with pitch, or any material 
of that kind, but was securely coated with bitumen. And is it not a subject of 
admiration, that by the providential arrangement of God, the elements of all the 
races were brought into it, that the earth might receive again the seeds of all 
living things, while God made use of a most righteous man to be the progenitor 
of those who were to be born after the deluge? 
CHAP. XLII. 
In order to show that he had read the book of Genesis, Celsus rejects the 
story of the dove, although unable to adduce any reason which might prove it to 
be a fiction. In the next place, as his habit is, in order to put the narrative 
in a more ridiculous light, he converts the "raven" into a "crow," and imagines 
that Moses so wrote, having recklessly altered the accounts related of the 
Grecian Deucalion; unless perhaps he regards the narrative as not having 
proceeded from Moses, but from several individuals, as appears from his 
employing the plural number in the expressions, "falsifying and recklessly 
altering the story of Deucalion," as well as from the words, "For they did not 
expect, I suppose, that these things would come to light." But how should they, 
who gave their Scriptures to the whale nation, not expect that they would come 
to light, and who predicted, moreover, that this religion should be proclaimed 
to all nations? Jesus declared, "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and 
given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof;" and in uttering these 
words to the Jews, what other meaning did He intend to convey than this, viz., 
that He Himself should, through his divine power, bring forth into light the 
whole of the Jewish Scriptures, which contain the mysteries of the kingdom of 
God? If, then, they peruse the Theogonies of the Greeks, and the stories about 
the twelve gods, they impart to them an air of dignity, by investing them with 
an allegorical signification; but when they wish to throw contempt upon our 
biblical narratives, they assert that they are fables, clumsily invented for 
infant children! 
CHAP. XLIII. 
"Altogether absurd, and out of season," he continues, "is the (account of 
the) begetting of children," where, although he has mentioned no names, it is 
evident that he is referring to the history of Abraham and Sarah. Cavilling also 
at the "conspiracies of the brothers," he allies either to the story of Cain 
plotting against Abel, or, in addition, to that of Esau against Jacob; and 
(speaking) of "a father's sorrow," he probably refers to that of Isaac on 
account of the absence of Jacob, and perhaps also to that of Jacob because of 
Joseph having been sold into Egypt. And when relating the "crafty procedure of 
mothers," I suppose he means the conduct of Rebecca, who contrived that the 
blessing of Isaac should descend, not upon Esau, but upon Jacob. Now if we 
assert that in all these cases God interposed in a very marked degree, what 
absurdity do we commit, seeing we are persuaded that He never withdraws His 
providence from those who devote themselves to Him in an honourable and vigorous 
life? He ridicules, moreover, the acquisition of property made by Jacob while 
living with Laban, not understanding to what these words refer: "And those which 
had no spots were Laban's, and those which were spotted were Jacob's;" and he 
says that "God presented his sons with asses, and sheep, and camels," and did 
not see that "all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and were 
written for our sake, upon whom the ends of the world are come." The varying 
customs (prevailing among the different nations) becoming famous, are regulated 
by the word of God, being given as a possession to him who is figuratively 
termed Jacob. For those who become converts to Christ from among the heathen, 
are indicated by the history of Laban and Jacob. 
CHAP. XLIV. 
And erring widely from the meaning of Scripture, he says that "God gave wells 
also to the righteous." Now he did not observe that the righteous do not 
construct cisterns, but dig wells, seeking to discover the inherent ground and 
source of potable blessings, inasmuch as they receive in a figurative sense the 
commandment which enjoins, "Drink waters from your own vessels, and from your 
own wells of fresh water. Let not your water be poured out beyond your own 
fountain, but let it pass into your own streets. Let it belong to you alone, and 
let no alien partake with thee." Scripture frequently makes use of the histories 
of real events, in order to present to view more important truths, which are but 
obscurely intimated; and of this kind are the narratives relating to the 
"wells," and to the "marriages," and to the various acts of "sexual intercourse" 
recorded of righteous persons, respecting which, however, it will be more 
seasonable to offer an explanation in the exegetical writings referring to those 
very passages. But that wells were constructed by righteous men in the land of 
the Philistines, as related in the book of Genesis, is manifest from the 
wonderful wells which are shown at Ascalon, and which are deserving of mention 
on account of their structure, so foreign and peculiar compared with that of 
other wells. Moreover, that both young women and female servants are to be 
understood metaphorically, is not our doctrine merely, but one which we have 
received from the beginning from wise men, among whom a certain one said, when 
exhorting his hearers to investigate the figurative meaning: "Tell me, ye that 
read the law, do ye not hear the law? For it is written that Abraham had two 
sons; the one by a bond maid, the other by a free woman. But he who was of the 
bond woman was born after the flesh; but he of the free woman was by promise. 
Which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants; the one from l 
the Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar." And a little after, 
"But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all." And any 
one who will take up the Epistle to the Galatians may learn how the passages 
relating to the "marriages," and the intercourse with "the maid-servants," have 
been allegorized; the Scripture desiring us to imitate not the literal acts of 
those who did these things, but (as the apostles of Jesus are accustomed to call 
them) the spiritual. 
CHAP. XLV. 
And whereas Celsus ought to have recognised the love of truth displayed by 
the writers of sacred Scripture, who have not concealed even what is to their 
discredit, and thus been led to accept the other and more marvellous accounts as 
true, he has done the reverse, and has characterized the story of Lot and his 
daughters (without examining either its literal or its figurative meaning) as 
"worse than the crimes of Thyestes." The figurative signification of that 
passage of history it is not necessary at present to explain, nor what is meant 
by Sodom, and by the words of the angels to him who was escaping thence, when 
they said: "Look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the surrounding 
district; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed;" nor what is intended 
by Lot and his wife, who became a pillar of salt because she turned back; nor by 
his daughters intoxicating their father, that they might become mothers by him. 
But let us in a few words soften down the repulsive features of the history. The 
nature of actions--good, bad, and indifferent--has been investigated by the 
Greeks; and the more successful of such investigators lay down the principle 
that intention alone gives to actions the character of good or bad, and that all 
things which are done without a purpose are, strictly speaking, indifferent; 
that when the intention is directed to a becoming end, it is praiseworthy; when 
the reverse, it is censurable. They have said, accordingly, in the section 
relating to" things indifferent," that, strictly speaking, for a man to have 
sexual intercourse with his daughters is a thing indifferent, although such a 
thing ought not to take place in established communities. And for the sake of 
hypothesis, in order to show that such an act belongs to the class of things 
indifferent, they have assumed the case of a wise man being left with an only 
daughter, the entire human race besides having perished; and they put the 
question whether the father can fitly have intercourse with his daughter, in 
order, agreeably to the supposition, to prevent the extermination of mankind. Is 
this to be accounted sound reasoning among the Greeks, and to be commended by 
the influential sect of the Stoics; but when young maidens, who had heard of the 
burning of the world, though without comprehending (its full meaning), saw fire 
devastating their city and country, and supposing that the only means left of 
rekindling the flame of human life lay in their father and themselves, should, 
on such a supposition, conceive the desire that the world should continue, shall 
their conduct be deemed worse than that of the wise man who, according to the 
hypothesis of the Stoics, acts becomingly in having intercourse with his 
daughter in the case already supposed, of all men having been destroyed? I am 
not unaware, however, that some have taken offence at the desire of Lot's 
daughters, and have regarded their conduct as very wicked; and have said that 
two accursed nations--Moab and Ammon--have sprung from that unhallowed 
intercourse. And yet truly sacred Scripture is nowhere found distinctly 
approving of their conduct as good, nor yet passing sentence upon it as 
blameworthy. Nevertheless, whatever be the real state of the case, it admits not 
only of a figurative meaning, but also of being defended on its own merits. 
CHAP. XLVI. 
Celsus, moreover, sneers at the "hatred" of Esau (to which, I suppose, he 
refers) against Jacob, although he was a man who, according to the Scriptures, 
is acknowledged to have been wicked; and not clearly stating the story of Simeon 
and Levi, who sallied out (on the She-chemites) on account of the insult offered 
to their sister, who had been violated by the son of the Shechemite king, he 
inveighs against their conduct. And passing on, he speaks of" brothers selling 
(one another)," alluding to the sons of Jacob; and of "a brother sold," Joseph 
to wit; and of "a father deceived," viz., Jacob, because he entertained no 
suspicion of his sons when they showed him Joseph's coat of many colours, but 
believed their statement, and mourned for his son, who was a slave in Egypt, as 
if he were dead. And observe in what a spirit of hatred and falsehood Celsus 
collects together the statements of the sacred history; so that wherever it 
appeared to him to contain a ground of accusation he produces the passage, but 
wherever there is any exhibition of virtue worthy of mention- as when Joseph 
would not gratify the lust of his mistress, refusing alike her allurements and 
her threats--he does not even mention the circumstance! He should see, indeed, 
that the conduct of Joseph was far superior to what is related of Bellerophon, 
since the former chose rather to be shut up in prison than do violence to his 
virtue. For although he might have offered a just defence against his accuser, 
he magnanimously remained silent, entrusting his cause to God. 
CHAP. XLVII. 
Celsus next, for form's sake, and with great want of precision, speaks of 
"the dreams of the chief butler and chief baker, and of Pharaoh, and of the 
explanation of them, in consequence of which Joseph was taken out of prison in 
order to be entrusted by Pharaoh with the second place in Egypt." What 
absurdity, then, did the history contain, looked at even in itself, that it 
should be adduced as matter of accusation by this Celsus, who gave the title of 
True Discourse to a treatise not containing doctrines, but full of charges 
against Jews and Christians? He adds: "He who had been sold behaved kindly to 
his brethren (who had sold him), when they were suffering from hunger, and had 
been sent with their asses to purchase (provisions);" although he has not 
related these occurrences (in his treatise). But he does mention the 
circumstance of Joseph making himself known to his brethren, although I know not 
with what view, or what absurdity he can point out in such an occurrence; since 
it is impossible for Momus himself, we might say, to find any reasonable fault 
with events which, apart from their figurative meaning, present so much that is 
attractive. He relates, further, that "Joseph, who had been sold as a slave, was 
restored to liberty, and went up with a solemn procession to his father's 
funeral," and thinks that the narrative furnishes matter of accusation against 
us, as he makes the following remark: "By whom (Joseph, namely) the illustrious 
and divine nation of the Jews, after growing up in Egypt to be a multitude of 
people, was commanded to sojourn somewhere beyond the limits of the kingdom, and 
to pasture their flocks in districts of no repute." Now the words, "that they 
were commanded to pasture their flocks in districts of no repute," are an 
addition, proceeding from his own feelings of hatred; for he has not shown that 
Goshen, the district of Egypt, is a place of no repute. The exodus of the people 
from Egypt he calls a flight, not at all remembering what is written in the book 
of Exodus regarding the departure of the Hebrews from the land of Egypt. We have 
enumerated these instances to show that what, literally considered, might appear 
to furnish ground of accusation, Celsus has not succeeded in proving to be 
either objectionable or foolish, having utterly failed to establish the evil 
character, as he regards it, of our Scriptures. 
CHAP. XLVIII. 
In the next place, as if he had devoted himself solely to the manifestation 
of his hatred and dislike of the Jewish and Christian doctrine, he says: "The 
more modest of Jewish and Christian writers give all these things an allegorical 
meaning;" and, "Because they are ashamed of these things, they take refuge in 
allegory." Now one might say to him, that if we must admit fables and fictions, 
whether written with a concealed meaning or with any other object, to be 
shameful narratives when taken in their literal acceptation, of what histories 
can this be said more truly than of the Grecian? In these histories, gods who 
are sons castrate the gods who are their fathers, and gods who are parents 
devour their own children, and a goddess-mother gives to the "father of gods and 
men" a stone to swallow instead of his own son, and a father has intercourse 
with his daughter, and a wife binds her own husband, having as her allies in the 
work the brother of the fettered god and his own daughter! But why should I 
enumerate these absurd stories of the Greeks regarding their gods, which are 
most shameful in themselves, even though invested with an allegorical meaning? 
(Take the instance) where Chrysippus of Soli, who is considered to be an 
ornament of the Stoic sect, on account of his numerous and learned treatises, 
explains a picture at Samos, in which Juno was represented as committing 
unspeakable abominations with Jupiter. This reverend philosopher says in his 
treatises, that matter receives the spermatic words of the god, and retains them 
within herself, in order to ornament the universe. For in the picture at Samos 
Juno represents matter, and Jupiter god. Now it is on account of these, and of 
countless other similar fables, that we would not even in word call the God of 
all things Jupiter, or the sun Apollo, or the moon Diana. But we offer to the 
Creator a worship which is pure, and speak with religious respect of His noble 
works of creation, not contaminating even in word the things of God; approving 
of the language of Plato in the Philebus, who would not admit that pleasure was 
a goddess, "so great is my reverence, Protarchus," he says, "for the very names 
of the gods." We verily entertain such reverence for the name of God, and for 
His noble works of creation, that we would not, even under pretext of an 
allegorical meaning, admit any fable which might do injury to the young. 
CHAP. XLIX. 
If Celsus had read the Scriptures in an impartial spirit, he would not have 
said that "our writings are incapable of admitting an allegorical meaning." For 
from the prophetic Scriptures, in which historical events are recorded (not from 
the historical), it is possible to be convinced that the historical portions 
also were written with an allegorical purpose, and were most skilfully adapted 
not only to the multitude of the simpler believers, but also to the few who are 
able or willing to investigate matters in an intelligent spirit. If, indeed, 
those writers at the present day who are deemed by Celsus the "more modest of 
the Jews and Christians" were the (first) allegorical interpreters of our 
Scriptures, he would have the appearance, perhaps, of making a plausible 
allegation. But since the very fathers and authors of the doctrines themselves 
give them an allegorical signification, what other inference can be drawn than 
that they were composed so as to be allegorically understood in their chief 
signification? And we shall adduce a few instances out of very many to show that 
Celsus brings an empty charge against the Scriptures, when he says "that they 
are incapable of admitting an allegorical meaning." Paul, the apostle of Jesus, 
says: "It is written in the law, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that 
treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen? or saith He it altogether 
for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is written, that he that plougheth 
should plough in hope, and he that thresheth in hope of partaking." And in 
another passage the same Paul says: "For it is written, For this cause shall a 
man leave his father and mother and shall be joined to his wife, and they two 
shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and 
the Church." And again, in another place: "We know that all our fathers were 
under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto 
Moses in the cloud, and in the sea." Then, explaining the history relating to 
the manna, and that referring to the miraculous issue of the water from the 
rock, he continues as follows: "And they did all eat the same spiritual meat, 
and did all drink the same spiritual drink. For they drank of that spiritual 
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ." Asaph, moreover, who, in 
showing the histories in Exodus and Numbers to be full of difficulties and 
parables, begins in the following manner, as recorded in the book of Psalms, 
where he is about to make mention of these things: "Give ear, O my people, to my 
law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth. I will open my mouth in 
parables; I will utter dark sayings of old, which we have heard and known, and 
our fathers have told us." 
CHAP. L 
Moreover, if the law of Moses had contained nothing which was to be 
understood as hating a secret meaning, the prophet would not have said in his 
prayer to God, "Open Thou mine eyes, and I will behold wondrous things out of 
Thy law;" whereas he knew that there was a veil of ignorance lying upon the 
heart of those who read but do not understand the figurative meaning, which veil 
is taken away by the gift of God, when He hears him who has done all that he 
can, and who by reason of habit has his senses exercised to distinguish between 
good and evil, and who continually utters the prayer, "Open Thou mine eyes, and 
I will behold wondrous things out of Thy law." And who is there that, on reading 
of the dragon that lives in the Egyptian river, and of the fishes which lurk in 
his scales, or of the excrement of Pharaoh which fills the mountains of Egypt, 
is not led at once to inquire who he is that fills the Egyptian mountains with 
his stinking excrement, and what the Egyptian mountains are; and what the rivers 
in Egypt are, of which the aforesaid Pharaoh boastfully says, "The rivers are 
mine, and I have made them;" and who the dragon is, and the fishes in its 
scales,--and this so as to harmonize with the interpretation to be given of the 
rivers? But why establish at greater length what needs no demonstration? For to 
these things applies the saying: "Who is wise, and he shall understand these 
things? or who is prudent, and he shall know them?" Now I have gone at some 
length into the subject, because I wished to show the unsoundness of the 
assertion of Celsus, that "the more modest among the Jews and Christians 
endeavour somehow to give these stories an allegorical signification, although 
some of them do not admit of this, but on the contrary are exceedingly silly 
inventions." Much rather are the stories of the Greeks not only very silly, but 
very impious inventions. For our narratives keep expressly in view the multitude 
of simpler believers, which was not done by those who invented the Grecian 
fables. And therefore not without propriety does Plato expel from his state all 
fables and poems of such a nature as those of which we have been speaking. 
CHAP. LI. 
Celsus appears to me to have heard that there are treatises in existence 
which contain allegorical explanations of the law of Moses. These however, he 
could not have read; for if he had he would not have said: "The allegorical 
explanations, however, which have been devised are much more shameful and absurd 
than the fables themselves, inasmuch as they endeavour to unite with marvellous 
and altogether insensate folly things which cannot at all be made to harmonize." 
He seems to refer in these words to the works of Philo, or to those of still 
older writers, such as Aristobulus. But I conjecture that Celsus has not read 
their books, since it appears to me that in many passages they have so 
successfully hit the meaning (of the sacred writers), that even Grecian 
philosophers would have been captivated by their explanations; for in their 
writings we find not only a polished style, but exquisite thoughts and 
doctrines, and a rational use of what Celsus imagines to be fables in the sacred 
writings. I know, moreover, that Numenius the Pythagorean--a surpassingly 
excellent expounder of Plato, and who held a foremost place as a teacher of the 
doctrines of Pythagoras--in many of his works quotes from the writings of Moses 
and the prophets, and applies to the passages in question a not improbable 
allegorical meaning, as in his work called Epops, and in those which treat of 
"Numbers" and of "Place." And in the third book of his dissertation on The Good, 
he quotes also a narrative regarding Jesus--without, however, mentioning His 
name--and gives it an allegorical signification, whether successfully or the 
reverse I may state on another occasion. He relates also the account respecting 
Moses, and Jannes, and Jambres. But we are not elated on account of this 
instance, though we express our approval of Numenius, rather than of Celsus and 
other Greeks, because he was willing to investigate our histories from a desire 
to acquire knowledge, and was (duly) affected by them as narratives which were 
to be allegorically understood, and which did not belong to the category of 
foolish compositions. 
CHAP. LII. 
After this, selecting from all the treatises which contain allegorical 
explanations and interpretations, expressed in a language and style not to be 
despised, the least important, such as might contribute, indeed, to strengthen 
the faith of the multitude of simple believers, but were not adapted to impress 
those of more intelligent mind, he continues: "Of such a nature do I know the 
work to be, entitled Controversy between one Papiscus and Jason, which is fitted 
to excite pity and hatred instead of laughter. It is not my purpose, however, to 
confute the statements contained in such works; for their fallacy is manifest to 
all, especially if any one will have the patience to read the books themselves. 
Rather do I wish to show that Nature teaches this, that God made nothing that is 
mortal, but that His works, whatever they are, are immortal, and theirs mortal. 
And the soul is the work of God, while the nature of the body is different. And 
in this respect there is no difference between the body of a bat, or of a worm, 
or of a frog, and that of a man; for the matter is the same, and their 
corruptible part is alike." Nevertheless I could wish that every one who heard 
Celsus declaiming and asserting that the treatise entitled Controversy between 
Jason and Papiscus regarding Christ was fitted to excite not laughter, but 
hatred, could fake the work into his hands, and patiently listen to its 
contents; that, finding in it nothing to excite hatred, he might condemn Celsus 
out of the book itself. For if it be impartially perused, it will be found that 
there is nothing to excite even laughter in a work in which a Christian is 
described as conversing with a Jew on the subject of the Jewish Scriptures, and 
proving that the predictions regarding Christ fitly apply to Jesus; although the 
other disputant maintains the discussion in no ignoble style, and in a manner 
not unbecoming the character of a Jew. 
CHAP. LIII. 
I do not know, indeed, how he could conjoin things that do not admit of 
union, and which cannot exist together at the same time in human nature, in 
saying, as he did, that "the above treatise deserved to be treated both with 
pity and hatred." For every one will admit that he who is the object of pity is 
not at the same moment an object of hatred, and that he who is the object of 
hatred is not at the same time a subject of pity. Celsus, moreover, says that it 
was not his purpose to refute such statements, because he thinks that their 
absurdity is evident to all, and that, even before offering any logical 
refutation, they will appear to be bad, and to merit both pity and hatred. But 
we invite him who peruses this reply of ours to the charges of Celsus to have 
patience, and to listen to our sacred writings themselves, and, as far as 
possible, to form an opinion from their contents of the purpose of the writers, 
and of their con sciences and disposition of mind; for he will discover that 
they are men who strenuously contend for what they uphold, and that some of them 
show that the history which they narrate is one which they have both seen and 
experienced, which was miraculous, and worthy of being recorded for the 
advantage of their future hearers. Will any one indeed venture to say that it is 
not the source and fountain of all blessing (to men) to believe in the God of 
all things, and to perform all our actions with the view of pleasing Him in 
everything whatever, and not to entertain even a thought unpleasing to Him, 
seeing that not only our words and deeds, but our very thoughts, will be the 
subject of future judgment? And what other arguments would more effectually lead 
human nature to adopt a virtuous life, than the belief or opinion that the 
supreme God beholds all things, not only what is said and done, but even what is 
thought by us? And let any one who likes compare any other system which at the 
same time converts and ameliorates, not merely one or two individuals, but, as 
far as in it lies, countless numbers, that by the comparison of both methods he 
may form a correct idea of the arguments which dispose to a virtuous life. 
CHAP. LIV. 
But as in the words which I quoted from Celsus, which are a paraphrase from 
the Timoeus, certain expressions occur, such as, "God made nothing mortal, but 
immortal things alone, while mortal things are the works of others, and the soul 
is a work of God, but the nature of the body is different, and there is no 
difference between the body of a man and that of a bat, or of a worm, or of a 
frog; for the matter is the same, and their corruptible part alike,"--let us 
discuss these points for a little; and let us show that Celsus either does not 
disclose his Epicurean opinions, or, as might be said by one person, has 
exchanged them for better, or, as another might say, has nothing in common save 
the name, with Celsus, the Epicurean. For he ought, in giving expression to such 
opinions, and in proposing to contradict not only us, but the by no means 
obscure sect of philosophers who are the adherents of Zeno of Citium, to have 
proved that the bodies of animals are not the work of God, and that the great 
skill displayed in their construction did not proceed from the highest 
intelligence. And he ought also, with regard to the countless diversities of 
plants, which are regulated by an inherent, incomprehensible nature, and which 
have been created for the by no means despicable use of man in general, and of 
the animals which minister to man, whatever other reasons may be adduced for 
their existence, not only to have stated his opinion, but also to have shown us 
that it was no perfect intelligence which impressed these qualities upon the 
matter of plants. And when he had once represented (various) divinities as the 
creators of all the bodies, the soul alone being the work of God, why did not 
he, who separated these great acts of creation, and apportioned them among a 
plurality of creators, next demonstrate by some convincing reason the existence 
of these diversities among divinities, some of which construct the bodies of 
men, and others--those, say, of beasts of burden, and others--those of wild 
animals? And he who saw that some divinities were the creators of dragons, and 
of asps, and of basilisks, and others of each plant and herb according to its 
species, ought to have explained the causes of these diversities. For probably, 
had he given himself carefully to the investigation of each particular point, he 
would either have observed that it was one God who was the creator of all, and 
who made each thing with a certain object and for a certain reason; or if he had 
failed to observe this, he would have discovered the answer which he ought to 
return to those who assert that corruptibility is a thing indifferent in its 
nature; and that there was no absurdity in a world which consists of diverse 
materials, being formed by one architect, who constructed the different kinds of 
things so as to secure the good of the whole. Or, finally, he ought to have 
expressed no opinion at all on so important a doctrine, since he did not intend 
to prove what he professed to demonstrate; unless, indeed, he who censures 
others for professing a simple faith, would have us to believe his mere 
assertions, although he gave out that he would not merely assert, but would 
prove his assertions. 
CHAP. LV. 
But I maintain that, if he had the patience (to use his own expression) to 
listen to the writings of Moses and the prophets, he would have had his 
attention arrested by the circumstance that the expression "God made" is applied 
to heaven and earth, and to what is called the firmament, and also to the lights 
and stars; and after these, to the great fishes, and to every living thing among 
creeping animals which the waters brought forth after their kinds, and to every 
fowl of heaven after its kind; and after these, to the wild beasts of the earth 
after their kind, and the beasts after their kind, and to every creeping thing 
upon the earth after its kind; and last of all to man. The expression "made," 
however, is not applied to other things; but it is deemed sufficient to say 
regarding light, "And it was light;" and regarding the one gathering together of 
all the waters that are under the whole heaven, "It was so." And in like manner 
also, with regard to what grew upon the earth, where it is said, "The earth 
brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after its kind and after its 
likeness, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit, whose seed is in itself, after its 
kind, upon the earth." He would have inquired, moreover, whether the recorded 
commands of God respecting the coming into existence of each part of the world 
were addressed to one thing or to several; and he would not lightly have charged 
with being unintelligible, and as having no secret meaning, the accounts related 
in these books, either by Moses, or, as we would say, by the Divine Spirit 
speaking in Moses, from whom also he derived the power of prophesying; since he 
"knew both the present, and the future, and the past," in a higher degree than 
those priests who are alleged by the poets to have possessed a knowledge of 
these things. 
CHAP. LVI. 
Moreover, since Celsus asserts that "the soul is the work of God, but that 
the nature of body is different; and that in this respect there is no difference 
between the body of a bat, or of a worm, or of a frog, and that of a man, for 
the matter is the same, and their corruptible part alike,"--we have to say in 
answer to this argument of his, that if, since the same matter underlies the 
body of a bat, or of a worm, or of a frog, or of a man, these bodies will differ 
in no respect from one another, it is evident then that these bodies also will 
differ in no respect from the sun, or the moon, or the stars, or the sky, or any 
other thing which is called by the Greeks a god, cognisable by the senses. For 
the same matter, underlying all bodies, is, properly speaking, without qualities 
and without form, and derives its qualities from some (other) source, I know not 
whence, since Celsus will have it that nothing corruptible can be the work of 
God. Now the corruptible part of everything whatever, being produced from the 
same underlying matter, must necessarily be the same, by Celsus' own showing; 
unless, indeed, finding himself here hard pressed, he should desert Plato, who 
makes the soul arise from a certain bowl, and take refuge with Aristotle and the 
Peripatetics, who maintain that the ether is immaterial, and consists of a fifth 
nature, separate from the other four elements, against which view both the 
Platonists and the Stoics have nobly protested. And we too, who are despised by 
Celsus, will contravene it, seeing we are required to explain i and maintain the 
following statement of the prophet: The heavens shall perish, but Thou 
remainest: and they all shall wax old as a garment; and as a vesture shall Thou 
fold them up, and they shall be changed: but Thou art the same." These remarks, 
however, are sufficient in reply to Celsus, when he asserts that "the soul is 
the work of God, but that the nature of body is different;" for from his 
argument it follows that there is no difference between the body of a bat, or of 
a worm, or of a frog, and that of a heavenly being. 
CHAP. LVII. 
See, then, whether we ought to yield to one who, holding such opinions, 
calumniates the Christians, and thus abandon a doctrine which explains the 
difference existing among bodies as due to the different qualities, internal and 
external, which are implanted in them. For we, too, know that there are "bodies 
celestial, and bodies terrestrial;" and that "the glory of the celestial is one, 
and the glory of the terrestrial another;" and that even the glory of the 
celestial bodies is not alike: for "one is the glory of the sun, and another the 
glory of the stars;" and among the stars themselves, "one star differeth from 
another star in glory." And therefore, as those who expect the resurrection of 
the dead, we assert that the qualities which are in bodies undergo change: since 
some bodies, which are sown in corruption, are raised in incorruption; and 
others, sown in dishonour, are raised in glory; and others, again, sown in 
weakness, are raised in power; and those which are sown natural bodies, are 
raised as spiritual. That the matter which underlies bodies is capable of 
receiving those qualities which the Creator pleases to bestow, is a point which 
all of us who accept the doctrine of providence firmly hold; so that, if God so 
willed, one quality is at the present time implanted in this portion of matter, 
and afterwards another of a different and better kind. But since there are, from 
the beginning of the world, laws established for the purpose of regulating the 
changes of bodies, and which will continue while the world lasts, I do not know 
whether, when a new and different order of things has succeeded after the 
destruction of the world, and what our Scriptures call the end (of the ages), it 
is not wonderful that at the present time a snake should be formed out of a dead 
man, growing, as the multitude affirm, out of the marrow of the back, and that a 
bee should spring from an ox, and a wasp from a horse, and a beetle from an ass, 
and, generally, worms from the most of bodies, Celsus, indeed, thinks that this 
can be shown to be the consequence of none of these bodies being the work of 
God, and that qualities (I know not whence it was so arranged that one should 
spring out of another) are not the work of a divine intelligence, producing the 
changes which occur in the qualities of matter. 
CHAP. LVIII. 
But we have something more to say to Celsus, when he declares that "the soul 
is the work of God, and that the nature of body is different," and puts forward 
such an opinion not only without proof, but even without clearly defining his 
meaning; for he did not make it evident whether he meant that every soul is the 
work of God, or only the rational soul. This, then, is what we have to say: If 
every soul is the work of God, it is manifest that those of the meanest 
irrational animals are God's work, so that the nature of all bodies is different 
from that of the soul. He appears, however, in what follows, where he says that 
"irrational animals are more beloved by God than we, and have a purer knowledge 
of divinity," to maintain that not only is the soul of man, but in a much 
greater degree that of irrational animals, the work of God; for this follows 
from their being said to be more beloved by God than we. Now if the rational 
soul alone be the work of God, then, in the first place, he did not clearly 
indicate that such was his opinion; and in the second place, this deduction 
follows from his indefinite language regarding the soul--viz., whether not every 
one, but only the rational, is the work of God--that neither is the nature of 
all bodies different (from the soul). But if the nature of all bodies be not 
different, although the body of each animal correspond to its soul, it is 
evident that the body of that animal whose soul was the work of God, would 
differ from the body of that animal in which dwells a soul which was not the 
work of God. And so the assertion will be false, that there is no difference 
between the body of a bat, or of a worm, or of a frog, and that of a man. 
CHAP. LIX. 
For it would, indeed, be absurd that certain stones and buildings should be 
regarded as more sacred or more profane than others, according as they were 
constructed for the honour of God, or for the reception of dishonourable and 
accursed persons; while bodies should not differ from bodies, according as they 
are inhabited by rational or irrational beings, and according as these rational 
beings are the most virtuous or most worthless of mankind. Such a principle of 
distinction, indeed, has led some to deify the bodies of distinguished men, as 
having received a virtuous soul, and to reject and treat with dishonour those of 
very wicked individuals. I do not maintain that such a principle has been always 
soundly exercised, but that it had its origin in a correct idea. Would a wise 
man, indeed, after the death of Anytus and Socrates, think of burying the bodies 
of both with like honours? And would he raise the same mound or tomb to the 
memory of both? These instances we have adduced because of the language of 
Celsus, that "none of these is the work of God" (where the words "of these" 
refer to the body of a man or to the snakes which come out of the body and to 
that of an ox, or of the bees which come from the body of an ox; and to that of 
a horse or of an ass, and to the wasps which come from a horse, and the beetles 
which proceed from an ass); for which reason we have been obliged to return to 
the consideration of his statement, that "the soul is the work of God, but that 
the nature of body is different." 
CHAP. LX. 
He next proceeds to say, that "a common nature pervades all the previously 
mentioned bodies, and one which goes and returns the same amid recurring 
changes." In answer to this it is evident from what has been already said that 
not only does a common nature pervade those bodies which have been previously 
enumerated, but the heavenly bodies as well. And if this is the case, it is 
clear also that, according to Celsus (although I do not know whether it is 
according to truth), it is one nature which goes and returns the same through 
all bodies amid recurring changes. It is evident also that this is the case in 
the opinion of those who hold that the world is to perish; while those also who 
hold the opposite view will endeavour to show, with out the assumption of a 
fifth substance, that in their judgment too it is one nature "which goes and 
returns the same through all bodies amid recurring changes." And thus, even that 
which is perishable remains in order to undergo a change; for the matter which 
underlies (all things), while its properties perish, stir abides according to 
the opinion of those who hold it to be uncreated. If, however, it can be shown 
by any arguments not to be uncreated, but to have been created for certain 
purposes, it is clear that it will not have the same nature of permanency which 
it would possess on the hypothesis of being uncreated. But it is not our object 
at present, in answering the charges of Celsus, to discuss these questions of 
natural philosophy. 
CHAP. LXI. 
He maintains, moreover, that "no product of matter is immortal." Now, in 
answer to this it may be said, that if no product of matter is immortal, then 
either the whole world is immortal, and thus not a product of matter, or it is 
not immortal. If, accordingly, the world is immortal (which is agreeable to the 
view of those who say that the soul alone is the work of God, and was produced 
from a certain bowl), let Celsus show that the world was not produced from a 
matter devoid of qualities, remembering his own assertion that "no product of 
matter is immortal." If, however, the world is not immortal (seeing it is a 
product of matter), but mortal, does it also perish, or does it not? For if it 
perish, it will perish as being a work of God; and then, in the event of the 
world perishing, what will become of the saul, which is also a work of God? Let 
Celsus answer this! But if, perverting the notion of immortality, he will assert 
that, although perishable, it is immortal, because it does not really perish; 
that it is capable of dying, but does not actually die,--it is evident that, 
according to him, there will exist something which is at the same time mortal 
and immortal, by being capable of both conditions; and that which does not die 
will be mortal, and that which is not immortal by nature will be termed in a 
peculiar sense immortal, because it does not die! According to what distinction, 
then, in the meaning of words, will he maintain that no product of matter is 
immortal? And thus you see that the ideas contained in his writings, when 
closely examined and tested, are proved not to be sound and incontrovertible. 
And after making these assertions he adds: "On this point these remarks are 
sufficient; and if any one is capable of hearing and examining further, he will 
come to know (the truth)." Let us, then, who in his opinion are unintelligent 
individuals, see what will result from our being able to listen to him for a 
little, and so continue our investigation. 
CHAP. LXII. 
After these matters, then, he thinks that he can make us acquainted in a few 
words with the questions regarding the nature of evil, which have been variously 
discussed in many important treatises, and which have received very opposite 
explanations. His words are: "There neither were formerly, nor are there now, 
nor will there be again, more or fewer evils in the world (than have always 
been). For the nature of all things is one and the same, and the generation of 
evils is always the same." He seems to have paraphrased these words from the 
discussions in the Theoetetus, where Plato makes Socrates say: 
"It is neither possible for evils to disappear from among men, nor for them 
to become established among the gods," and so on. But he appears to me not to 
have understood Plato correctly, although professing to include all truth in 
this one treatise, and giving to his own book against us the title of A 
True Discourse. For the language in the Timoeus, where it is said, "When the 
gods purify the earth with water," shows that the earth, when purified with 
water, contains less evil than it did before its purification. And this 
assertion, that there at one time were fewer evils in the world, is one which we 
make, in harmony with the opinion of Plato, because of the language in the 
Theoetetus, where he says that "evils cannot disappear from among men." 
CHAP. LXIII. 
I do not understand how Celsus, while admitting the existence of Providence, 
at least so far as appears from the language of this book, can say that there 
never existed (at any time) either more or fewer evils, but, as it were, a fixed 
number; thus annihilating the beautiful doctrine regarding the indefinite s 
nature of evil, and asserting that evil, even in its own nature, is infinite. 
Now it appears to follow from the position, that there never have been, nor are 
now, nor ever will be, more or fewer evils in the world; that as, according to 
the view of those who hold the indestructibility of the world, the equipoise of 
the elements is maintained by a Providence (which does not permit one to gain 
the preponderance over the others, in order to prevent the destruction of the 
world), so a kind of Providence presides, as it were, over evils (the number of 
which is fixed), to prevent their being either increased or diminished! In other 
ways, too, are the arguments of Celsus concerning evil confuted, by those 
philosophers who have investigated the subjects of good and evil, and who have 
proved also from history that in former times it was without the city, and with 
their faces concealed by masks, that loose women hired themselves to those who 
wanted them; that subsequently, becoming more impudent, they laid aside their 
masks, though not being permitted by the laws to enter the cities, they (still) 
remained without them, until, as the dissoluteness of manners daily increased, 
they dared even to enter the cities. Such accounts are given by Chrysippus in 
the introduction to his work on Good and Evil. From this also it may be seen 
that evils both increase and decrease, viz., that those individuals who were 
called "Ambiguous" used formerly to present themselves openly to view, suffering 
and committing all shameful things, while subserving the passions of those who 
frequented their society; but recently they have been expelled by the 
authorities. And of countless evils which, owing to the spread of wickedness, 
have made their appearance in human life, we may say that formerly they did not 
exist. For the most ancient histories, which bring innumerable other accusations 
against sinful men, know nothing of the perpetrators of abominable crimes. 
CHAP. LXIV. 
And now, after these arguments, and others of a similar kind, how can Celsus 
escape appearing in a ridiculous light, when he imagines that there never has 
been in the past, nor will be in the future, a greater or less number of evils? 
For although the nature of all things is one and the same, it does not at all 
follow that the production of evils is a constant quantity. For although the 
nature of a certain individual is one and the same, yet his mind, and his 
reason, and his actions, are not always alike: there being a time when he had 
not yet attained to reason; and another, when, with the possession of reason, he 
had become stained with wickedness, and when this increased to a greater or less 
degree; and again, a time when he devoted himself to virtue, and made greater or 
less progress therein, attaining sometimes the very summit of perfection, 
through longer or shorter periods of contemplation. In like manner, we may make 
the same assertion in a higher degree of the nature of the universe, that 
although it is one and the same in kind, yet neither do exactly the same things, 
nor yet things that are similar, occur in it; for we neither have invariably 
productive nor unproductive seasons, nor yet periods of continuous rain or of 
drought. And so in the same way, with regard to virtuous souls, there are 
neither appointed periods of fertility nor of barrenness; and the same is the 
case with the greater or less spread of evil. And those who desire to 
investigate all things to the best of their ability, must keep in view this 
estimate of evils, that their amount is not always the same, owing to the 
working of a Providence which either preserves earthly things, or purges them by 
means of floods and conflagrations; and effects this, perhaps, not merely with 
reference to things on earth, but also to the whole universe of things s I which 
stands in need of purification, when the wickedness that is in it has become 
great. 
CHAP. LXV. 
After this Celsus continues: "It is not easy, indeed, for one who is not a 
philosopher to ascertain the origin of evils, though it is sufficient for the 
multitude to say that they do not proceed from God, but cleave to matter, and 
have their abode among mortal things; while the course of mortal things being 
the same from beginning to end, the same things must always, agreeably to the 
appointed cycles, recur in the past, present, and future." Celsus here observes 
that it is not easy for one who is not a philosopher to ascertain the origin of 
evils, as if it were an easy matter for a philosopher to gain this knowledge, 
while for one who is not a philosopher it was difficult, though still possible, 
for such an one, although with great labour, to attain it. Now, to this we say, 
that the origin of evils is a subject which is not easy even for a philosopher 
to master, and that perhaps it is impossible even for such to attain a clear 
understanding of it, unless it be revealed to them by divine inspiration, both 
what evils are, and how they originated, and how they shall be made to 
disappear. But although ignorance of God is an evil, and one of the greatest of 
these is not to know how God is to be served and worshipped, yet, as even Celsus 
would admit, there are undoubtedly some philosophers who have been ignorant of 
this, as is evident from the views of the different philosophical sects; 
whereas, according to our judgment, no one is capable of ascertaining the origin 
of evils who does not know that it is wicked to suppose that piety is preserved 
uninjured amid the laws that are established in different states, in conformity 
with the generally prevailing ideas of government. No one, moreover, who has not 
heard what is related of him who is called "devil," and of his "angels," and 
what he was before he became a devil, and how he became such, and what was the 
cause of the simultaneous apostasy of those who are termed his angels, will be 
able to ascertain the origin of evils. But he who would attain to this knowledge 
must learn more accurately the nature of demons, and know that they are not the 
work of God so far as respects their demoniacal nature, but only in so far as 
they are possessed of reason; and also what their origin was, so that they 
became beings of such a nature, that while converted into demons, the powers of 
their mind remain. And if there be any topic of human investigation which is 
difficult for our nature to grasp, certainly the origin of evils may be 
considered to be such. 
CHAP. LXVI. 
Celsus in the next place, as if he were able to tell certain secrets 
regarding the origin of evils, but chose rather to keep silence, and say only 
what was suitable to the multitude, continues as follows: "It is sufficient to 
say to the multitude regarding the origin of evils, that they do not proceed 
from God, but cleave to matter, and dwell among mortal things." It is true, 
certainly, that evils do not proceed from God; for according to Jeremiah, one of 
our prophets, it is certain that "out of the mouth of the Most High proceedeth 
not evil and good." But to maintain that matter, dwelling among mortal things, 
is the cause of evils, is in our opinion not true. For it is the mind of each 
individual which is the cause of the evil which arises in him, and this is evil 
(in the abstract); while the actions which proceed from it are wicked, and there 
is, to speak with accuracy, nothing else in our view that is evil. I am aware, 
however, that this topic requires very elaborate treatment, which (by the grace 
of Cod enlightening the mind) may be successfully attempted by him who is deemed 
by God worthy to attain the necessary knowledge on this subject. 
CHAP. LXVII. 
I do not understand how Celsus should deem it of advantage, in writing a 
treatise against us, to adopt an opinion which requires at least much plausible 
reasoning to make it appear, as far as he can do so, that "the course of mortal 
things is the same from beginning to end, and that the same things must always, 
according to the appointed cycles, recur in the past, present, and future." Now, 
if this be true, our free-will is annihilated. For if, in the revolution of 
mortal things, the same events must perpetually occur in the past, present, and 
future, according to the appointed cycles, it is clear that, of necessity, 
Socrates will always be. a philosopher, and be condemned for introducing strange 
gods and for corrupting the youth. And Anytus and Melitus must always be his 
accusers, and the council of the Areopagus must ever condemn him to death by 
hemlock. And in the same way, according to the appointed cycles, Phalaris must 
always play the tyrant, and Alexander of Pherae commit the same acts of cruelty, 
and those condemned to the bull of Phalaris continually pour forth their 
wailings from it. But if these things be granted, I do not see how our free-will 
can be preserved, or how praise or blame can be administered with propriety. We 
may say further to Celsus, in answer to such a view, that "if the course of 
moral things be always the same from beginning to end, and if, according to the 
appointed cycles, the same events must always occur in the past, present, and 
future," then, according to the appointed cycles, Moses must again come forth 
from Egypt with the Jewish people, and Jesus again come to dwell in human life, 
and perform the same actions which (according to this view) he has done not 
once, but countless times, as the periods have revolved. Nay, Christians too 
will be the same in the appointed cycles; and Celsus will again write this 
treatise of his, which he has done innumerable times before. 
CHAP. LXVIII. 
Celsus, however, says that it is only "the course of mortal things which, 
according to the appointed cycles, must always be the same in the past, present, 
and future;" whereas the majority of the Stoics maintain that this is the case 
not only with the course of mortal, but also with that of immortal things, and 
of those whom they regard as gods. For after the conflagration of the world, 
which has taken place countless times in the past, and will happen countless 
times in the future, there has been, and will be, the same arrangement of all 
things from the beginning to the end. The Stoics, indeed, in endeavouring to 
parry, I don't know how, the objections raised to their views, allege that as 
cycle after cycle returns, all men will be altogether unchanged from those who 
lived in former cycles; so that Socrates will not live again, but one altogether 
like to Socrates, who will marry a wife exactly like Xanthippe, and will be 
accused by men exactly like Anytus and Melitus. I do not understand, however, 
how the world is to be always the same, and one individual not different from 
another, and yet the things in it not the same, though exactly alike. But the 
main argument in answer to the statements of Celsus and of the Stoics will be 
more appropriately investigated elsewhere, since on the present occasion it is 
not consistent with the purpose we have in view to expatiate on these points. 
CHAP. LXIX. 
He continues to say that "neither have visible things been given to man (by 
God), but each individual thing comes into existence and perishes for the sake 
of the safety of the whole passing agreeably to the change, which I have already 
mentioned, from one thing to another." It is unnecessary, however, to linger 
over the refutation of these statements, which have been already refuted to the 
best of my ability. And the following, too, has been answered, viz., that "there 
will neither be more nor less good and evil among mortals." This point also has 
been referred to, viz., that "God does not need to amend His work afresh." But 
it is not as a man who has imperfectly designed some piece of workmanship, and 
executed it unskilfully, that God administers correction to the world, in 
purifying it by a flood or by a conflagration, but in order to prevent the tide 
of evil from rising to a greater height; and, moreover, I am of opinion that it 
is at periods which are precisely determined beforehand that He sweeps 
wickedness away, so as to contribute to the good of the whole world. If, 
however, he should assert that, after the disappearance of evil, it again comes 
into existence, such questions will have to be examined in a special treatise. 
It is, then, always in order to repair what has become faulty s that God desires 
to amend His work afresh. For although, in the creation of the world, all things 
had been arranged by Him in the most beautiful and stable manner, He 
nevertheless needed to exercise some healing power upon those who were labouring 
under the disease of wickedness, and upon a whole world, which was polluted as 
it were thereby. But nothing has been neglected by God, or will be neglected by 
Him; for He does at each particular juncture what it becomes Him to do in a 
perverted and changed world. And as a husbandman performs different acts of 
husbandry upon the soil and its productions, according to the varying seasons of 
the year, so God administers entire ages of time, as if they were, so to speak, 
so many individual years, performing during each one of them what is requisite 
with a reasonable regard to the care of the world; and this, as it is truly 
understood by God alone, so also is it accomplished by Him. 
CHAP. LXX. 
Celsus has made a statement regarding evils of the following nature, viz., 
that "although a thing may seem to you to be evil, it is by no means certain 
that it is so; for you do not know what is of advantage to yourself, or to 
another, or to the whole world." Now this assertion is made with a certain 
degree of caution; and it hints that the nature of evil is not wholly wicked, 
because that which may be considered so in individual cases, may contain 
something which is of advantage to the whole community. However, lest any one 
should mistake my words, and find a pretence of wrongdoing, as if his wickedness 
were profitable to the world, or at least might be so, we have to say, that 
although God, who preserves the free-will of each individual, may make use of 
the evil of the wicked for the administration of the world, so disposing them as 
to conduce to the benefit of the whole; yet, notwithstanding, such an individual 
is deserving of censure, and as such has been appointed for a use, which is a 
subject of loathing to each separate individual, although of advantage to the 
whole community. It is as if one were to say that in the case of a city, a man 
who had committed certain crimes, and on account of these had been condemned to 
serve in public works that were useful to the community, did something that was 
of advantage to the entire city, while he himself was engaged in an abominable 
task, in which no one possessed of moderate understanding would wish to be 
engaged. Paul also, the apostle of Jesus, teaches us that even the very wicked 
will contribute to the good of the whole, while in themselves they will be 
amongst the vile, but that the most virtuous men, too, will be of the greatest 
advantage to the world, and will therefore on that account occupy the noblest 
position. His words are: "But in a great house there are not only vessels of 
gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to 
dishonour. If a man therefore purge himself, he shall be a vessel unto honour, 
sanctified and meet for the Master's use, prepared unto every good work." These 
remarks I have thought it necessary to make in reply to the assertion, that 
"although a thing may seem to you to be evil, it is by no means certain that it 
is so, for you do not know what is of advantage either to yourself or to 
another," in order that no one may take occasion from what has been said on the 
subject to commit sin, on the pretext that he will thus be useful to the world. 

CHAP. LXXI. 
But as, in what follows, Celsus, not understanding that the language of 
Scripture regarding God is adapted to an anthropopathic point of view, ridicules 
those passages which speak of words of anger addressed to the ungodly, and of 
threatenings directed against sinners, we have to say that, as we ourselves, 
when talking with very young children, do not aim at exerting our own power of 
eloquence, but, adapting ourselves to the weakness of our charge, both say and 
do those thingS which may appear to us useful for the correction and improvement 
of the children as children, so the word of God appears to have dealt with the 
history, making the capacity of the hearers, and the benefit which they were to 
receive, the standard of the appropriateness of its announcements (regarding 
Him). And, generally, with regard to such a style of speaking about God, we find 
in the book of Deuteronomy the following: "The LORD thy God bare with your 
manners, as a man would bear with the manners of his son." It is, as it were, 
assuming the manners of a man in order to secure the advantage of men that the 
Scripture makes use of such expressions; for it would not have been suitable to 
the condition of the multitude, that what God had to say to them should be 
spoken by Him in a manner more befitting the majesty of His own person. And yet 
he who is anxious to attain a true understanding of holy Scripture, will 
discover the spiritual truths which are spoken by it to those who are called 
"spiritual," by comparing the meaning of what is addressed to those of weaker 
mind with what is announced to such as are of acuter understanding, both 
meanings being frequently found in the same passage by him who is capable of 
comprehending it. 
CHAP. LXXII. 
We speak, indeed, of the "wrath" of God. We do not, however, assert that it 
indicates any "passion" on His part, but that it is something which is asumed in 
order to discipline by stern means those sinners who have committed many and 
grievous sins. For that which is called God's "wrath," and "anger," is a means 
of discipline; and that such a view is agreeable to Scripture, is evident from 
what is said in the sixth Psalm, "O LORD, rebuke me not in Thine anger, neither 
chasten me in Thy hot displeasure;" and also in jeremiah. "O LORD, correct me, 
but with judgment: not in Thine anger, lest Thou bring me to nothing." Any one, 
moreover, who reads in the second book of Kings of the "wrath" of God, inducing 
David to number the people, and finds from the first book of Chronicles that it 
was the devil who suggested this measure, will, on comparing together the two 
statements, easily see for what purpose the "wrath" is mentioned, of which 
"wrath," as the Apostle Paul declares, all men are children: "We were by nature 
children of wrath, even as others." Moreover, that "wrath" is no passion on the 
part of God, but that each one bringS it upon himself by his sins, will be clear 
from the further statement of Paul: "Or despisest thou the riches of His 
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of 
God leadeth thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, 
treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the 
righteous judgment of God." How, then, can any one treasure up for himself 
"wrath" against a "day of wrath," if "wrath" be understood in the sense of 
"passion?" or how can the "passion of wrath" be a help to discipline? Besides, 
the Scripture, which tells us not to be angry at all, and which says in the 
thirty-seventh Psalm, "Cease from anger, and forsake wrath," and which commands 
us by the mouth of Paul to "put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, 
filthy communication," would not involve God in the same passion from which it 
would have us to be altogether free. It is manifest, further, that the language 
used regarding the wrath of God is to be understood figuratively from what is 
related of His "sleep," from which, as if awaking Him, the prophet says: "Awake, 
why sleepest Thou, Lord?" and again: "Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, 
and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine." If, then, "sleep" must 
mean something else, and not what the first acceptation of the word conveys, why 
should not "wrath" also be understood in a similar way? The "threatenings," 
again, are intimations of the (punishments) which are to befall the wicked: for 
it is as if one were to call the words of a physician "threats," when he tells 
his patients, "I will have to use the knife, and apply cauteries, if you do not 
obey my prescriptions, and regulate your diet and mode of life in such a way as 
I direct you." It is no human passions, then, which we ascribe to God, nor 
impious opinions which we entertain of Him; nor do we err when we present the 
various narratives concerning Him, drawn from the Scriptures them selves, after 
careful comparison one with another. For those who are wise ambassadors of the 
"word" have no other object in view than to free as far as they can their 
hearers from weak opinions, and to endue them with intelligence. 
CHAP. LXXIII. 
And as a sequel to his non-understanding of the statements regarding the 
"wrath" of God, he continues: "Is it not ridiculous to suppose that, whereas a 
man, who became angry with the Jews, slew them all from the youth upwards, and 
burned their city (so powerless were they to resist him), the mighty God, as 
they say, being angry, and indignant, and uttering threats, should, (instead of 
punishing them,) send His own Son, who endured the sufferings which He did?" If 
the Jews, then, after the treatment which they dared to inflict upon Jesus, 
perished with all their youth, and had their city consumed by fire, they 
suffered this punishment in consequence of no other wrath than that which they 
treasured up for themselves; for the judgment of God against them, which was 
determined by the divine appointment, is termed "wrath" agreeably to a 
traditional usage of the Hebrews. And what the Son of the mighty God suffered, 
He suffered voluntarily for the salvation of men, as has been stated to the best 
of my ability in the preceding pages. He then continues: "But that I may speak 
not of the Jews alone (for that is not my object), but of the whole of nature, 
as I promised, I will bring out more clearly what has been already stated." Now 
what modest man, on reading these words, and knowing the weakness of humanity, 
would not be indignant at the offensive nature of the promise to give an account 
of the "whole of nature," and at an arrogance like that which prompted him to 
inscribe upon his book the title which he ventured to give it (of a True 
Discourse)? But let us see what he has to say regarding the "whole of nature," 
and what he is to place "in a clearer light." 
CHAP. LXXIV. 
He next, in many words, blames us for asserting that God made all things for 
the sake of man. Because from the history of animals, and from the sagacity 
manifested by them, he would show that all things came into existence not more 
for the sake of man than of the irrational animals. And here he seems to me to 
speak in a similar manner to those who, through dislike of their enemies, accuse 
them of the same things for which their own friends are commended. For as, in 
the instance referred to, hatred blinds these persons from seeing that they are 
accusing their very dearest friends by the means through which they think they 
are slandering their enemies; so in the same way, Celsus also, becoming confused 
in his argument, does not see that he is bringing a charge against the 
philosophers of the Porch, who, not amiss, place man in the foremost rank, and 
rational nature in general before irrational animals, and who maintain that 
Providence created all things mainly on account of rational nature. Rational 
beings, then, as being the principal ones, occupy the place, as it were, of 
children in the womb, while irrational and soulless beings hold that of the 
envelope which is created along with the child. I think, too, that as in cities 
the superintendents of the goods and market discharge their duties for the sake 
of no other than human beings, while dogs and other irrational animals have the 
benefit of the superabundance; so Providence provides in a special manner for 
rational creatures; while this l also follows, that irrational creatures 
likewise enjoy the benefit of what is done for the sake of man. And as he is in 
error who alleges that the superintendents of the markets make provision in no 
greater degree for men than for dogs, because dogs also get their share of the 
goods; so in a far greater degree are Celsus and they who think with him guilty 
of impiety towards the God who makes provision for rational beings, in asserting 
that His arrangements are made in no greater degree for the sustenance of human 
beings than for that of plants, and trees, and herbs, and thorns. 
CHAP. LXXV. 
For, in the first place, he is of opinion that "thunders, and lightnings, and 
rains are not the works of God,"--thus showing more clearly at last his 
Epicurean leanings; and in the second place, that "even if one were to grant 
that these were the works of God, they are brought into existence not more for 
the support of us who are human beings, than for that of plants, and trees, and 
herbs, and thorns,"--maintaining, like a true Epicurean, that these things are 
the product of chance, and not the work of Providence. For if these things are 
of no more use to us than to plants, and trees, and herbs, and thorns, it is 
evident either that they do not proceed from Providence at all, or from a 
providence which does not provide for us in a greater degree than for trees, and 
herbs, and thorns. Now, either of these suppositions is impious in itself, and 
it would be foolish to refute such statements by answering any one who brought 
against us the charge of impiety; for it is manifest to every one, from what has 
been said, who is the person guilty of impiety. In the next place, he adds: 
"Although you may say that these things, viz., plants, and trees, and herbs, and 
thorns, grow for the use of men, why will you maintain that they grow for the 
use of men rather than for that of the most savage of irrational animals?" Let 
Celsus then say distinctly that the great diversity among the products of the 
earth is not the work of Providence, but that a certain fortuitous concurrence 
of atoms gave birth to qualities so diverse, and that it was owing to chance 
that so many kinds of plants, and trees, and herbs resemble one another, and 
that no disposing reason gave existence to them, and that they do not derive 
their origin from an understanding that is beyond all admiration. We Christians, 
however, who are devoted to the worship of the only God, who created these 
things, feel grateful for them to Him who made them, because not only for us, 
but also (on our account) for the animals which are subject to us, He has 
prepared such a home, seeing "He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and 
herb for the service of man, that He may bring forth food out of the earth, and 
wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and 
bread which strengtheneth man's heart." But that He should have provided food 
even for the most savage animals is not matter of surprise, for these very 
animals are said by some who have philosophized (upon the subject) to have been 
created for the purpose of affording exercise to the rational creature. And one 
of our own wise men says somewhere: "Do not say, What is this? or Wherefore is 
that? for all things have been made for their uses. And do not say, What is 
this? or Wherefore is that? for everything shall be sought out in its season." 
CHAP. LXXVI. 
After this, Celsus, desirous of maintaining that Providence created the 
products of the earth, not more on our account than on that of the most savage 
animals, thus proceeds: "We indeed by labour and suffering earn a scanty and 
toilsome subsistence, while all things are produced for them without their 
sowing and ploughing." He does not observe that God, wishing to exercise the 
human understanding in all countries (that it might not remain idle and 
unacquainted with the arts), created man a being full of wants, in order that by 
virtue of his very needy condition he might be compelled to be the inventor of 
arts, some of which minister to his subsistence, and others to his protection. 
For it was better that those who would not have sought out divine things, nor 
engaged in the study of philosophy, should be placed in a condition of want, in 
order that they might employ their understanding in the invention of the arts, 
than that they should altogether neglect the cul-tivation of their minds, 
because their condition was one of abundance. The want of the necessaries of 
human life led to the invention on the one hand of the art of husbandry, on the 
other to that of the cultivation of the vine; again, to the art of gardening, 
and the arts of carpentry and smithwork, by means of which were formed the tools 
required for the arts which minister to the support of life. The want of 
covering, again, introduced the art of weaving, which followed that of 
wool-carding and spinning; and again, that of house-building: and thus the 
intelligence of men ascended even to the art of architecture. The want of 
necessaries caused the products also of other places to be conveyed, by means of 
the arts of sailing and pilotage, to those who were without them; so that even 
on that account one might admire the Providence which made the rational being 
subject to want in a far higher degree than the irrational animals, and yet all 
with a view to his advantage. For the irrational animals have their food 
provided for them, because there is not in them even an impulse towards the 
invention of the arts. They have, besides, a natural covering; for they are 
provided either with hair, or wings, or scales, or shells. Let the above, then, 
be our answer to the assertions of Celsus, when he says that "we indeed by 
labour and suffering earn a scanty and toilsome subsistence, while all things 
are produced for them without their sowing and ploughing." 
CHAP. LXXVII. 
In the next place, forgetting that his object is to accuse both Jews and 
Christians, he quotes against himself an iambic verse of Euripides, which is 
opposed to his view, and, joining issue with the words, charges them with being 
an erroneous statement. His words are as follow: "But if you will quote the 
saying of Euripides, that 'The Sun and Night are to mortals slaves,' why should 
they be so in a greater degree to us than to ants and flies? For the night is 
created for them in order that they may rest, and the day that they may see and 
resume their work." Now it is undoubted, that not only have certain of the Jews 
and Christians declared that the sun and the heavenly bodies are our servants; 
but he also has said this, who, according to some, is the philosopher of the 
stage, and who was a hearer of the lectures on the philosophy of nature 
delivered by Anaxagoras. But this man asserts that all things in the world are 
subject to all rational beings,--one rational nature being taken to represent 
all, On the principle of a part standing for the whole; which, again, clearly 
appears from the verse:- "The Sun and Night are to mortals slaves." 
Perhaps the tragic poet meant the day when he said the sun, inasmuch as it is 
the cause of the day,--teaching that those things which most need the day and 
night are the things which are under the moon, and other things in a less degree 
than those which are upon the earth. Day and night, then, are subject to 
mortals, being created for the sake of rational beings. And if ants and flies, 
which labour by day and rest by night, have, besides, the benefit of those 
things which were created for the sake of men, we must not say that day and 
night were brought into being for the sake of ants and flies, nor must we 
suppose that they were created for the sake of nothing, but, agreeably to the 
design of Providence, were formed for the sake of man. 
CHAP. LXXVIII. 
He next proceeds further to object against himself what is said on behalf of 
man, viz., that the irrational animals were created on his account, saying: "If 
one were to call us the lords of the animal creation because we hunt the other 
animals and live upon their flesh, we would say, Why were not we rather created 
on their account, since they hunt and devour us? Nay, we require nets and 
weapons, and the assistance of many persons, along with dogs, when engaged in 
the chase; while they are immediately and spontaneously provided by nature with 
weapons which easily bring us under their power." And here we may observe, that 
the gift of understanding has been bestowed upon us as a mighty aid, far 
superior to any weapon which wild beasts may seem to possess. We, indeed, who 
are far weaker in bodily strength than the beasts, and shorter in stature than 
some of them, yet by means of our understanding obtain the mastery, and capture 
the huge elephants. We subdue by our gentle treatment those animals whose nature 
it is to be tamed, while with those whose nature is different, or which do not 
appear likely to be of use to us when tamed, we take such precautionary 
measures, that when we desire it, we keep such wild beasts shut up; and when we 
need the flesh of their bodies for food, we slaughter them, as we do those 
beasts which are not of a savage nature. The Creator, then, has constituted all 
things the servants of the rational being and of his natural understanding. For 
some purposes we require dogs, say as guardians of our sheep-folds, or of our 
cattle-yards, or goat-pastures, or of our dwellings; and for other purposes we 
need oxen, as for agriculture; and for others, again, we make use of those which 
bear the yoke, or beasts of burden. And so it may be said that the race of 
lions, and bears, and leopards, and wild boars, and such like, has been given to 
us in order to call into exercise the elements of the manly character that 
exists within us. 
CHAP. LXXIX. 
In the next place, in answer to the human race, who perceive their own 
superiority, which far exceeds that of the irrational animals, he says: "With 
respect to your assertion, that God gave you the power to capture wild beasts, 
and to make your own use of them, we would say that, in all probability, before 
cities were built, and arts invented, and societies such as now exist were 
formed, and weapons and nets employed, men were generally caught and devoured by 
wild beasts, while wild beasts were very seldom captured by men." Now, in 
reference to this, observe that although men catch wild beasts, and wild beasts 
make prey of men, there is a great difference between the case of such as by 
means of their understanding obtain the mastery over those whose superiority 
consists in their savage and cruel nature, and that of those who do not make use 
of their understanding to secure their safety from injury by wild beasts. But 
when Celsus gays, "before cities were built, and arts invented, and societies 
such as now exist were formed," he appears to have forgotten what he had before 
said, that "the world was uncreated and incorruptible, and that it was only the 
things on earth which underwent deluges and conflagrations, and that all these 
things did not happen at the same time." Now let if be granted that these 
admissions on his part are entirely in harmony with our views, though not at all 
with him and his statements made above; yet what does it all avail to prove that 
in the beginning men were mostly captured and devoured by wild beasts, while 
wild beasts were never caught by men? For, since the world was created in 
conformity with the will of Providence, and God presided over the universe of 
things, it was necessary that the elements of the human race should at the 
commencement of its existence be placed under some protection of the higher 
powers, so that there might be formed from the beginning a union of the divine 
nature with that of men. And the poet of Ascra, perceiving this, sings:- "For 
common then were banquets, and common were seats, Alike to immortal gods and 
mortal men." 
CHAP. LXXX. 
Those holy Scriptures, moreover, which bear the name of Moses, introduce the 
first men as hearing divine voices and oracles, and beholding sometimes the 
angels of God coming to visit them. For it was probable that in the beginning of 
the world's existence human nature would be assisted to a greater degree (than 
afterwards), until progress had been made towards the attainment of 
understanding and the other virtues, and the invention of the arts, and they 
should thus be able to maintain life of themselves, and no longer stand in need 
of superintendents, and of those to guide them who do so with a miraculous 
manifestation of the means which subserve the will of God. Now it follows from 
this, that it is false that "in the beginning men were captured and devoured by 
wild beasts, while wild beasts were very seldom caught by men." And from this, 
too, it is evident that the following statement of Celsus is untrue, that "in 
this way God rather subjected men to wild beasts." For God did not subject men 
to wild beasts, but gave wild beasts to be a prey to the understanding of man, 
and to the arts, which are directed against them, and which are the product of 
the understanding. For it was not without the help of God that men desired for 
themselves the means of protection against wild beasts, and of securing the 
mastery over them. 
CHAP. LXXXI. 
Our noble opponent, however, not observing how many philosophers there are 
who admit the existence of Providence, and who hold that Providence created all 
things for the sake of rational beings, overturns as far as he can those 
doctrines which are of use in showing the harmony that prevails in these matters 
between Christianity and philosophy; nor does he see how great is the injury 
done to religion from accepting the statement that before God there is no 
difference between a man and an ant or a bee, but proceeds to add, that "if men 
appear to be superior to irrational animals on this account, that they have 
built cities, and make use of a political constitution, and forms of government, 
and sovereignties, this is to say nothing to the purpose, for ants and bees do 
the same. Bees, indeed, have a sovereign, who has followers and attendants; and 
there occur among them wars and victories, and slaughterings of the vanquished, 
and cities and suburbs, and a succession of labours, and judgments passed upon 
the idle and the wicked; for the drones are driven away and punished." Now here 
he did not observe the difference that exists between what is done after reason 
and consideration, and what is the result of an irrational nature, and is purely 
mechanical. For the origin of these things is not explained by the existence of 
any rational principle in those who make them, because they do not possess any 
such principle; but the most ancient Being, who is also the Son of God, and the 
King of all things that exist, has created an irrational nature, which, as being 
irrational, acts as a help to those who are deemed worthy of reason. Cities, 
accordingly, were established among men, with many arts and well-arranged laws; 
while constitutions, and governments, and sovereignties among men are either 
such as are properly so termed, and which exemplify certain virtuous tendencies 
and workings, or they are those which are improperly so called, and which were 
devised, so far as could be done, in imitation of the former: for it was by 
contemplating these that the most successful legislators established the best 
constitutions, and governments, and sovereignties. None of these things, 
however, can be found among irrational animals, although Celsus may transfer 
rational names, and arrangements which belong to rational beings, as cities and 
constitutions, and rulers and sovereignties, even to ants and bees; in respect 
to which matters, however, ants and bees merit no approval, because they do not 
act from reflection. But we ought to admire the divine nature, which extended 
even to irrational animals the capacity, as it were, of imitating rational 
beings, perhaps with a view of putting rational beings to shame; so that by 
looking upon ants, for instance, they might become more industrious and more 
thrifty in the management of their goods; while, by considering the bees, they 
might place themselves in subjection to their Ruler, and take their respective 
parts in those constitutional duties which are of use in ensuring the safety of 
cities. 
CHAP. LXXXII. 
Perhaps also the so-called wars among the bees convey instruction as to the 
manner in which wars, if ever there arise a necessity for them, should be waged 
in a just and orderly way among men. But the bees have no cities or suburbs; 
while their hives and hexagonal cells, and succession of labours, are for the 
sake of men, who require honey for many purposes, both for cure of disordered 
bodies, and as a pure article of food. Nor ought we to compare the proceedings 
taken by the bees against the drones with the judgments and punishments 
inflicted on the idle and wicked in cities. But, as I formerly said, we ought on 
the one hand in these things to admire the divine nature, and on the other to 
express our admiration of man, who is capable of considering and admiring all 
things (as co-operating with Providence), and who executes not merely the works 
which are determined by the providence of God, but also those which are the 
consequences of his own foresight. 
CHAP. LXXXIII. 
After Celsus has finished speaking of the bees, in order to depreciate (as 
far as he can) the cities, and constitutions, and governments, and sovereignties 
not only of us Christians, but of all mankind, as well as the wars which men 
undertake on behalf of their native countries, he proceeds, by way of 
digression, to pass a eulogy upon the ants, in order that, while praising them, 
he may compare the measures which men take to secure their subsistence with 
those adopted by these insects, and so evince his contempt for the forethought 
which makes provision for winter, as being nothing higher than the irrational 
providence of the ants, as he regards it. it. Now might not some of the more 
simple-minded, and such as know not how to look into the nature of all things, 
be turned away (so far, at least, as Celsus could accomplish it) from helping 
those who are weighed down with the burdens (of life), and from sharing their 
toils, when he says of the ants, that "they help one another with their loads, 
when they see one of their number toiling under them?" For he who needs to be 
disciplined by the word, but who does not at all understand its voice, will say: 
"Since, then, there is no difference between us and the ants, even when we help 
those who are weary with bearing their heavy burdens, why should we continue to 
do so to no purpose?" And would not the ants, as being irrational creature, be 
greatly puffed up, and think highly of themselves, because their works were 
compared to those of men? while men, on the other hand, who by means of their 
reason are enabled to hear how their philanthropy towards others is contemned, 
would be injured, so far as could be effected by Celsus and his arguments: for 
he does not perceive that, while he wishes to turn away from Christianity those 
who read his treatise, he turns away also the sympathy of those who are not 
Christians from those who bear the heaviest burdens (of life). Whereas, had he 
been a philosopher, who was capable of perceiving the good which men may do each 
other, he ought, in addition to not removing along with Christianity the 
blessings which are found amongst men, to have lent his aid to co-operate (if he 
had it in his power) with those principles of excellence which are common to 
Christianity and the rest of mankind. Moreover, even if the ants set apart in a 
place by themselves those grains which sprout forth, that they may not swell 
into bud, but may continue throughout the year as their food, this is not to be 
deemed as evidence of the existence of reason among ants, but as the work of the 
universal mother, Nature, which adorned even irrational animals, so that even 
the most insignificant is not omitted, but bears traces of the reason implanted 
in it by nature. Unless, indeed, by these assertions Celsus means obscurely to 
intimate (for in many instances he would like to adopt Platonic ideas) that all 
souls are of the same species, and that there is no difference between that of a 
man and those of ants and bees, which is the act of one who would bring down the 
soul from the vault of heaven, and cause it to enter not only a human body, but 
that of an animal. Christians, however, will not yield their assent to such 
opinions: for they have been instructed before now that the human soul was 
created in the image of God; and they see that it is impossible for a nature 
fashioned in the divine image to have its (original) features altogether 
obliterated, and to assume others, formed after I know not what likeness of 
irrational animals. 
CHAP. LXXXIV. 
And since he asserts that, "when ants die, the survivors set apart a special 
place (for their interment), and that their ancestral sepulchres such a place 
is," we have to answer, that the greater the laudations which he heaps upon 
irrational animals, so much the more does he magnify (although against his will) 
the work of that reason which arranged all things in order, and points out the 
skill which exists among men, and which is capable of adorning by its reason 
even the gifts which are bestowed by nature on the irrational creation. But why 
do I say "irrational," since Celsus is of opinion that these animals, which, 
agreeably to the common ideas of all men, are termed irrational, are not really 
so? Nor does he regard the ants as devoid of reason, who professed to speak of 
"universal nature," and who boasted of his truthfulness in the inscription of 
his book. For, speaking of the ants conversing with one another, he uses the 
following language: "And when they meet one another they enter into 
conversation, for which reason they never mistake their way; consequently they 
possess a full endowment of reason, and some common ideas on certain general 
subjects, and a voice by which they express themselves regarding accidental 
things." Now conversation between one man and another is carried on by means of 
a voice, which gives expression to the meaning intended, and which also gives 
utterances concerning what are called "accidental things;" but to say that this 
was the case with ants would be a most ridiculous assertion. 
CHAP. LXXXV. 
He is not ashamed, moreover, to say, in addition to these statements (that 
the unseemly character of his opinions may be manifest to those who will live 
after him): "Come now, if one were to look down from heaven upon earth, in what 
respect would our actions appear to differ from those of ants and bees?" Now 
does he who, according to his own supposition, looks from heaven upon the 
proceedings of men and ants, look upon their bodies alone, and not rather have 
regard to the controlling reason which is called into action by reflection; 
while, on the other hand, the guiding principle of the latter is irrational, and 
set in motion irrationally by impulse and fancy, in conjunction with a certain 
natural apparatus? But it is absurd to suppose that he who looks from heaven 
upon earthly things would desire to look from such a distance upon the bodies of 
men and ants, and would not rather consider the nature of the guiding 
principles, and the source of impulses, whether that be rational or irrational. 
And if he once look upon the source of all impulses, it is manifest that he 
would behold also the difference which exists, and the superiority of man, not 
only over ants, but even over elephants. For he who looks from heaven will see 
among irrational creatures, however large their bodies, no other principle than, 
so to speak, irrationality; while amongst rational beings he will discover 
reason, the common possession of men, and of divine and heavenly beings, and 
perhaps of the Supreme God Himself, on account of which man is said to have been 
created in the image of God, for the image of the Supreme God is his reason. 
CHAP. LXXXVI. 
Immediately after this, as if doing his utmost to reduce the human race to a 
still lower position, and to bring them to the level of the irrational animals, 
and desiring to omit not a single circumstance related of the latter which 
manifests their greatness, he declares that "in certain individuals among the 
irrational creation there exists the power of sorcery;" so that even in this 
particular men cannot specially pride themselves, nor wish to arrogate a 
superiority over irrational creatures. And the following are his words: "If, 
however, men entertain lofty notions because of their possessing the power of 
sorcery, yet even in that respect are serpents and eagles their superiors in 
wisdom; for they are acquainted with many prophylactics against persons and 
diseases, and also with the virtues of certain stones which help to preserve 
their young. If men, however, fall in with these, they think that they have 
gained a wonderful possession." Now, in the first place, I know not why he 
should designate as sorcery the knowledge of natural prophylactics displayed by 
animals,--whether that knowledge be the result of experience, or of some natural 
power of apprehension; for the term "sorcery" has by usage been assigned to 
something else. Perhaps, indeed, he wishes quietly, as an Epicurean, to censure 
the entire use of such arts, as resting only on the professions of sorcerers. 
However, let it be granted him that men do pride themselves greatly upon the 
knowledge of such arts, whether they are sorcerers or not: how can serpents be 
in this respect wiser than men, when they make use of the well-known fennel to 
sharpen their power of vision and to produce rapidity of movement, having 
obtained this natural power not from the exercise of reflection, but from the 
constitution of their body, while men do not, like serpents, arrive at such 
knowledge merely by nature, but partly by experiment, partly by reason, and 
sometimes by reflection and knowledge? So, if eagles, too, in order to preserve 
their young in the nest, carry thither the eagle-stone when they have discovered 
it, how does it appear that they are wise, and more intelligent than men, who 
find out by the exercise of their reflective powers and of their understanding 
what has been bestowed by nature upon eagles as a gift? 
CHAP. LXXXVII. 
Let it be granted, however, that there are other prophylactics against 
poisons known to animals: what does that avail to prove that it is not nature, 
but reason, which leads to the discovery of such things among them? For if 
reason were the discoverer, this one thing (or, if you will, one or two more 
things) would not be (exclusive of all others) the sole discovery made by 
serpents, and some other thing the sole discovery of the eagle, and so on with 
the rest of the animals; but as many discoveries would have been made amongst 
them as among men. But now it is manifest from the determinate inclination of 
the nature of each animal towards certain kinds of help, that they possess 
neither wisdom nor reason, but a natural constitutional tendency implanted by 
the Logos towards such things in order to ensure the preservation of the animal. 
And, indeed, if I wished to join issue with Celsus in these matters, I might 
quote the words of Solomon from the book of Proverbs, which run thus: "There be 
four things which are little upon the earth, but these are wiser than the wise: 
The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer; the 
conies are but a feeble folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks; the 
locusts have no king, yet go they forth in order at one command; and the spotted 
lizard, though leaning upon its hands, and being easily captured, dwelleth in 
kings' fortresses." I do not quote these words, however, as taking them in their 
literal signification, but, agreeably to the title of the book (for it is 
inscribed "Proverbs"), I investigate them as containing a secret meaning. For it 
is the custom of these writers (of Scripture) to distribute into many classes 
those writings which express one sense when taken literally, but which convey a 
different signification as their hidden meaning; and one of these kinds of 
writing is "Proverbs." And for this reason, in our Gospels too, is our Saviour 
described as saying: "These things have I spoken to you in proverbs, but the 
time cometh when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs." It is not, then, 
the visible ants which are "wiser even than the wise," but they who are 
indicated as such under the "proverbial" style of expression. And such must be 
our conclusion regarding the rest of the animal creation, although Celsus 
regards the books of the Jews and Christians as exceedingly simple and 
commonplace, and imagines that those who give them an allegorical interpretation 
do violence to the meaning of the writers. By what we have said, then, let it 
appear that Celsus calumniates us in vain, and let his assertions that serpents 
and eagles are wiser than men also receive their refutation. 
CHAP. LXXXVIII. 
And wishing to show at greater length that even the thoughts of God 
entertained by the human race are not superior to those of all other mortal 
creatures, but that certain of the irrational animals are capable of thinking 
about Him regarding whom opinions so discordant have existed among the most 
acute of mankind--Greeks and Barbarians--he continues: "If, because man has been 
able to grasp the idea of God, he is deemed superior to the other animals, let 
those who hold this opinion know that this capacity will be claimed by many of 
the other animals; and with good reason: for what would any one maintain to be 
more divine than the power of foreknowing and predicting future events? Men 
accordingly acquire the art from the other animals, and especially from birds. 
And those who listen to the indications furnished by them, become possessed of 
the gift of prophecy. If, then, birds, and the other prophetic animals, which 
are enabled by the gift of God to foreknow events, instruct us by means of 
signs, so much the nearer do they seem to be to the society of God, and to be 
endowed with greater wisdom, and to be more beloved by Him. The more intelligent 
of men, moreover, say that the animals hold meetings which are more sacred than 
our assemblies, and that they know what is said at these meetings, and show that 
in reality they possess this knowledge, when, having previously stated that the 
birds have declared their intention of departing to some particular place, and 
of doing this thing or the other, the truth of their assertions is established 
by the departure of the birds to the place in question, and by their doing what 
was foretold. And no race of animals appears to be more observant of oaths than 
the elephants are, or to show greater devotion to divine things; and this, I 
presume, solely because they have some knowledge of God." See here now how he at 
once lays hold of, and brings forward as acknowledged facts, questions which are 
the subject of dispute among those philosophers, not only among the Greeks, but 
also among the Barbarians, who have either discovered or learned from certain 
demons some things about birds of augury and other animals, by which certain 
prophetic intimations are said to be made to men. For, in the first place, it 
has been disputed whether there is an art of augury, and, in general, a method 
of divination by animals, or not. And, in the second place, they who admit that 
there is an art of divination by birds, are not agreed about the manner of the 
divination; since some maintain that it is from certain demons or gods of 
divination s that the animals receive their impulses to action--the birds to 
flights and sounds of different kinds, and the other animals to movements of one 
sort or another. Others, again, believe that their souls are more divine in 
their nature, and fitted to operations of that kind, which is a most incredible 
supposition. 
CHAP. LXXXIX. 
Celsus, however, seeing he wished to prove by the foregoing statements that 
the irrational animals are more divine and intelligent than human beings, ought 
to have established at greater length the actual existence of such an art of 
divination, and in the next place have energetically undertaken its defence, and 
effectually refuted the arguments of those who would annihilate such arts of 
divination, and have overturned in a convincing manner also the arguments of 
those who say that it is from demons or from gods that animals receive the 
movements which lead them to divination, and to have proved in the next place 
that the soul of irrational animals is more divine than that of man. For, had he 
done so, and manifested a philosophical spirit in dealing with such things, we 
should to the best of our power have met his confident assertions, refuting in 
the first place the allegation that irrational animals are wiser than men, and 
showing the falsity of the statement that they have ideas of God more sacred 
than ours, and that they hold among themselves certain sacred assemblies. But 
now, on the contrary, he who accuses us because we believe in the Supreme God, 
requires us to believe that the souls of birds entertain ideas of God more 
divine and distinct than those of men. Yet if this is true, the birds have 
clearer ideas of God than Celsus himself; and it is not matter of surprise that 
it should be so with him, who so greatly depreciates human beings. Nay, so far 
as Celsus can make it appear, the birds possess grander and more divine ideas 
than, I do not say we Christians do, or than the Jews, who use the same 
Scriptures with ourselves, but even than are possessed by the theologians among 
the Greeks, for they were only human beings. According to Celsus, indeed, the 
tribe of birds that practise divination, forsooth, understand the nature of the 
Divine Being better than Pherecydes, and Pythagoras, and Socrates and Plato! We 
ought then to go to the birds as our teachers, in order that as, according to 
the view of Celsus, they instruct us by their power of divination in the 
knowledge of future events, so also they may free men from doubts regarding the 
Divine Being, by imparting to them the clear ideas which they have obtained 
respecting Him! It follows, accordingly, that Celsus, who regards birds as 
superior to men, ought to employ them as his instructors, and not one of the 
Greek philosophers. 
CHAP. XC. 
But we have a few remarks to make, out of a larger number, in answer to these 
statements of Celsus, that we may show the ingratitude towards his Maker which 
is involved in his holding these false opinions. For Celsus, although a man, and 
"being in honour," does not possess understanding, and therefore he did not 
compare himself with the birds and the other irrational animals, which he 
regards as capable of divining; but yielding to them the foremost place, he 
lowered himself, and as far as he could the whole human race with him (as 
entertaining lower and inferior views of God than the irrational animals), 
beneath the Egyptians, who worship irrational animals as divinities. Let the 
principal point of investigation, however, be this: whether there actually is or 
not an art of divination, by means of birds and other living things believed to 
have such power. For the arguments which tend to establish either view are not 
to be despised. On the one hand, it is pressed upon us not to admit such an art, 
lest the rational being should abandon the divine oracles, and betake himself to 
birds; and on the other, there is the energetic testimony of many, that numerous 
individuals have been saved from the greatest dangers by putting their trust in 
divination by birds. For the present, however, let it be granted that an art of 
divination does exist, in order that I may in this way show to those who are 
prejudiced on the subject, that if this be admitted, the superiority of man over 
irrational animals, even over those that are endowed with power of divination, 
is great, and beyond all reach of comparison with the latter. We have then to 
say, that if there was in them any divine nature capable of foretelling future 
events, and so rich (in that knowledge) as out of its superabundance to make 
them known to any man who wished to know them, it is manifest that they would 
know what concerned themselves far sooner (than what concerned others); and had 
they possessed this knowledge, they would have been upon their guard against 
flying to any particular place Where men had planted snares and nets to catch 
them, or where archers took aim and shot at them in their flight. And 
especially, were eagles aware beforehand of the designs formed against their 
young, either by serpents crawling up to their nests and destroying them, or by 
men who take them for their amusement, or for any other useful purpose or 
service, they would not have placed their young in a spot where they were to be 
attacked; and, in general, not one of these animals would have been captured by 
men, because they were more divine and intelligent than they. 

CHAP. XCI. 
But besides, if birds of augury converse with one another, as Celsus 
maintains they do, the prophetic birds having a divine nature, and the other 
rational animals also ideas of the divinity and foreknowledge of future events; 
and if they had communicated this knowledge to others, the sparrow mentioned in 
Homer would not have built her nest in the spot where a serpent was to devour 
her and her young ones, nor would the serpent in the writings of the same poet 
have failed to take precautions against being captured by the eagle. For this 
wonderful poet says, in his poem regarding the former:- "A mighty dragon shot, 
of dire portent; From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent. 
Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he rolled, And curled around in many 
a winding fold. 
The topmost branch a mother-bird possessed; Eight callow infants filled the 
mossy nest; Herself the ninth: the serpent, as he hung, Stretched his black 
jaws, and crashed the dying young; While hovering near, with miserable moan, The 
drooping mother wailed her children gone. 
The mother last, as round the nest she flew, Seized by the beating wing, the 
monster slew: 
Nor long survived: to marble turned, he stands A lasting prodigy on Aulis' 
sands. 
Such was the will of Jove; and hence we dare Trust in his omen, and support 
the war." 
And regarding the second--the bird--the poet says:- "Jove's bird on sounding 
pinions beat the skies; A bleeding serpent of enormous size, His talons twined; 
alive, and curling round, He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound. 
Mad with the smart, he drops the fatal prey, In airy circles wings his 
painful way, Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries; Amidst the 
host, the fallen serpent lies. 
They, pale with terror, mark its spires unrolled, And Jove's portent with 
beating hearts behold." 
Did the eagle, then, possess the power of divination, and the serpent (since 
this animal also is made use of by the augurs) not? But as this distinction can 
be easily refuted, cannot the assertion that both were capable of divination be 
refuted also? For if the serpent had possessed this knowledge, would not he have 
been on his guard against suffering what he did from the eagle? And innumerable 
other instances of a similar character may be found, to show that animals do not 
possess a prophetic soul, but that, according to the poet and the majority of 
mankind, it is the "Olympian himself who sent him to the light." And it is with 
a symbolical meaning that Apollo employs the hawks as his messenger, for the 
hawk is called the "swift messenger of Apollo." 
CHAP. XCII. 
In my opinion, however, it is certain wicked demons, and, so to speak, of the 
race of Titans or Giants, who have been guilty of impiety towards the true God, 
and towards the angels in heaven, and who have fallen from it, and who haunt the 
denser parts of bodies, and frequent unclean places upon earth, and who, 
possessing some power of distinguishing future events, because they are without 
bodies of earthly material, engage in an employment of this kind, and desiring 
to lead the human race away from the true God, secretly enter the bodies of the 
more rapacious and savage and wicked of animals, and stir them up to do whatever 
they choose, and at whatever time they choose: either turning the fancies of 
these animals to make flights and movements of various kinds, in order that men 
may be caught by the divining power that is in the irrational animals, and 
neglect to seek after the God who contains all things; or to search after the 
pure worship of God, but allow their reasoning powers to grovel on the earth, 
and amongst birds and serpents, and even foxes and wolves. For it has been 
observed by those who are skilled in such matters, that the clearest 
prognostications are obtained from animals of this kind; because the demons 
cannot act so effectively in the milder sort of animals as they can in these, in 
consequence of the similarity between them in point of wickedness; and yet it is 
not wickedness, but something like wickedness, which exist in these animals. 
CHAP. XCIII. 
For which reason, whatever else there may be in the writings of Moses which 
excites my wonder, I would say that the following is worthy of admiration, viz. 
that Moses, having observed the varying natures of animals, and having either 
learned from God what was peculiar to them, and to the demons which are kindred 
to each of the animals, or having himself ascertained these things by his own 
wisdom, has, in arranging the different kinds of animals, pronounced all those 
which are supposed by the Egyptians and the rest of mankind to possess the power 
of divination to be unclean, and, as a general rule, all that are not of that 
class to be clean. And amongst the unclean animals mentioned by Moses are the 
wolf, and fox, and serpent, and eagle, and hawk, and such like. And, generally 
speaking, you will find that not only in the law, but also in the prophets, 
these animals are employed as examples of all that is most wicked; and that a 
wolf or a fox is never mentioned for a good purpose. Each species of demon, 
consequently, would seem to possess a certain affinity with a certain species of 
animal. And as among men there are some who are stronger than others, and this 
not at all owing to their moral character, so, in the same way, some demons will 
be more powerful in things indifferent than others; and one class of them 
employs one kind of animal for the purpose of deluding men, in accordance with 
the will of him who is called in our Scriptures the "prince of this world," 
while others predict future events by means of another kind of animal. Observe, 
moreover, to what a pitch of wickedness the demons proceed, so that they even 
assume the bodies of weasels in order to reveal the future! And now, consider 
with yourself whether it is better to accept the belief that it is the Supreme 
God and His Son who stir up the birds and the other living creatures to 
divination, or that those who stir up these creatures, and not human beings 
(although they are present before them), are wicked, and, as they are called by 
our Scriptures, unclean demons. 
CHAP. XCIV. 
But if the soul of birds is to be esteemed divine because future events are 
predicted by them, why should we not rather maintain, that when omens are 
accepted by men, the souls of those are divine through which the omens are 
heard? Accordingly, among such would be ranked the female slave mentioned in 
Homer, who ground the corn, when she said regarding the suitors:- "For the very 
last time, now, will they sup here." 
This slave, then, was divine, while the great Ulysses, the friend of Homer's 
Pallas Athene, was not divine, but understanding the words spoken by this 
"divine" grinder of corn as an omen, rejoiced, as the poet says:- "The divine 
Ulysses rejoiced at the omen." Observe, now, as the birds are possessed of a 
divine soul, and are capable of perceiving God, or, as Celsus says, the gods, it 
is clear that when we men also sneeze, we do so in consequence of a kind of 
divinity that is within us, and which imparts a prophetic power to our soul. For 
this belief is testified by many witnesses, and therefore the poet also says:- 
"And while he prayed, he sneezed." 
And Penelope, too, said:- "Perceiv'st thou not that at every word my son did 
sneeze?" 
CHAP. XCV. 
The true God, however, neither employs irrational animals, nor any 
individuals whom chance may offer, to convey a knowledge of the future; but, on 
the contrary, the most pure and holy of human souls, whom He inspires and endows 
with prophetic power. And therefore, whatever else in the Mosaic writings may 
excite our wonder, the following must be considered as fitted to do so: "Ye 
shall not practise augury, nor observe the flight of birds;" and in another 
place: "For the nations whom the LORD thy God will destroy from before thy face, 
shall listen to omens and divinations; but as for thee, the LORD thy God has not 
suffered thee to do so." And he adds: "A prophet shall the LORD your God raise 
up unto you from among your brethren." On one occasion, moreover, God, wishing 
by means of an augur to turn away (His people) from the practice of divination, 
caused the spirit that was in the augur to speak as follows: "For there is no 
enchantment in Jacob, nor is there divination in Israel. In due time will it be 
declared to Jacob and Israel what the Lord will do." And now, we who knew these 
and similar sayings wish to observe this precept with the mystical meaning, 
viz., "Keep thy heart with all diligence," that nothing of a demoniacal nature 
may enter into our minds, or any spirit of our adversaries turn our imagination 
whither it chooses. But we pray that the light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God may shine in our hearts, and that the Spirit of God may dwell in our 
imaginations, and lead them to contemplate the things of God; for "as many as 
are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." 
CHAP. XCVI. 
We ought to take note, however, that the power of foreknowing the future is 
by no means a proof of divinity; for in itself it is a thing indifferent, and is 
found occurring amongst both good and bad. Physicians, at any rate, by means of 
their professional skill foreknow certain things, although their character may 
happen to be bad. And in the same way also pilots, although perhaps wicked men, 
are able to foretell the signs (of good or bad weather), and the approach of 
violent tempests of wind, and atmospheric changes, because they gather this 
knowledge from experience and observation, although I do not suppose that on 
that account any one would term them "gods" if their characters happened to be 
bad. The assertion, then, of Celsus is false, when he says: "What could be 
called more divine than the power of foreknowing and foretelling the future?" 
And so also is this, that "many of the animals claim to have ideas of God;" for 
none of the irrational animals possess any idea of God. And wholly false, too, 
is his assertion, that "the irrational animals are nearer the society of God 
(than men)," when even men who are still in a state of wickedness, however great 
their progress in knowledge, are far removed from that society. It is, then, 
those alone who are truly wise and sincerely religious who are nearer to God's 
society; such persons as were our prophets, and Moses, to the latter of whom, on 
account of his exceeding purity, the Scripture said: "Moses alone shall come 
near the LORD, but the rest shall not come nigh." 
CHAP. XCVII. 
How impious, indeed, is the assertion of this man, who charges us with 
impiety, that "not only are the irrational animals wiser than the human race, 
but that they are more beloved by God (than they)!" And who would not be 
repelled (by horror) from paying any attention to a man who declared that a 
serpent, and a fox, and a wolf, and an eagle, and a hawk, were more beloved by 
God than the human race? For it follows from his maintaining such a position, 
that if these animals be more beloved by God than human beings, it is manifest 
that they are dearer to God than Socrates, and Plato, and Pythagoras, and 
Pherecydes, and those theologians whose praises he had sung a little before. And 
one might address him with the prayer: "If these animals be dearer to God than 
men, may you be beloved of God along with them, and be made like to those whom 
you consider as dearer to Him than human beings!" And let no one suppose that 
such a prayer is meant as an imprecation; for who would not pray to resemble in 
all respects those whom he believes to be dearer to God than others, in order 
that he, like them, may enjoy the divine love? And as Celsus is desirous to show 
that the assemblies of the irrational animals are more sacred than ours, he 
ascribes the statement to that effect not to any ordinary individuals, but to 
persons of intelligence. Yet it is the virtuous alone who are truly wise, for no 
wicked man is so. He speaks, accordingly, in the following style: "Intelligent 
men say that these animals hold assemblies which are more sacred than ours, and 
that they know what is spoken at them, and actually prove that they are not 
without such knowledge, when they mention beforehand that the birds have 
announced their intention of departing to a particular place, or of doing this 
thing or that, and then show that they have departed to the place in question, 
and have done the particular thing which was foretold." Now, truly, no person of 
intelligence ever related such things; nor did any wise man ever say that the 
assemblies of the irrational animals were more sacred than those of men. 
But if, for the purpose of examining (the soundness of) his statements, we 
look to their consequences, it is evident that, in his opinion, the assemblies 
of the irrational animals are more sacred than those of the venerable 
Pherecydes, and Pythagoras, and Socrates, and Plato, and of philosophers in 
general; which assertion is not only incongruous in itself, but full of 
absurdity. In order that we may believe, however, that certain individuals do 
learn from the indistinct sound of birds that they are about to take their 
departure, and do this thing or that, and announce these things beforehand, we 
would say that this information is imparted to men by demons by means of signs, 
with the view of having men deceived by demons, and having their understanding 
dragged down from God and heaven to earth, and to places lower still. 
CHAP. XCVIII. 
I do not know, moreover, how Celsus could hear of the elephants' (fidelity 
to) oaths, and of their great devotedness to our God, and of the knowledge which 
they possess of Him. For I know many wonderful things which are related of the 
nature of this animal, and of its gentle disposition. But I am not aware that 
any one has spoken of its observance of oaths; unless indeed to its gentle 
disposition, and its observance of compacts, so to speak, when once concluded 
between it and man, he give the name of keeping its oath, which statement also 
in itself is false. For although rarely, yet sometimes it has been recorded 
that, after their apparent tameness, they have broken out against men in the 
most savage manner, and have committed murder, and have been on that account 
condemned to death, because no longer of any use. And seeing that after this, in 
order to establish (as he thinks he does) that the stork is more pious than any 
human being, he adduces the accounts which are narrated regarding that 
creature's display of filial affection in bringing food to its parents for their 
support, we have to say in reply, that this is done by the storks, not from a 
regard to what is proper, nor from reflection, but from a natural instinct; the 
nature which formed them being desirous to show an instance among the irrational 
animals which might put men to shame, in the matter of exhibiting their 
gratitude to their parents. And if Celsus had known how great the difference is 
between acting in this way from reason, and from an irrational natural impulse, 
he would not have said that storks are more pious than human beings. But 
further, Celsus, as still contending for the piety of the irrational creation, 
quotes the instance of the Arabian bird the phoenix, which after many years 
repairs to Egypt, and bears thither its parent, when dead and buried in a ball 
of myrrh, and deposits its body in the Temple of the Sun. Now this story is 
indeed recorded, and, if it be true, it is possible that it may occur in 
consequence of some provision of nature; divine providence freely displaying to 
human beings, by the differences which exist among living things, the variety of 
constitution which prevails in the world, and which extends even to birds, and 
in harmony with which He has brought into existence one creature, the only one 
of its kind, in order that by it men may be led to admire, not the creature, but 
Him who created it. 
CHAP. XCIX. 
In addition to all that he has already said, Celsus subjoins the following: 
"All things, accordingly, were not made for man, any more than they were made 
for lions, or eagles, or dolphins, but that this world, as being God's work, 
might be perfect and entire in all respects. For this reason all things have 
been adjusted, not with reference to each other, but with regard to their 
bearing upon the whole. And God takes care of the whole, and (His) providence 
will never forsake it; and it does not become worse; nor does God after a time 
bring it back to himself; nor is He angry on account of men any more than on 
account of apes or flies; nor does He threaten these beings, each one of which 
has received its appointed lot in its proper place." 
Let us then briefly reply to these statements. I think, indeed, that I have 
shown in the preceding pages that all things were created for man, and every 
rational being, and that it was chiefly for the sake of the rational creature 
that the creation took place. Celsus, indeed, may say that this was done not 
more for man than for lions, or the other creatures which he mentions; but we 
maintain that the Creator did not form these things for lions, or eagles, or 
dolphins, but all for the sake of the rational creature, and "in order that this 
world, as being God's work, might be perfect and complete in all things." For to 
this sentiment we must yield our assent as being well said. And God takes care, 
not, as Celsus supposes, merely of the whole, but beyond the whole, in a special 
degree of every rational being. Nor will Providence ever abandon the whole; for 
although it should become more wicked, owing to the sin of the rational being, 
which is a portion of the whole, He makes arrangements to purify it, and after a 
time to bring back the whole to Himself. Moreover, He is not angry with apes or 
flies; but on human beings, as those who have transgressed the laws of nature, 
He sends judgments and chastisements, and threatens them by the mouth of the 
prophets, and by the Saviour who came to visit the whole human race, that those 
who hear the threatenings may be converted by them, while those who neglect 
these calls to conversion may deservedly suffer those punishments which it 
becomes God, in conformity with that will of His which acts for the advantage of 
the whole, to inflict upon those who need such painful discipline and 
correction. But as our fourth book has now attained sufficient dimensions, we 
shall here terminate our discourse. 
And may God grant, through His Son, who is God the Word, and Wisdom, and 
Truth, and Righteousness, and everything else which the sacred Scriptures when 
speaking of God call Him, that we may make a good beginning of the fifth book, 
to the benefit of our readers, and may bring it to a successful conclusion, with 
the aid of His word abiding in our soul. 

