
Origen












Origen. Commentary on John
Book VI 
1. THE WORK IS TAKEN UP AFTER A VIOLENT INTERRUPTION, WHICH HAS DRIVEN THE 
WRITER FROM ALEXANDRIA. HE ADDRESSES HIMSELF TO IT AGAIN, WITH THANKS FOR HIS 
DELIVERANCE, AND PRAYER FOR GUIDANCE. 
When a house is being built which is to be made as strong as possible, the 
building takes place in fine weather and in calm, so that nothing may hinder the 
structure from acquiring the needed solidity. And thus it turns out so strong 
and stable that it is able to withstand the rush of the flood. and the dashing 
of the river, and all the agencies accompanying a storm which are apt to find 
out what is rotten in a building and to show what parts of it have been properly 
put together. And more particularly should that house which is capable of 
sheltering the speculations of truth, the house of reason, as it were, in 
promise or in letters, be built at a time when God can add His free co-operation 
to the projector of so noble a work, when the soul is quiet and in the enjoyment 
of that peace which passes all understanding, when she is turned away from all 
disturbance and not buffeted by any billows. This, it appears to me, was well 
understood by the servants of the prophetic spirit and the ministers of the 
Gospel message; they made themselves worthy to receive that peace which is in 
secret from Him who ever gives it to them that are worthy and who said, "Peace I 
leave with you, My peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth give I unto 
you." And look if some similar lesson is not taught under the surface with 
regard to David and Solomon in the narrative about the temple. David, who fought 
the wars of the Lord and stood firm against many enemies, his own and those of 
Israel, desired to build a temple for God. But God, through Nathan, prevents him 
from doing so, and Nathan says to him, "Thou shalt not build me an house, 
because thou art a man of blood." But Solomon, on the other hand, saw God in a 
dream, and in a dream received wisdom, for the reality of the vision was kept 
for him who said, "Behold a greater than Solomon is here." The time was one of 
the profoundest peace, so that it was possible for every man to rest under his 
own vine and his own fig-tree, and Solomon's very name was significant of the 
peace which was in his days, for Solomon means peaceful; and so he was at 
liberty to build the famous temple of God. About the time of Ezra, also, when 
"truth conquers wine and the hostile king: and women," the temple of God is 
restored again. All this is said by way of apology to you, reverend Ambrosius. 
It is at your sacred encouragement that I have made up my mind to build up in 
writing: the tower of the Gospel; and I have therefore sate down to count the 
cost, if I have sufficient to finish it, lest I should be mocked by the 
beholders, because I laid the foundation but was not able to finish the work. 
The result of my counting, it is true, has been that I do not possess what is 
required to finish it; yet I have put my trust in God, who enriches us with all 
wisdom and all knowledge. If we strive to keep His spiritual laws we believe 
that He does enrich us; He will supply what is necessary so that we shall get on 
with our building, and shall even come to the parapet of the structure. That 
parapet it is which keeps from falling those who go up on the house of the Word; 
for people only fall off those houses which have no parapet, so that the 
buildings themselves are to blame for their fall and for their death. We 
proceeded as far as the fifth volume in spite of the obstacles presented by the 
storm in Alexandria, and spoke what was given us to speak, for Jesus rebuked the 
winds and the waves of the sea. We emerged from the storm, we were brought out 
of Egypt, that God delivering us who led His people forth from there. Then, when 
the enemy assailed us with all bitterness by his new writings, so directly 
hostile to the Gospel, and stirred up against us all the winds of wickedness in 
Egypt, I felt that reason called me rather to stand fist for the conflict, and 
to save the higher part in me, lest evil counsels should succeed in directing 
the storm so as to overwhelm my soul, rather to do this than to finish my work 
at an unsuitable season, before my mind had recovered its calm. Indeed, the 
ready writers who usually attended me brought my work to a stand by failing to 
appear to take down my words. But now that the many fiery darts directed against 
me have lost their edge, for God extinguished them, and my soul has grown 
accustomed to the dispensation sent me for the sake of the heavenly word, and 
has learned from necessity to disregard the snares of my enemies, it is as if a 
great calm had settled on me, and I defer no longer the continuation of this 
work. I pray that God will be with me, and will speak as a teacher in the porch 
of my soul, so that the building I have begun of the exposition of the Gospel of 
John may arrive at completion. May God hear my prayer and grant that the body of 
the whole work may now be brought together, and that no interruption may 
intervene which might prevent me from following the sequence of Scripture. And 
be assured that it is with great readiness that I now make this second beginning 
and enter on my sixth volume, because what I wrote before at Alexandria has not, 
I know not by what chance, been brought with me. I feared I might neglect this 
work, if I were not engaged on it at once, and therefore thought it better to 
make use of this present time and begin without delay the part which remains. I 
am not certain if the part formerly written will come to light, and would be 
very unwilling to waste time in waiting to see if it does. Enough of preamble, 
let us now attend to our text. 
2. HOW THE PROPHETS AND HOLY MEN OFTHE OLD TESTAMENT KNEW THE THINGS OF 
CHRIST. 
"And this is the witness of John." This is the second recorded testimony of 
John the Baptist to Christ. The first begins with "This was He of whom I said, 
He that cometh after me," and goes down to "The only-begotten Son of God who is 
in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared him." Heracleon supposes the words, 
"No one has seen God at any time," etc., to have been spoken, not by the 
Baptist, but by the disciple. But in this he is not sound. He himself allows the 
words, "Of his fulness we all received, and grace for grace; for the law was 
given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ," to have been spoken 
by the Baptist. And does it not follow that the person who received of the 
fulness of Christ, and a second grace in addition to that he had before, and who 
declared the law to have been given by Moses, but grace and truth to have come 
through Jesus Christ, is it not clear that this is the person who understood, 
from what he received from the fulness of Christ, how "no one hath seen God at 
any time," and how "the only-begotten who is in the bosom of the Father" had 
delivered the declaration about God to him and to all those who had received of 
His fulness? He was not declaring here for the first time Him that is in the 
bosom of the Father, as if there had never before been any one fit to receive 
what he told His Apostles. Does he not teach us that he was before Abraham, and 
that Abraham rejoiced and was glad to see his day? The words "Of his fulness all 
we received," and "Grace for grace," show, as we have already made clear, that 
the prophets also received their gift from the fulness of Christ and received a 
second grace in place of that they had before; for they also, led by the Spirit, 
advanced from the introduction they had in types to the vision of truth. Hence 
not all the prophets, but many of them, desired to see the things, which the 
Apostles saw. For if there was a difference among the prophets, those who were 
perfect and more distinguished of them did not desire to see what the Apostles 
saw, but actually beheld them, while those who rose less fully than these to the 
height of the Word were filled with longing for the things which the Apostles 
knew through Christ. The word "saw" we have not taken in a physical sense, and 
the word "heard" we have taken to refer to a spiritual communication; only he 
who has ears is prepared to hear the words of Jesus--a thing which does not 
happen too frequently. There is the further point, that the saints before the 
bodily advent of Jesus had an advantage over most believers in their insight 
into the mysteries of divinity, since the Word of God was their teacher before 
He became flesh, for He was always work ing, in imitation of His Father, of whom 
He says, "My father worketh hitherto." On this point we may adduce the words He 
addresses to the Sadducees, who do not believe the doctrine of the resurrection. 
"Have you not read," He says, "what is said by God at the Bush, I am the God of 
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; He is not the God of the 
dead but of the living." If, then, God is not ashamed to be called the God of 
these men, and if they are counted by Christ among the living, and if all 
believers are sons of Abraham, since all the Gentiles are blessed with faithful 
Abraham, who is appointed by God to be a father of the Gentiles, can we hesitate 
to admit that those living persons made acquaintance with the learning of living 
men, and were taught by Christ who was born before the daystar, before He became 
flesh? And for this cause they lived, because they had part in Him who said, "I 
am the life," and as the heirs of so great promises received the vision, not 
only of angels, but of God in Christ. For they saw, it may be, the image of the 
invisible God, since he who hath seen the Son hath seen the Father, and so they 
are recorded to have known God, and to have heard God's words worthily, and, 
therefore, to have seen God and heard Him. Now, I consider that those who are 
fully and really sons of Abraham are sons of his actions, spiritually 
understood, and of the knowledge which was made manifest to him. What he knew 
and what he did appears again in those who are his sons, as the Scripture 
teaches those who have ears to hear, "If ye were the children of Abraham, ye 
would do the works of Abraham." And if it is a true proverb which says, "A wise 
man will understand that which proceeds from his own mouth, and on his lips he 
will bear prudence," then we must at once repudiate some things which have been 
said about the prophets, as if they were not wise men, and did not understand 
what proceeded from their own mouths. We must believe what is good and true 
about the prophets, that they were sages, that they did understand what 
proceeded from their mouths, and that they bore prudence on their lips. It is 
clear indeed that Moses understood in his mind the truth (real meaning) of the 
law, and the higher interpretations of the stories recorded in his books. 
Joshua, too, understood the meaning of the allotment of the land after the 
destruction of the nine and twenty kings, and could see better than we can the 
realities of which his achievements were the shadows. It is clear, too, that 
Isaiah saw the mystery of Him who sat upon the throne, and of the two seraphim, 
and of the veiling of their faces and their feet, and of their wings, and of the 
altar and of the tongs. Ezekiel, too, understood the true significance of the 
cherubim and of their goings, and of the firmament that was above them, and of 
Him that sat on the throne, than all which what could be loftier or more 
splendid? I need not enter into more particulars; the point I aim at 
establishing is clear enough already, namely, that those who were made perfect 
in earlier generations knew not less than the Apostles did of what Christ 
revealed to them, since the same teacher was with them as He who revealed to the 
Apostles the unspeakable mysteries of godliness. I will add but a few points, 
and then leave it to the reader to judge and to form what views he pleases on 
this subject. Paul says in his Epistle to the Romans, "Now, to him who is able 
to establish you according to my Gospel, according to the revelation of the 
mystery which hath been kept in silence through times eternal, but is now made 
manifest by the prophetic Scriptures and the appearance of our Lord Jesus 
Christ." For if the mystery concealed of old is made manifest to the Apostles 
through the prophetic writings, and if the prophets, being wise men, understood 
what proceeded from their own mouths, then the prophets knew what was made 
manifest to the Apostles. But to many it was not revealed, as Paul says, "In 
other generations it was not made known to the sons of men as it hath now been 
revealed unto His holy Apostles and prophets by the Spirit, that the Gentiles 
are fellow-heirs and members of the same body." Here an objection may be raised 
by those who do not share the view we have propounded; and it becomes of 
importance to define what is meant by the word "revealed." It is capable of two 
meanings: firstly, that the thing in question is understood, but secondly, if a 
prophecy is spoken of, that it is accomplished. Now, the fact that the Gentiles 
were to be fellow-heirs and members of the same body, and partakers of the 
promise, was known to the prophets to this extent, that they knew the Gentiles 
were to fellow-heirs and members of the same body, and partakers of the promise 
in Christ. When this should be, and why, and what Gentiles were spoken of, and 
how, though strangers from the covenants. and aliens to the promises, they were 
yet to be members of one body and sharers of the blessings; all this was known 
to the prophets, being revealed to them. But the things prophesied belong to the 
future, and are not revealed to those who know them, but do not witness their 
fulfilment, as they are to those who have the event before their eyes. And this 
was the position of the Apostles. Thus, I conceive. they knew the events no more 
than the fathers and the prophets did; and yet it is truly said of them that 
"what to other generations was not revealed was now revealed to the Apostles and 
prophets, that the Gentiles were fellow-heirs and members of the same body, and 
partakers in the promise of Christ." For, in addition to knowing these 
mysteries, they saw the power at work in the accomplished fact. The passage, 
"Many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things ye see and did not 
see them; and to hear the things ye hear and did not hear them," may be 
interpreted in the same way. They also desired to see the mystery of the 
incarnation of the Son of God, and of His coming down to carry out the design of 
His suffering for the salvation of many, actually put in operation. This may be 
illustrated from another quarter. Suppose one of the Apostles to have understood 
the "unspeakable words which it is not lawful for a man to utter," but not to 
witness the glorious bodily appearing of Jesus to the faithful. which is 
promised, although He desired to see it and suppose another had not only not 
marked and seen what that Apostle marked and saw, but had a much feebler grasp 
of the divine hope, and yet is present at the second coming of our Saviour, 
which the Apostle, as in the parallel above, had desired, but had not seen. We 
shall not err from the truth if we say that both of these have seen what the 
Apostle, or indeed the Apostles, desired to see, and yet that they are not on 
that account to be deemed wiser or more blessed than the Apostles. In the same 
way, also, the Apostles are not to be deemed wiser than the fathers, or than 
Moses and the prophets, than those in fact who, for their virtue, were found 
worthy of epiphanies and of divine manifestations and of revelations of 
mysteries. 
3. "GRACE AND TRUTH CAME THROUGH JESUS CHRIST." THESE WORDS BELONG TO THE 
BAPTIST, NOT THE EVANGELIST. WHAT THE BAPTIST TESTIFIES BY THEM. 
We have lingered rather long over these discussions, but there is a reason 
for it. There are many who, under the pretence of glorifying the advent of 
Christ, declare the Apostles to be wiser than the fathers or the prophets; and 
of these teachers some have invented a greater God for the later period, while 
some, not venturing so far, but moved, according to their own account of the 
matter, by the difficulty connected with doctrine, cancel the whole of the gift 
conferred by God on the fathers and the prophets, through Christ, through whom 
all things were made. If all things were made through Him, clearly so must the 
splendid revelations have been which were made to the fathers and prophets, and 
became to them the symbols of the sacred mysteries of religion. 
Now the true soldiers of Christ must always be prepared to do battle for the 
truth, and must never, so far as lies with them, allow false convictions to 
creep in. We must not, therefore, neglect this matter. It may be said that 
John's earlier testimony to Christ is to be found in the words. "He who cometh 
after me exists before me, for He was before me," and that the words, "For of 
His fulness we all received, and grace for grace," are in the mouth of John the 
disciple. Now, we must show this exposition to be a forced one, and one which 
does violence to the context; it is rather a strong proceeding to suppose the 
speech of the Baptist to be so suddenly and, as it were, inopportunely 
interrupted by that of the disciple, and it is quite apparent to any one who can 
judge, in whatever small degree, of a context, that the speech goes on 
continuously after the words, "This is He of whom I spoke, He that cometh after 
me exists before me, for He was before me." The Baptist brings a proof that 
Jesus existed before him because He was before him, since He is the first-born 
of all creation; he says, "For of His fulness all we received." 
That is the reason why he says, "He exists before me, for He was before me." 
That is how I know that He is first and in higher honour with the Father, since 
of His fulness both I and the prophets before me received the more divine 
prophetic grace instead of the grace we received at His hands before in respect 
of our election. That is why I say, "He exists before me, for He was before me," 
because we know what we have received from His fulness; namely, that the law was 
given through Moses, not by Moses, while grace and truth not only were given but 
came into existence through Jesus Christ. For His God and Father both gave the 
law through Moses, and made grace and truth through Jesus Christ, that grace and 
truth which came to man. If we give a reasonable interpretation to the words, 
"Grace and truth came through Jesus Christ," we shall not be alarmed at the 
possible discrepancy with them of that other saying, "I am the way and the truth 
and the life." If it is Jesus who says, "I am the truth," then how does the 
truth come through Jesus Christ, since no one comes into existence through 
himself? We must recognize that this very truth, the essential truth, which is 
prototypal, so to speak, of that truth which exists in souls endowed with 
reason, that truth from which, as it were, images are impressed on those who 
care for truth, was not made through Jesus Christ, nor indeed through any one, 
but by God;--just as the Word was not made through any one which was in the 
beginning with the Father;--and as wisdom which God created the beginning of His 
ways was not made through any one, so the truth also was not made through any 
one.That truth, however, which is with men came through Jesus Christ, as the 
truth in Paul and the Apostles came through Jesus Christ. And it is no wonder, 
since truth is one, that many truths should flow from that one. The prophet 
David certainly knew many truths, as he says, "The Lord searcheth out truths," 
for the Father of truth searches out not the one truth but the many through 
which those are saved who possess them. And as with the one truth and many 
truths, so also with righteousness and righteousnesses. For the very essential 
righteousness is Christ, "Who was made to us of God wisdom and righteousness and 
sanctification and redemption." But from that righteousness is formed the 
righteousness which is in each individual. so that there are in the saved many 
righteousnesses, whence also it is written, "For the Lord is righteous, and He 
loved righteousnesses." This is the reading in the exact copies, and in the 
other versions besides the Septuagint, and in the Hebrew. Consider if the other 
things which Christ is said to be in a unity admit of being multiplied in the 
same way and spoken of in the plural. For example, Christ is our life as the 
Saviour Himself says, "I am the way and the truth and the life." The Apostle, 
too, says, "When Christ our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with 
Him in glory." And in the Psalms again we find, "Thy mercy is better than life;" 
for it is on account of Christ who is life in every one that there are many 
lives. This, perhaps, is also the key to the passage, "If ye seek a proof of the 
Christ that speaketh in me." For Christ is found in every saint, and so from the 
one Christ there come to be many Christs, imitators of Him and formed after Him 
who is the image of God; whence God says through the prophet, "Touch not my 
Christs." Thus we have explained in passing the passage which we appeared to 
have omitted from our exposition, viz.: "Grace and truth came through Jesus 
Christ;" and we have also shown that the words belong to John the Baptist and 
form part of his testimony to the Son of God. 
4. JOHN DENIES THAT HE IS ELIJAH OR "THE" PROPHET. YET HE WAS "A" PROPHET. 
Now let us consider John's second testimony. Jews from Jerusalem, kindred to 
John the Baptist, since he also belonged to a priestly race, send priests and 
levites to ask John who he is. In saying, "I am not the Christ," he made a 
confession of the truth. The words are not, as one might suppose, a negation; 
for it is no negation to say, in the honour of Christ, that one is not Christ. 
The priests and levites sent from Jerusalem, having there heard in the first 
place that he is not the expected Messiah, put a question about the second great 
personage whom they expected, namely, Elijah, whether John were he, and he says 
he is not Elijah, and by his "I am not" makes a second confession of the truth. 
And, as many prophets had appeared in Israel, and one in particular was looked 
for according to the prophecy of Moses, who said, "A prophet shall the Lord your 
God raise up to you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear; and it 
shall come to pass that every soul that shall not hear that prophet shall be 
destroyed from among the people," they, therefore, ask a third question, not 
whether he is a prophet, but whether he is the prophet. Now, they did not apply 
this name to the Christ, but supposed the prophet to be a second figure beside 
the Christ. But John, on the contrary, who knew that He whose forerunner he was 
was both the Christ and the prophet thus foretold, answered "No;" whereas, if 
they had asked if he was a prophet, he would have answered "Yes;" for he was not 
unconscious that he was a prophet. In all these answers John's second testimony 
to Christ was not yet completed; he had still to give his questioners the answer 
they were to take back to those who sent them, and to declare himself in the 
terms of the prophecy of Isaiah, which says, "The voice of one crying in the 
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord." 
5. THERE WERE TWO EMBASSIES TO JOHN THE BAPTIST; THE DIFFERENT CHARACTERS OF 
THESE. 
Here the enquiry suggests itself whether the second testimony is concluded, 
and whether there is a third, addressed to those who were sent from the 
Pharisees. They wished to know why he baptized, if he was neither the Christ, 
nor Elijah, nor the prophet; and he said: "I baptize with water; but there 
standeth one among you whom you know not, He that cometh after me, the latchet 
of whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose." Is this a third testimony, or is this 
which they were to report to the Pharisees a part of the second? As far as the 
words allow me to conjecture I should say that the word to the emissaries of the 
Pharisees was a third testimony. It is to be observed, however, that the first 
testimony asserts the divinity of the Saviour, while the second disposes of the 
suspicion of those who were in doubt whether John could be the Christ, and the 
third declares one who was already present with men although they saw Him not, 
and whose coming was no longer in the future. Before going on to the subsequent 
testimonies in which he points out Christ and witnesses to Him, let us look at 
the second and third, word for word, and let us, in the first place, observe 
that there are two embassies to the Baptist, one "from Jerusalem" from the Jews, 
who send priests and levites, to ask him, "Who art thou?" the second sent by the 
Pharisees, who were in doubt about the answer which had been made to the priests 
and levites. Observe how what is said by the first envoys is in keeping with the 
character of priests and levites, and shows gentleness and a willingness to 
learn. "Who art thou?" they say, and "What then? art thou Elijah?" and "Art thou 
that prophet?" and then, "Who art thou, that we may give an answer to them that 
sent us? What sayest thou of thyself?" There is nothing harsh or arrogant in the 
enquiries of these men; everything agrees well with the character of true and 
careful servants of God; and they raise no difficulties about the replies made 
to them. Those, on the contrary, who are sent from the Pharisees assail the 
Baptist, as it were, with arrogant and unsympathetic words: "Why then baptizest 
thou if thou be not the Christ nor Elijah nor the prophet?" This mission is sent 
scarcely for the sake of information, as in the former case of the priests and 
levites, but rather to debar the Baptist from baptizing, as if it were thought 
that no one was entitled to baptize but Christ and Elijah and the prophet. The 
student who desires to understand the Scripture must always proceed in this 
careful way; he must ask with regard to each speech, who is the speaker and on 
what occasion it was spoken. Thus only can we discern how speech harmonizes with 
the character of the speaker, as it does all through the sacred books. 
6. MESSIANIC DISCUSSION WITH JOHN THE BAPTIST. 
Then the Jews sent priests and levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art 
thou And he confessed and denied not; and he confessed, I am not the Christ. 
What legates should have been sent from the Jews to John, and where should they 
have been sent from? Should they not have been men held to stand by the election 
of God above their fellows, and should they not have come from that place which 
was chosen out of the whole of the earth, though it is all called good, from 
Jerusalem where was the temple of God? With such honour, then, do they enquire 
of John. In the case of Christ nothing of this sort is reported to have been 
done by the Jews; but what the Jews do to John, John does to Christ, sending his 
own disciples to ask him, "Art thou He that should come, or do we look for 
another?" John confesses to those sent to him, and denies not, and he afterwards 
declares, "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness; "but Christ, as 
having a greater testimony than John the Baptist, makes His answer by words and 
deeds, saying. "Go and tell John those things which ye do hear and see; the 
blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed and the 
deaf hear, and the poor have the Gospel preached to them." On this passage I 
shall, if God permit, enlarge in its proper place. Here, however, it might be 
asked reasonably enough why John gives such an answer to the question put to 
him. The priests and levites do not ask him, "Art thou the Christ?" but "Who art 
thou?" and the Baptist's reply to this question should have been, "I am the 
voice of one crying in the wilderness." The proper reply to the question, "Art 
thou the Christ?" is, "I am not the Christ;" and to the question, "Who art 
thou?"--"The voice of one crying in the wilderness." To this we may say that he 
probably discerned in the question of the priests and levites a cautious 
reverence, which led them to hint the idea in their minds that he who was 
baptizing might be the Christ, but withheld them from openly saying so, which 
might have been presumptuous. He quite naturally, therefore, proceeds in the 
first place to remove any false impressions they might have taken up about him, 
and declares publicly the true state of the matter, "I am not the Christ." Their 
second question, and also their third, show that they had conceived some such 
surmise about him. They supposed that he might be that second in honour to whom 
their hopes pointed, namely, Elijah, who held with them the next position after 
Christ; and so when John had answered, "I am not the Christ," they asked, "What 
then? Art thou Elijah?" And he said, "I am not." They wish to know, in the third 
place, if he is the prophet, and on his answer," No," they have no longer any 
name to give the personage whose advent they expected, and they say, "Who art 
thou, then, that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of 
thyself?" Their meaning is: "You are not, you say, any of those personages whose 
advent Israel hopes and expects, and who you are, to baptize as you do, we do 
not know; tell us, therefore, so that we may report to those who sent us to get 
light ripen this point." We add, as it has some bearing on the context, that the 
people were moved by the thought that the period of Christ's advent was near. It 
was in a manner imminent in the years from the birth of Jesus and a little 
before, down to the publication of the preaching. Hence it was, in all 
likelihood, that as the scribes and lawyers had deduced the time from Holy 
Scripture and were expecting the Coming One, the idea was taken up by Theudas, 
who came forward as the Messiah and brought together a considerable multitude, 
and after him by the famous Judas of Galilee in the days of the taxing. Thus the 
coming of the Messiah was more warmly expected and discussed, and it was natural 
enough for the Jews to send priests and levites from Jerusalem to John, to ask 
him, "Who art thou?" and learn if he professed to be the Christ. 
7. OF THE BIRTH OF JOHN, AND OF HIS ALLEGED IDENTITY WITH ELIJAH. OF THE 
DOCTRINE OF TRANSCORPORATION. 
"And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elijah? and he said, I am not." No 
one can fail to remember in this connection what Jesus says of John, "If ye will 
receive it, this is Elijah which is to come." How, then, does John come to say 
to those who ask him, "Art thou Elijah?"--"I am not." And how can it be true at 
the same time that John is Elijah who is to come, according to the words of 
Malachi, "And behold I send unto you Elijah the Tishbite, before the great and 
notable day of the Lord come, who shall restore the heart of the father to the 
SOD, and the heart of a man to his neighbour, lest I come, and utterly smite the 
earth." The words of the angel of the Lord, too, who appeared to Zacharias, as 
he stood at the right hand of the altar of incense, are somewhat to the same 
effect as the prophecy of Malachi: "And thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a 
son, and thou shalt call his name John." And a little further on: "And he shall 
go before His face in the spirit and power of Elijah to turn the hearts of the 
fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make 
ready for the Lord a people prepared for Him." As for the first point, one might 
say that John did not know that he was Elijah. This will be the explanation of 
those who find in our passage a support for their doctrine of transcorporation, 
as if the soul clothed itself in a fresh body and did not quite remember its 
former lives. These thinkers will also point out that some of the Jews assented 
to this doctrine when they spoke about the Saviour as if He was one of the old 
prophets, and had risen not from the tomb but from His birth. His mother Mary 
was well known, and Joseph the carpenter was supposed to be His father, add it 
could readily be supposed that He was one of the old prophets risen from the 
dead. 
The same person will adduce the text in Genesis. "I will destroy the whole 
resurrection," and will thereby reduce those who give themselves to finding in 
Scripture solutions of false probabilities to a great difficulty in respect of 
this doctrine. Another, however, a churchman, who repudiates the doctrine of 
transcorporation as a false one, and does not admit that the soul of John ever 
was Elijah, may appeal to the above-quoted words of the angel, and point out 
that it is not the soul of Elijah that is spoken of at John's birth, but the 
spirit and power of Elijah. "He shall go before him," it is said, "in the spirit 
and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children." Now it 
can be shown from thousands of texts that the spirit is a different thing from 
the soul, and that what is called the power is a different thing from both the 
soul and the spirit. On these points I cannot now enlarge; this work must not be 
unduly expanded. To establish the fact that power is different from spirit. it 
will be enough to cite the text, "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the 
power of the Highest shall overshadow thee." As for the spirits of the prophets, 
these are given to them by God, and are spoken of as being in a manner their 
property (slaves), as "The spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets." 
and "The spirit of Elijah rested upon Elisha." Thus, it is said, there is 
nothing absurd in supposing that John, "in the spirit and power of Elijah," 
turned the hearts of the fathers to the children, and that it was on account of 
this spirit that he was called "Elijah who was to come." And to reinforce this 
view it may be argued that if the God of the universe identified Himself with 
His saints to such an extent as to be called the God of Abraham and the God of 
Isaac and the God of Jacob, much more might the Holy Spirit so identify Himself 
with the prophets as to be called their spirit, so that when the spirit is 
spoken of it might be the spirit of Elijah or the spirit of Isaiah. Our 
churchman, to go on with his views, may further say that those who supposed 
Jesus to be one of the prophets risen from the dead were probably misled, partly 
by the doctrine above mentioned, and partly by supposing Him to be one of the 
prophets, and that as for this misconception that He was one of the prophets, 
these persons probably fell into their error from not knowing about Jesus' 
supposed father and actual mother, and considering that He had risen from the 
tombs. As for the text in Genesis about the resurrection, the churchman will 
rejoin with a text to an opposite effect, "God hath raised up for me another 
seed in place of Abel whom Cain slew;" showing that the resurrection occurs in 
Genesis. As for the first difficulty which was raised, our churchman will meet 
the view of the believers in transcorporation by saying that John is no doubt, 
in a certain sense, as he has already shown, Elijah who is to come; and that the 
reason why he met the enquiry of the priests and levites with "I am not," was 
that he divined the object they had in view in making it. For the enquiry laid 
before John by the priests and levites was not intended to bring out whether the 
same spirit was in both, but whether John was that very Elijah who was taken up, 
and who now appeared according to the expectation of the Jews without being born 
(for the emissaries, perhaps, did not know about John's birth); and to such all 
enquiry he naturally answered, "I am not;" for he who was called John was not 
Elijah who was taken up, and had not changed his body for his present 
appearance. Our first scholar, whose view of transcorporation we have seen based 
upon our passage, may go on with a close examination of the text, and urge 
against his antagonist, that if John was the son of such a man as the priest 
Zacharias, and if he was born when his parents were both aged, contrary to all 
human expectation, then it is not likely that so many Jews at Jerusalem would be 
so ignorant about him, or that the priests and levites whom they sent would not 
be acquainted with the facts of his birth. Does not Luke declare that "fear came 
upon all those who lived round about,"--clearly round about Zacharias and 
Elisabeth--and that "all these things were noised abroad throughout the whole 
hill country of Judaea"? And if John's birth from Zacharias was a matter of 
common knowledge, and the Jews of Jerusalem yet sent priests and levites to ask, 
"Art thou Elijah?" then it is clear that in saying this they assumed the 
doctrine of transcorporation to be true, and that it was a current doctrine of 
their country, and not foreign to their secret teaching. 
John therefore says, I am not Elijah, because he does not know about his own 
former life. These thinkers, accordingly, entertain an opinion which is by no 
means to be despised. Our churchman, however, may return to the charge, and ask 
if it is worthy of a prophet, who is enlightened by the Holy Spirit, who is 
predicted by Isaiah, and whose birth was foretold before it took place by so 
great an angel, one who has received of the fulness of Christ, who shares in 
such a grace, who knows truth to have come through Jesus Christ, and has taught 
such deep things about God and about the only-begotten, who is in the bosom of 
the Father, is it worthy of such a one to lie, or even to hesitate, out of 
ignorance of what he was. For with respect to what was obscure, he ought to have 
refrained from confessing, and to have neither affirmed nor denied the 
proposition put before him. If the doctrine in question really was widely 
current, ought not John to have hesitated to pronounce upon it, lest his soul 
had actually been in Elijah? And here our churchman will appeal to history, and 
will bid his antagonists ask experts of the secret doctrines of the Hebrews, if 
they do really entertain such a belief. For if it should appear that they do 
not, then the argument based on that supposition is shown to be quite baseless. 
Our churchman, however, is still free to have recourse to the solution given 
before, and to insist that attention be paid to the meaning with which the 
question was put. For if, as I showed, the senders knew John to be the child of 
Zacharias and Elisabeth, and if the messengers still more, being men of priestly 
race, could not possibly be ignorant of the remarkable manner in which their 
kinsman Zacharias had received his son, then what could be the meaning of their 
question, "Art thou Elijah?" Had they not read that Elijah had been taken up 
into heaven, and did they not expect him to appear? Then, as they expect Elijah 
to come at the consummation before Christ, and Christ to follow him, perhaps 
their question was meant less in a literal than in a tropical sense: Are you he 
who announces beforehand the word which is to come before Christ, at the 
consummation? To this he very properly answers, "I am not." The adversary, 
however, tries to show that the priests could not be ignorant that the birth of 
John had taken place in so remarkable a manner, because "all these things had 
been much spoken of in the hill country of Judaea;" and the churchman has to 
meet this. He does so by showing that a similar mistake was widely current about 
the Saviour Himself; for "some said that He was John the Baptist, others Elijah, 
others Jeremiah or one of the prophets." So the disciples told the Lord when He 
was in the parts of Caesarea Philippi, and questioned them on that subject. And 
Herod, too, said, "John whom I beheaded, he is risen from the dead;" so that he 
appears not to have known what was said about Christ, as reported in the Gospel, 
"Is not this the son of the carpenter, is not His mother called Mary, and His 
brothers James, and Joseph, and Simon, and Judas? And His sisters, are they not 
all with us?" Thus in the case of the Saviour, while many knew of His birth from 
Mary, others were under a mistake about Him; and so in the case of John, there 
is no wonder if, while some knew of his birth from Zacharias, others were in 
doubt whether the expected Elijah had appeared in him or not. There was not more 
room for doubt about John, whether he was Elijah, than about the Saviour, 
whether He was John. Of the two, the question of the outward form of Elijah 
could be disposed of from the words of Scripture, though not from actual 
observation, for we read, "He was a hairy man, and girt with a leather girdle 
about his loins." John's outward appearance, on the contrary, was well known, 
and was not like that of Jesus; and yet there were those who surmised that John 
had risen from the dead, and taken the name of Jesus. As for the change of name, 
a thing which reminds us of mysteries, I do not know how the Hebrews came to 
tell about Phinehas, son of Eleazar, who admittedly prolonged his life to the 
time of many of the judges, as we read in the Book of Judges, to tell about him 
what I now mention. They say that he was Elijah, because he had been promised 
immortality (in Numbers ), on account of the covenant of peace granted to him 
because he was jealous with a divine jealousy, and in a passion of anger pierced 
the Midianitish woman and the Israelite, and stayed the wrath of God as it is 
called, as it is written, "Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, hath 
turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, in that he was jealous with my 
jealousy among them." No wonder, then, if those who conceived Phinehas and 
Elijah to be the same person, whether they judged soundly in this or not. for 
that is not now the question, considered John and Jesus also to be the same. 
This, then, they doubted, and desired to know if John and Elijah were the same. 
At another time than this, the point would certainly call for a careful enquiry, 
and the argument would have to be well weighed as to the essence of the soul, as 
to the principle of her composition, and as to her entering into this body of 
earth. We should also have to enquire into the distributions of the life of each 
soul, and as to her departure from this life, and whether it is possible for her 
to enter into a second life in a body or not, and whether that takes place at 
the same period, and after the same arrangement in each case, or not; and 
whether she enters the same body, or a different one, and if the same, whether 
the subject remains the same while the qualities are changed, or if both subject 
and qualities remain the same, and if the soul will always make use of the same 
body or will change it. Along with these questions, it would also be necessary 
to ask what transcorporation is, and how it differs from incorporation, and if 
he who holds transcorporation must necessarily hold the world to be eternal. The 
views of these scholars must also be taken into account, who consider that, 
according to the Scriptures, the soul is sown along with the body, and the 
consequences of such a view must also be looked at. In fact the subject of the 
soul is a wide one, and hard to be unravelled, and it has to be picked out of 
scattered expressions of Scripture. It requires, therefore, separate treatment. 
The brief consideration we have been led to give to the problem in connection 
with Elijah and John may now suffice; we go on to what follows in the Gospel. 
8. JOHN IS A PROPHET, BUT NOT THE PROPHET. 
"Art thou that prophet? And he answered No." If the law and the prophets were 
until John, what can we say that John was but a prophet? His father Zacharias, 
indeed, says, filled with the Holy Ghost and prophesying, "And thou, child, 
shalt be called the prophet of the Highest, for thou shalt go before the Lord to 
prepare His ways." (One might indeed get past this passage by laying stress on 
the word called: he is to be called, he is not said to be, a prophet.) And still 
more weighty is it that the Saviour said to those who considered John to be a 
prophet, "But what went ye out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and more 
than a prophet." The words, Yea, I say unto you, manifestly affirm that John is 
a prophet, and that is nowhere denied afterwards. If, then, he is said by the 
Saviour to be not only a prophet but "more than a prophet," how is it that when 
the priests and levites come and ask him, "Art thou the Prophet?" he answers No! 
On this we must remark that it is not the same thing to say, "Art thou the 
Prophet?" and "Art thou a prophet?" The distinction between the two expressions 
has already been observed, when we asked what was the difference between the God 
and God, and between the Logos and Logos. Now it is written in Deuteronomy, "A 
prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, like me; Him shall ye hear, 
and it shall be that every soul that will not hear that prophet shall be cut off 
from among His people," There was, therefore, an expectation of one particular 
prophet having a resemblance to Moses in mediating between God and the people 
and receiving a new covenant from God to give to those who accepted his 
teaching; and in the case of each of the prophets, the people of Israel 
recognized that he was not the person of whom Moses spoke. As, then, they 
doubted about John, whether he were not the Christ, so they doubted whether he 
could not be the prophet. And there is no wonder that those who doubted about 
John whether he were the Christ, did not understand that the Christ and the 
prophet are the same person; their doubt as to John necessarily implied that 
they were not clear on this point. Now the difference between "the prophet" and 
"a prophet" has escaped the observation of most students; this is the case with 
Heracleon, who says, in these very words: "As, then, John confessed that he was 
not the Christ, and not even a prophet, nor Elijah." If he interpreted the words 
before us in such a way, he ought to have examined the various passages to see 
whether in saying that he is not a prophet nor Elijah he is or is not saying 
what is true. He devotes no attention, however, to these passages, and in his 
remaining commentaries he passes over such points without any enquiry. In the 
sequel, too, his remarks, of which we shall have to speak directly, are very 
scanty, and do not testify to careful study. 
9. JOHN 1:22. 
"They said therefore unto him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to 
them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?" This speech of the emissaries 
amounts to the following: We had a surmise what you were and came to learn if it 
was so, but now we know that you are not that. It remains for us, therefore. to 
hear your account of yourself, so that we may report your answer to those who 
sent us. 
10. OF THE VOICE JOHN THE BAPTISTS IS. 
"He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness: Make straight the 
way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet." As He who is peculiarly the Son of 
God, being no other than the Logos, yet makes use of Logos (reason)--for He was 
the Logos in the beginning, and was with God, the Logos of God--so John, the 
servant of that Logos, being, if we take the Scripture to mean what it says, no 
other than a voice, yet uses his voice to point to the Logos. He, then, 
understanding in this way the prophecy about himself spoken by Isaiah the 
prophet, says he is a voice, not crying in the wilderness, but "of one crying in 
the wilderness," of Him, namely, who stood and cried, "If any man thirst, let 
him come unto Me and drink." He it was. too, who said, "Prepare ye the way of 
the Lord, make His paths straight. Every valley shall be filled and every 
mountain and hill shall be brought low; and all the crooked shall be made 
straight." For as we read in Exodus that God said to Moses, "Behold I have given 
thee for a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet;" so we 
are to understand--the cases are at least analogous if not altogether 
similar--it is with the Word in the beginning, who is God, and with John. For 
John's voice points to that word and demonstrates it. It is therefore a very 
appropriate punishment that falls on Zacharias on his saying to the angel, 
"Whereby shall I know this? For I am an old man and my wife well stricken in 
years." For his want of faith with regard to the birth of the voice, he is 
himself deprived of his voice, as the angel Gabriel says to him, "Behold, thou 
shall be silent and not able to speak until the day that these things shall come 
to pass, because thou hast not believed my words, which shall be fulfilled in 
their season." And afterwards when he had "asked for a writing tablet and 
written, His name is John; and they all marvelled," he recovered his voice; for 
"his mouth was opened immediately and his tongue, and he spake, blessing God." 
We discussed above how it is to be understood that the Logos is the Son of God, 
and went over the ideas connected with that; and a similar sequence of ideas is 
to be observed at this point. John came for a witness; he was a man sent from 
God to bear witness of the light, that all men through him might believe; he was 
that voice, then, we are to understand, which alone was fitted worthily to 
announce the Logos. We shall understand this aright if we call to mind what was 
adduced in our exposition of the texts: "That all might believe through Him," 
and "This is he of whom it is written, Behold I send My messenger before thy 
face, who shall prepare thy way before thee." There is fitness, too, in his 
being said to be the voice, not of one saying in the wilderness, but of one 
crying in the wilderness. He who cries, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord," also 
says it; but he might say it without crying it. But he cries and shouts it, that 
even those may hear who are at a distance from the speaker, and that even the 
deaf may understand the greatness of the tidings, since it is announced in a 
great voice; and he thus brings help, both to those who have departed from God 
and to those who have lost the acuteness of their hearing. This, too, was the 
reason why "Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto 
Me and drink." Hence, too, "John beareth witness of Him, and cried, saying," 
"Hence also God commands Isaiah to cry, with the voice of one saying, Cry. And I 
said, What shall I cry?" The physical voice we use in prayer need not be great 
nor startling; even should we not lift up any great cry or shout, God will yet 
hear us. He says to Moses, "Why criest thou unto Me?" when Moses had not cried 
audibly at all. It is not recorded in Exodus that he did so; but Moses had cried 
mightily to God in prayer with that voice which is heard by God alone. Hence 
David also says, "With my voice I cried unto the Lord, and He heard me." And one 
who cries in the desert has need of a voice, that the soul which is deprived of 
God and deserted of truth--and what more dreadful desert is there than a soul 
deserted of God and of all virtue, since it still goes crookedly and needs 
instruction--may be exhorted to make straight the way of the Lord. And that way 
is made straight by the man who, far from copying the serpent's crooked journey: 
while he who is of the contrary disposition perverts his way. Hence the rebuke 
directed to a man of this kind and to all who resemble him, "Why pervert ye the 
right ways of the Lord?" 
11. OF THE WAY OF THE LORD, HOW IT IS NARROW, AND HOW JESUS IS THE WAY. 
Now the way of the Lord is made straight in two fashions. First, in the way 
of contemplation, when thought is made clear in truth without any mixture of 
falsehood; and then in the way of conduct, after the sound contemplation of what 
ought to be done, when action is produced which harmonizes with sound theory of 
conduct. And that we may the more clearly understand the text, "Make straight 
the way of the Lord," it will be well to compare with it what is said in the 
Proverbs, "Depart not, either to the right hand or to the left." For he who 
deviates in either direction has given up keeping his path straight, and is no 
longer worthy of regard, since he has gone apart from the straightness of the 
journey, for "the Lord is righteous, and loves righteousness, and His face 
beholds straightness." Hence he who is the object of regard, and receives the 
benefit that comes from this oversight, says, "The light of Thy countenance was 
shown upon us, O Lord." Let us stand, then, as Jeremiah exhorts, upon the ways, 
and let us see and ask after the ancient ways of the Lord, and let us see which 
is the good way, and walk in it. Thus did the Apostles stand and ask for the 
ancient ways of the Lord; they asked the Patriarchs and the Prophets, enquiring 
into their writings, and when they came to understand these writings they saw 
the good way, namely, Jesus Christ, who said, "I am the way." and they walked in 
it. For it is a good way that leads the good man to the good father, the man 
who, from the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things, and who is a 
good and faithful servant. This way is narrow, indeed, for the many cannot bear 
to walk in it and are lovers of their flesh; but it is also hard-pressed by 
those who use violence to walk in it, for it is not called afflicting, but 
afflicted. For that way which is a living way, and feels the qualities of those 
who tread it, is pressed and afflicted, when he travels on it who has not taken 
off his shoes from off his feet. nor truly realized that the place on which he 
stands. or indeed treads, is holy ground. And it will lead to Him who is the 
life, and who says, "I am the life." For the Saviour, in whom all virtues are 
combined, has many aspects. To him who, though by no means near the end, is yet 
advancing, He is the way; to him who has put off all that is dead He is the 
life. He who travels on this way is told to take nothing with him on it, since 
it provides bread and all that is necessary for life, enemies are powerless on 
it, and he needs no staff, and since it is holy, he needs no shoes. 
12. HERACLEON'S VIEW OF THE VOICE, AND OF JOHN THE BAPTIST. 
The words, however, "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness," etc., 
may be taken as equivalent to "I am He of whom the 'voice in the wilderness' is 
written." Then John would be the person crying, and his voice would be that 
crying in the wilderness, "Make straight the way of the Lord." Heracleon, 
discussing John and the prophets, says, somewhat slanderously, that "the Word is 
the Saviour; the voice, that in the wilderness which John interpreted; the sound 
is the whole prophetic order." To this we may reply by reminding him of the 
text, "If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for the 
battle," and that which says that though a man have knowledge of mysteries, or 
have prophecy but wants love, he is a sounding or a tinkling cymbal. If the 
prophetic voice be nothing but sound, how does our Lord come to refer us to it 
as where He says, "Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal 
life, and these are they which bear witness," and "If ye believed Moses, ye 
would believe Me," and "Well did Isaiah prophesy concerning you, saying, This 
people honours me with their lips"? I do not know if any one can reasonably 
admit that the Saviour thus spoke in praise of an uncertain sound, or that there 
is any preparation to be had from the Scriptures to which we are referred as 
from the voice of a trumpet, for our war against opposing powers, should their 
sound give an uncertain voice. If the prophets had not love, and if that is why 
they were sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal, then how does the Lord send us to 
their sound, as these writers will have it, as if we could get help from that? 
He asserts, indeed, that a voice, when well fitted to speech, becomes speech, as 
if one should say that a woman is turned into a man; and the assertion is not 
supported by argument. And, as if he were in a position to put forth a dogma on 
the subject and to get on in this way, he declares that sound can be changed in 
a similar way into voice, and the voice, which is changed into speech, he says, 
is in the position of a disciple, while sound passing into voice is in that of a 
slave. If he had taken any kind of trouble to establish these points we should 
have had to devote some attention to refuting them; but as it is, the bare 
denial is sufficient refutation. There was a point some way back which we 
deferred taking up, that, namely, of the motive of John's speeches. We may now 
take it up. The Saviour, according to Heracleon, calls him both a prophet and 
Elijah, but he himself denies that he is either of these. When the Saviour, 
Heracleon says, calls him a prophet and Elijah, He is speaking not of John 
himself, but of his surroundings; but when He calls him greater than the 
prophets and than those who are born of women, then He is describing the 
character of John himself. When John, on the other hand, is asked about himself, 
his answers relate to himself, not to his surroundings. This we have examined as 
carefully as possible, comparing each of the terms in question with the 
statements of Heracleon, lest he should not have expressed himself quite 
accurately. For how it comes that the statements that he is Elijah and that he 
is a prophet apply to those about him, but the statement that he is the voice of 
one crying in the wilderness, to himself, no attempt whatever is made to show 
Heracleon only gives an illustration, namely, this: His surroundings were, so to 
speak, his clothes, and other than himself, and when he was asked about his 
clothes, if he; were his clothes, he could not answer "Yes." Now that his being 
Elijah, who was to come, was his clothes, is scarcely consistent, so far as I 
can see, with Heracleon's views; it might consist, perhaps, with the exposition 
we ourselves gave of the words, "In the spirit and power of Elijah;" it might, 
in a sense, be said that this spirit of Elijah is equivalent to the soul of 
John. 
He then goes on to try to determine why those who were sent by the Jews to 
question John were priests and levites, and he answers by no means badly, that 
it was incumbent on such persons, being devoted to the service of God, to busy 
themselves and to make enquiries about such matters. When he goes on, however, 
to say that it was "because John was of the levitical tribe, this is less well 
considered. We raised the question ourselves above, and saw that if the Jews who 
were sent knew John's birth, it was not open to them to ask if he was Elijah. 
Then, again, in dealing with the question, "Art thou the prophet?" 
Heracleon does not regard the addition of the article as having any special 
force, and says, "They asked him if he were a prophet, wishing to know this more 
general fact." Again, not Heracleon alone, but, so far as I am informed, all 
those who diverge from our views, as if they had not been able to deal with a 
trifling ambiguity and to draw the proper distinction, suppose John to be 
greater than Elijah and than all the prophets. The words are, "Of those born of 
women there is none greater than John;" but this admits of two mean-lugs, that 
John is greater than they all, or again, that some of them are equal to him. For 
though many of the prophets were equal to him, still it might be true ill 
respect of the grace bestowed on him, that none of them was greater than he. He 
regards it as confirming the view that John was greater, that "he is predicted 
by Isaiah;" for no other of all those who uttered prophecies was held worthy by 
God of this distinction. This, however, is a venturesome statement anti implies 
some disrespect of what is called the Old Testament, and total disregard of the 
fact that Elijah himself was the subject of prophecy. For Elijah is prophesied 
by Malachi, who says, "Behold, I send unto you Elijah, the Tishbite, who shall 
restore the heart of the father to the son." Josiah, too, as we read in third 
Kings, was predicted by name by the prophet who came out of Judah; for he said, 
Jeroboam also being present at the altar, "Thus saith the Lord, Behold a son is 
born to David, his name is Josiah." There are some also who say that Samson was 
predicted by Jacob, when he said, "Dan shall judge his own people, he is as one 
tribe in Israel," for Samson who judged Israel was of the tribe of Dan. So much 
by way of evidence of the rashness of the statement that John alone was the 
subject of prophecy, made by Heracleon in his attempted explanation of the 
words, "I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness." 
13. JOHN 1:24-25. OF THE BAPTISM OF JOHN, THAT OF ELIJAH, AND THAT OF CHRIST. 

And they that were sent were of the Pharisees. And they asked him, and said 
unto him, "Why baptizest thou then, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor 
the prophet?" Those who sent from Jerusalem the priests and levites who asked 
John these questions, having learned who John was not, and who he was, preserve 
a decent silence, as if tacitly assenting and indicating that they ac cepted 
what was said, and saw that baptism was suited to a voice crying in the 
wilderness for the preparing of the way of the Lord. But the Pharisees being, as 
their name indicates, a divided and seditious set of people, show that they do 
not agree with the Jews of the metropolis and with the ministers of the service 
of God, the priests and levites. They send envoys who deal in rebukes, and so 
far as their power extends debar him from baptizing; their envoys ask, Why 
baptizest thou, then, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet? 
And if we were to stitch together into one statement what is written in the 
various Gospels, we should say that at this time they spoke as is here reported, 
but that at a later time, when they wished to received baptism, they heard the 
address of John: "Generations of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the 
wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance." This is what 
the Baptist says in Matthew, when he sees many of the Pharisees and Sadducees 
coming to his baptism, without, it is clear, having the fruits of repentance, 
and pharisaically boasting in themselves that they had Abraham for their father. 
For this they are rebuked by John, who has the zeal of Elijah according to the 
communication of the Holy Spirit. For that is a rebuking word, "Think not to say 
within yourselves, We have Abraham for our father," and that is the word of a 
teacher, when he speaks of those who for their stony hearts are called 
unbelieving stones, and says that by the power of God these stones may be 
changed into children of Abraham; for they were present to the eyes of the 
prophet and did not shrink from his divine glance. Hence his words: "I say unto 
you that God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham." And since 
they came to his baptism without having done fruits meet for repentance, he says 
to them most appropriately, "Already is the axe laid to the root of the tree; 
every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the 
fire." This is as much as to say to them: Since you have come to baptism without 
having done fruits meet for repentance, you are a tree that does not bring forth 
good fruit and which has to be cut down by the most sharp and piercing axe of 
the Word which is living and powerful and sharper than every two-edged sword. 
The estimation in which the Pharisees held themselves is also set forth by Luke 
in the passage: "Two men went up to the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee and 
the other a publican. And the Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself: God, 
I thank Thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, 
or even as this publican." The result of this speech is that the publican goes 
down to his house justified rather than the Pharisee, and the lesson is drawn, 
that every one who exalts himself is abased. They came, then, in the character 
in which the Saviour's reproving words described them, as hypocrites to John's 
baptism, nor does it escape the Baptist's observation that they have the poison 
of vipers under their tongue and the poison of asps, for "the poison of asps is 
under their tongue," The figure of serpents rightly indicates their temper, and 
it is plainly revealed in their better question: "Why baptizest thou then, if 
thou art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?" To these I would fain 
reply, if it be the case that the Christ and Elijah and the prophet baptize, but 
that the voice crying in the wilderness has no authority to do so, "Most 
harshly, my friends, do you question the messenger sent before the face of 
Christ to prepare His way before Him. The mysteries which belong to this point 
are all hidden to you; for Jesus being, whether you will or not, the Christ, did 
not Himself baptize but His disciples, He who was Himself the prophet. And how 
have you come to believe that Elijah who is to come will baptize?" He did not 
baptize the logs upon the altar in the times of Ahab, though they needed such a 
bath to be burned up, what time the Lord appeared in fire. No, he commands the 
priests to do this for him, and that not only once; for he says, "Do it a second 
time," upon which they did it a second time, and "Do it a third time," and they 
did it a third time. If, then, he did not at that time himself baptize but left 
the work to others, how was he to baptize at the time spoken of by Malachi? 
Christ, then, does not baptize with water, but His disciples. He reserves for 
Himself to baptize with the Holy Spirit and with fire. Now Heracleon accepts the 
speech of the Pharisees as distinctly implying that the office of baptizing 
belonged to the Christ and Elijah and to every prophet, for he uses these words, 
"Whose office alone it is to baptize." He is refuted by what we have just said, 
and especially by the consideration that he takes the word "prophet" in a 
general sense; for he can not show that any of the prophets baptized. He adds, 
not incorrectly, that the Pharisees put the question from malice, and not from a 
desire to learn. 
14. COMPARISON OF THE STATEMENTS OF THE FOUR EVANGELISTS RESPECTING JOHN THE 
BAPTIST, THE PROPHECIES REGARDING HIM, HIS ADDRESSES TO THE MULTITUDE AND TO THE 
PHARISEES, ETC. 
We deem it necessary to compare with the expression of the passage we are 
considering the similar expressions found elsewhere in the Gospels. This we 
shall continue to do point by point to the end of this work, so that terms which 
appear to disagree may be shown to be in harmony, and that the peculiar meanings 
present in each may be explained. This we shall do in the present passage. The 
words, "The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the 
Lord," are placed by John, who was a disciple, in the mouth of the Baptist. In 
Mark, on the other hand, the same words are recorded at the beginning of the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ, in accordance with the Scripture of Isaiah, as thus: 
"The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is written in Isaiah the 
prophet, Behold, I send My messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way 
before thee. The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of 
the Lord, make His paths straight." Now the words, "Make straight the way of the 
Lord," added by John, are not found in the prophet. Perhaps John was seeking to 
compress the "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight the paths of our 
God," and so wrote, "Make straight the way of the Lord;" while Mark combined two 
prophecies spoken by two different prophets in different places, and made one 
prophecy out of them, "As it is written in Isaiah the prophet, Behold I send My 
messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way. The voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths straight." The 
words, "The voice of one crying in the wilderness," are written immediately 
after the narrative of Hezekiah's recovery from his sickness, while the words, 
"Behold I send My messenger before thy face," are written by Malachi. What John 
does here, abbreviating the text he quotes, we find done by Mark also at another 
point. For while the words of the prophet are, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, 
make straight the paths of our God," Mark writes, "Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord, make His paths straight." And John practises a similar abbreviation in the 
text, "Behold I send My messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way 
before thee," when he does not add the words "before thee," as in the original. 
Coming now to the statement, "They were sent from the Pharisees and they asked 
Him," we have been led by our examination of the passage to prefix the enquiry 
of the Pharisees--which Matthew does not mention--to the occurrence recorded in 
Matthew, when John saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his 
baptism, and said to them, "Ye generations of vipers," etc. For the natural 
sequence is that they should first enquire and then come. And we have to observe 
how, when Matthew reports that there went out to John Jerusalem and all Judaea, 
and all the region round about Jordan, to be baptized by him in Jordan, 
confessing their sins, it was not these people who heard from the Baptist any 
word of rebuke or refutation, but only those many Pharisees and Sadducees whom 
he saw coming. They it was who were greeted with the address, "Ye offspring of 
vipers," etc. Mark, again, does not record any words of reproof as having been 
used by John to those who came to him, being all the country of Judaea and all 
of them of Jerusalem, who were baptized by him in the Jordan and confessed their 
sins. 
This is because Mark does not mention the Pharisees and Sadducees as having 
come to John. A further circumstance which we must mention is that both Matthew 
and Mark state that, in the one case, all Jerusalem and all Judaea, and the 
whole region round about Jordan, in the other, the whole land of Judaea and all 
they of Jerusalem, were baptized, confessing their sins; but when Matthew 
introduces the Pharisees and Sadducees as coming to the baptism, he does not say 
that they confessed their sins, and this might very likely and very naturally be 
the reason why they were addressed as "offspring of vipers." 
Do not suppose, reader, that there is anything improper in our adducing m our 
discussion of the question of those who were sent from the Pharisees and put 
questions to John, the parallel passages from the other Gospels too. For if we 
have indicated the proper connection between the enquiry of the Pharisees, re 
corded by the disciple John, and their baptism which is found in Matthew, we 
could scarcely avoid inquiring into the passages in question, nor recording the 
observations made on them. Luke, like Mark, remembers the passage, "The voice of 
one crying in the wilderness," but lie for his part treats it as follows: "The 
word of God came unto John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness. And he came 
into all the region round about Jordan preaching the baptism of repentance unto 
remission of sins; as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the 
prophet, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord, make His paths straight." Luke, however, added the continuation of the 
prophecy: "Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be 
brought low, and the crooked shall become straight, and the rough ways smooth, 
and all flesh shall see the salvation of God." He writes, like Mark, "Make His 
ways straight;" curtailing, as we saw before, the text, "Make straight the ways 
of our God." In the phrase, "And all the crooked shall become straight," he 
leaves out the "all," and the word "straight" he converts from a plural into a 
singular. Instead of the phrase, moreover, "The rough laud into a plain," he 
gives, "The rough ways into smooth ways," and he leaves out "And the glory of 
the Lord shall be revealed," and gives what follows, "And all flesh shall see 
the salvation of God." These observations are of use as showing how the 
evangelists are accustomed to abbreviate the sayings of the prophets. It has 
also to be observed that the speech, "Offspring of vipers," etc., is said by 
Matthew to have been spoken to the Pharisees and Sadducees when coming to 
baptism, they being a different set of people from those who confessed their 
sins, and to whom no words of this kind were spoken. With Luke, on the contrary, 
these words were addressed to the multitudes who came out to be baptized by 
John, and there were not two divisions of those who were baptized, as we found 
in Matthew. But Matthew, as the careful observer will see, does not speak of the 
multitudes in the way of praise, and he probably means the Baptist's address, 
Offspring of vipers, etc., to be understood as addressed to them also. Another 
point is, that to the Pharisees and Sadducees he says, "Bring forth a fruit," in 
the singular, "worthy of repentance," but to the multitudes he uses the plural, 
"Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance." Perhaps the Pharisees are required to 
yield the special fruit of repentance, which is no other than the Son and faith 
in Him, while the multitudes, who have not even a beginning of good things, are 
asked for all the fruits of repentance, and so the plural is used to them. 
Further, it is said to the Pharisees, "Think not to say within yourselves, We 
have Abraham for our father." For the multitudes now have a beginning, appearing 
as they do to be introduced into the divine Word, and to approach the truth; and 
thus they begin to say within themselves, "We have Abraham for our father." 
The Pharisees, on the contrary, are not beginning to this, but have long held 
it to be so. But both classes see John point to the stones aforesaid and declare 
that even from these children can be raised up to Abraham, rising up out of 
unconsciousness and deadness. And observe how it is said to the Pharisees, 
according to the word of the prophet, "Ye have eaten false fruit," and they have 
false fruit,--" Every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and 
cast into the fire," while to the multitudes which do not bear fruit at all, 
"Every tree which bringeth not forth fruit is hewn down." For that which has no 
fruit at all has not good fruit, and, therefore, it is worthy to be hewn down. 
But that which bears fruit has by no means good fruit, whence it also calls for 
the axe to lay it low. But, if we look more closely into this about the fruit, 
we shall find that it is impossible that that which has just begun to be 
cultivated, even should it not prove fruitless, should bear the first good 
fruits. The husbandman is content that the tree just coming into cultivation 
should bear him at first such fruits as it may; afterwards, when he has pruned 
and trained it according to his art, he will receive, not the fruits it chanced 
to bear at first, but good fruits. The law itself favours this interpretation, 
for it says that the planter is to wait for three years, having the trees pruned 
and not eating the fruit of them. "Three years." it says, "the fruit shall be 
unpurified to you, and shall not be eaten, but in the fourth year all the fruit 
shall be holy, for giving praise unto the Lord." This explains how the word 
"good" is omitted from the address to the multitudes, "Every tree, therefore, 
which bears not fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire." The tree which goes 
on bearing such fruit as it did at first, is a tree which does not bear good 
fruit, and is, therefore, cut down, and cast into the fire, since, when the 
three years have passed and the fourth comes round, it does not bear good fruit, 
for praise unto the Lord. In thus adducing the passages from the other Gospels I 
may appear to be digressing, but I cannot think it useless, or without bearing 
on our present subject. For the Pharisees send to John, after the priests and 
levites who came from Jerusalem, men who came to ask him who he was, and 
enquire, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the 
prophet? After making this enquiry they straightway come for baptism, as Matthew 
records, and then they hear words suited to their quackery and hypocrisy. But 
the words addressed to them were very similar to those spoken to the multitudes, 
and hence the necessity to look carefully at both speeches, and to compare them 
together. It was while we were so engaged that various points arose in the 
sequence of the matter, which we had to consider. To what has been said we must 
add the following. We find mention made in John of two orders of persons 
sending: the one, that of the Jews from Jerusalem sending priests and levites; 
the other, that of the Pharisees who want to know why he baptizes. And we found 
that, after the enquiry, the Pharisees present themselves for baptism. May it 
not be that the Jews, who had sent the earlier mission from Jerusalem, received 
John's words before those who sent the second mission, namely, the Pharisees, 
and hence arrived before them? For Jerusalem and all Judaea, and, in 
consequence, the whole region round about Jordan, were being baptized by him in 
the river Jordan, confessing their sins; or, as Mark says. "There went out to 
him the whole land of Judaea, and all they of Jerusalem, and were baptized of 
him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins." Now, neither does Matthew 
introduce the Pharisees and Sadducees, to whom the words, "Offspring of vipers," 
etc., are addressed; nor does Luke introduce the multitudes who meet with the 
same rebuke, as confessing their sins. And the question may be raised how, if 
the whole city of Jerusalem, and the whole of Judaea, and the whole region round 
about Jordan, were baptized of John in Jordan, the Saviour could say, "John the 
Baptist came neither eating nor drinking, and ye say he hath a devil;" and how 
could He say to those who asked Him, "By what authority doest thou these things? 
I also will ask you one word, which if ye tell me, I also will tell you by what 
authority I do these things. The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven or 
of men? And they reason, and say, If we shall say, From heaven, He will say, Why 
did ye not believe him?" The solution of the difficulty is this. The Pharisees, 
addressed by John, as we saw before, with his "Offspring of vipers," etc., came 
to the baptism, without believing in him, probably because they feared the 
multitudes, and, with their accustomed hypocrisy towards them, deemed it right 
to undergo the washing, so as not to appear hostile to those who did so. Their 
belief was, then, that he derived his baptism from men, and not from heaven, 
but, on account of the multitude, lest they should be stoned, they are afraid to 
say what they think. Thus there is no contradiction between the Saviour's speech 
to the Pharisees and the narratives in the Gospels about the multitudes who 
frequented' John's baptism. It was part of the effrontery of the Pharisees that 
they declared John to have a devil, as, also, that they declared Jesus to have 
performed His wonderful works by Beelzebub, the prince of the devils. 
15. HOW THE BAPTIST ANSWERS THE QUESTION OF THE PHARISEES AND EXALTS THE 
NATURE OF CHRIST. OF THE SHOE-LATCHET WHICH HE IS UNABLE TO UNTIE. 
John answered them, saying, "I baptize with water, but in the midst of you 
standeth one whom ye know not, even He who cometh after me, the latchet of whose 
shoe I am not worthy to unloose." Heracleon considers that John's answers to 
those sent by the Pharisees refer not to what they asked, but to what he wished, 
not observing that he accuses the prophet of a want of manners, by making him, 
when asked about one thing, answer about another; for this is a fault to be 
guarded against in conversation. We assert, on the contrary, that the reply 
accurately takes up the question. It is asked," Why baptizest thou then, if thou 
art not the Christ?" And what other answer could be given to this than to show 
that his baptism was in its nature a bodily thing? I, he says, "baptize with 
water;" this is his answer to, "Why baptizest thou." And to the second part of 
their question, "If thou art not the Christ," he answers by exalting the 
superior nature of Christ, that He has such virtue as to be invisible in His 
deity, though present to every man and extending over the whole universe. This 
is what is indicated in the words, "There standeth one among you." The 
Pharisees, moreover, though expecting the advent of Christ, saw nothing in Him 
of such a nature as John speaks of; they believed Him to be simply a perfect and 
holy man. John, therefore, rebukes their ignorance of His superiority, and adds 
to the words, "There standeth one among you," the clause, "whom ye know not." 
And, lest any one should suppose the invisible One who extends to every man, or, 
indeed, to the whole world, to be a different person from Him who became man, 
and appeared upon the earth and con versed with men, he adds to the words, 
"There standeth one among you whom you know not," the further words, "Who cometh 
after me," that is, He who is to be manifested after me. By whose surpassing 
excellence he well understood that his own nature was far surpassed, though some 
doubted whether he might be the Christ; and, therefore, desiring to show how far 
he is from attaining to the greatness of the Christ, that no one should think of 
him beyond what he sees or hears of him, he goes on: "The latchet of whose shoe 
I am not worthy to unloose." By which lie conveys, as in a riddle, that he is 
not fit to solve and to explain the argument about Christ's assuming a human 
body, an argument tied up and hidden (like a shoe-tie) to those who do not 
understand it,--so as to say anything worthy of such an advent, compressed, as 
it was, into so short a space. 
16. COMPARISON OF JOHN'S TESTIMONY TO JESUS IN THE DIFFERENT GOSPELS. 
It may not be out of place, as we are examining the text, "I baptize with 
water," to compare the parallel utterances of the evangelists with this of John. 
Matthew reports that the Baptist, when he saw many of the Pharisees and 
Sadducees coming to his baptism, after the words of rebuke which we have already 
studied, went on: "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but He that 
cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; He 
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." This agrees with the 
words in John, in which the Baptist declares himself to those sent by the 
Pharisees, on the subject of his baptizing with water. Mark, again, says, "John 
preached, saying, There cometh after me He that is mightier than I, the latchet 
of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose. I baptized you with 
water, but He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost." And Luke says that, as the 
people were in expectation, and all were reasoning in their hearts concerning 
John, whether haply he were the Christ, John answered them all, saying. "I 
indeed baptize you with water; but there cometh one mightier than I, whose 
shoe-latchet I am not worthy to unloose; He shall baptize you with the Holy 
Ghost, and with fire." 
17. OF THE TESTIMONY OF JOHN TO JESUS IN MATTHEW'S GOSPEL 
These, then, are the parallel passages of the four; let us try to see as 
clearly as we can what is the purport of each and wherein they differ from each 
other. And we will begin with Matthew, who is reported by tradition to have 
published his Gospel before the others, to the Hebrews, those, namely, of the 
circumcision who believed. I, he says, baptize you with water unto repentance, 
purifying you, as it were, and turning you away from evil courses and calling 
you to repentance; for I am come to make ready for the Lord a people prepared 
for Him, and by my baptism of repentance to prepare the ground for Him who is to 
come after me, and who will thus benefit you much more effectively and 
powerfully than my strength could. For His baptism is not that of the body only; 
He fills the penitent with the Holy Ghost, and His diviner fire does away with 
everything material and consumes everything that is earthy, not only from him 
who admits it to his life, but even from him who hears of it from those who have 
it. So much stronger than I is He who is coming after me, that I am not able to 
bear even the outskirts of the powers round Him which are furthest from Him 
(they are not open and exposed, so that any one could see them), nor even to 
bear those who support them. I know not of which I should speak. Should I speak 
of my own great weakness, which is not able to bear even these things about 
Christ which in comparison with the greater things in Him are least, or should I 
speak of His transcendent Deity, greater than all the world? If I who have 
received such grace, as to be thought worthy of prophecy predicting my arrival 
in this human life, in the words," The voice of one crying in the wilderness," 
and "Behold I send my messenger before thy face;" if I whose birth Gabriel who 
stands before God announced to my father so advanced in years, so much against 
his expectation, I at whose name Zacharias recovered his voice and was enabled 
to use it to prophesy, I to whom my Lord bears witness that among them that are 
born of women there is noble greater than I, I am not able so much as to bear 
His shoes l And if not His shoes, what can be said about His garments? Who is so 
great as to be able to guard His coat? Who can suppose that He can understand 
the meaning contained in His tunic which is without seam from the top because it 
is woven throughout? It is to be observed that while the four represent John as 
declaring himself to have come to baptize with water. Matthew alone adds the 
words "to repentance," teaching that the benefit of baptism is connected with 
the intention of the baptized person; to him who repents it is salutary, but to 
him who comes to it without repentance it will turn to greater condemnation. And 
here we must note that as the wonderful works done by the Saviour in the cures 
He wrought, which are symbolical of those who at any time are set free by the 
word of God from ally sickness or disease, though they were done to the body and 
brought a bodily relief, yet also called those who were benefited by them to an 
exercise of faith, so the washing with water which is symbolic of the soul 
cleansing herself from every stain of wickedness, is no less in itself to him 
who yields himself to the divine power of the invocation of the Adorable 
Trinity, the beginning and source of divine girls; for "there are diversities of 
gifts." This view receives confirmation from the narrative recorded in the Acts 
of the Apostles, which shows the Spirit to have descended so manifestly on those 
who receive baptism, after the water had prepared the way for him in those who 
properly approached the rite. 
Simon Magus, astonished at what he saw, desired to receive from Peter this 
gift, but though it was a good thing he desired, he thought to attain it by the 
mammon of unrighteousness. We next remark in passing that the baptism of John 
was inferior to the baptism of Jesus which was given through His disciples. 
Those persons in the Acts who were baptized to John's baptism and who had not 
heard if there was any Holy Ghost are baptized over again by the Apostle, 
Regeneration did not take place with John, but with Jesus through His disciples 
it does so, and what is called the layer of regeneration takes place with 
renewal of the Spirit; for the Spirit now comes in addition since it comes from 
God and is over and above the water and does not come to all after the water. So 
hr, then, our examination of the statements in the Gospel according to Matthew. 
18. OF THE TESTIMONY IN MARK. WHAT IS MEANT BY THE SAVIOUR'S SHOES AND 
BYUNTYING HIS SHOE-LATCHETS. 
Now let us consider what is stated by Mark. Mark's account of John's 
preaching agrees with the other. The words are, "There cometh after me He that 
is mightier than I," which amounts to the same thing as "He that cometh after me 
is mightier than I." There is a difference, however, in what follows, "The 
latchets of His shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and untie." For it is one 
thing to bear a person's shoes,--they must, it is evident, have been untied 
already from the feet of the wearer,--and it is another thing to stoop down and 
untie the latchet of his shoes. And it follows, since believers cannot think 
that either of the Evangelists made any mistake or misrepresentation, that the 
Baptist must have made these two utterances at different times and have meant 
them to express different things. It is not the case, as some suppose. that the 
reports refer to the same incident and turned out differently because of a 
loose-ness of memory as to some of the facts or words. Now it is a great thing 
to bear the shoes of Jesus, a great thing to stoop down to the bodily features 
of His mission, to that which took place in some lower region, so as to 
contemplate His image in the lower sphere, and to untie each difficulty 
connected with the mystery of His incarnation, such being as it were His 
shoe-latchets. For the fetter of obscurity is one as the key of knowledge also 
is one; not even He who is greatest among those born of women is sufficient of 
Himself to loose such things or to open them, for He who tied and locked at 
first, He also grants to whom He will to loose His shoe-latchet and to unlock 
what He has shut. If the passage about the shoes has a mystic meaning we ought 
not to scorn to consider it. Now I consider that the inhumanisation when the Son 
of God assumes flesh and bones is one of His shoes, and that the other is the 
descent to Hades, whatever that Hades be, and the journey with the Spirit to the 
prison. As to the descent into Hades, we read in the sixteenth Psalm, "Thou wilt 
not leave my soul in Hades," and as for the journey in prison with the Spirit we 
read in Peter in his Catholic Epistle, "Put to death," he says, "in the flesh, 
but quickened in the Spirit; in which also He went and preached unto the spirits 
in prison, which at one time were disobedient, when the long-suffering of God 
once waited in the days of Noah while the ark was a preparing." He, then, who is 
able worthily to set forth the meaning of these two journeys is able to untie 
the latchet of the shoes of Jesus; he, bending down in his mind and going with 
Jesus as He goes down into Hades, and descending from heaven and the mysteries 
of Christ's deity to the advent He of necessity made with us when He took on man 
(as His shoes). Now He who put on man also put on the dead, for "for this end 
Jesus both died and revived, that He might be Lord both of dead and living." 
This is why He put on both living and dead, that is, the inhabitants of the 
earth and those of Hades, that He might be the Lord of both dead and living. 
Who, then, is able to stoop down and untie the latchet of such shoes, and having 
untied them not to let them drop, but by the second faculty he has received to 
take them up and bear them, by bearing the meaning of them in his memory? 
19. LUKE AND JOHN SUGGEST THAT ONE MAY LOOSE THE SHOE-LATCHETS OF THE LOGOS 
WITHOUT STOOPING DOWN. 
We must not, however, omit to ask how it comes that Luke and John give the 
speech without the phrase "to stoop down." He, perhaps, who stoops down may be 
held to unloose in the sense which we have stated. On the other hand, it may be 
that one who fixes his eyes on the height of the exaltation of the Logos, may 
find the loosing of those shoes which when one is seeking them seem to be bound, 
so that He also looses those shoes which are separable from the Logos, and 
beholds the Logos divested of inferior things, as He is, the Son of God. 
20. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN NOTBEING "SUFFICIENT" AND NOT BEING "WORTHY." 
John records that the Baptist said he was not worthy, Mark that he was not 
sufficient, and these two are not the same. One who was not worthy might yet be 
sufficient, and one who was worthy might not be sufficient. For even if it be 
the case that gifts are bestowed to profit withal and not merely according to 
the proportion of faith, yet it would seem to be the part of a God who loves men 
and who sees before what harm must come from the rise of self-opinion or 
conceit, not to bestow sufficiency even on the worthy. But it belongs to the 
goodness of God by conferring bounties to conquer the object of His bounty, 
taking in advance him who is destined to be worthy, and adorning him even before 
he becomes worthy with sufficiency, so that after his sufficiency he may come to 
be worthy; he is not first to be worthy and then to anticipate the giver and 
take His gifts before the time and so arrive at being sufficient. Now with the 
three the Baptist says he is not sufficient, while in John he says he is not 
worthy. But it may be that he who formerly declared that he was not sufficient 
became sufficient afterwards, even though perhaps he was not worthy, or again 
that while he was saying he was not worthy, and was in fact not worthy, he 
arrived at being worthy, unless one should say that human nature can never come 
to perform worthily this loosing or this bearing, axed that John, therefore, 
says truly that he never became sufficient to loose the latchets of the 
Saviour's shoes, nor worthy of it either. However much we take into our minds 
there are still left things not yet understood; for, as we read in the wisdom of 
Jesus, son of Sirach, "When a man hath done, then he beginneth, and when he 
leaveth off, then he shall he doubtful." 
21. THE FOURTH GOSPEL SPEAKS OF ONLY ONE SHOE, THE OTHERS OF BOTH. THE 
SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS. 
As to the shoes, too, which are spoken of in the three Gospels, we have a 
question to consider; we must compare them with the single shoe named by the 
disciple John. "I am not worthy," we read there, "to untie the latchet of His 
shoe." Perhaps he was conquered by the grace of God, and received the gift of 
doing that which of himself he would not have been worthy to do, of untying, 
namely, the latchet of one of the shoes, namely, after he had seen the Saviour's 
sojourn among men, of which he bears witness. But he did not know the things 
which were to follow, namely, whether Jesus was to come to that place also, to 
which he was to go after being beheaded in prison, or whether he was to look for 
another; and hence he alludes enigmatically to that doubt which was afterwards 
cleared up to us, and says, "I am not worthy to untie His shoe-latchet." If any 
one considers this to be a superfluous speculation, he can combine in one the 
speech about the shoes and that about the shoe, as if John said, I am by no 
means worthy to loose His shoestring, not even at the beginning, the string of 
one of His shoes. Or the following may be a way to combine what is said in the 
Four. If John understands about Jesus sojourn here, but is in doubt about the 
future, then he says with perfect truth that he is not worthy to loose the 
latchet of His shoes; for though he loosed that of one shoe, he did not loose 
both. And on the other hand, what he says about the latehet of the shoe is quite 
true also; since as we saw he is still in doubt whether Jesus is He that was to 
come, or whether another is to be looked for, in that other region. 
22. HOW THE WORD STANDS IN THE MIDST OF MEN WITHOUT BEING KNOWN OF THEM. 
As for the saying, "There standeth one among you whom you know not," we are 
led by it to consider the Son of God, the Word, by whom all things were made, 
since He exists in substance throughout the underlying nature of things, being 
the same as wisdom. For He permeated, from the beginning, all creation, so that 
what is made at any time should be made through Him, and that it might be always 
true of anything soever, that "All things were made by Him, and without Him was 
not anything made that was made;" and this saying also, "By wisdom didst thou 
make them all." Now, if He permeates all creation, then He is also in those 
questioners who ask, "Why baptizest thou, if thou art not the Christ, nor 
Elijah, nor the prophet?" In the midst of them stands the Word, who is the same 
and steadfast, being everywhere established by the Father. Or the words, "There 
standeth among you," may he understood to say, In the midst of you men, because 
you are reasonable beings, stands He who is proved by Scripture to be the 
sovereign principle in the midst of every body, and so to be present in your 
heart. Those, therefore, who have the Word in the midst of them, but who do not 
consider His nature, nor from what spring and principle He came, nor how He gave 
them the nature they have, these, while having Him in the midst of them, know 
Him not. But John knew Him: for the words, "Whom you know not," used in reproach 
to the Pharisees, show that he well knew the Word whom they did not know. And 
the Baptist, therefore, knowing Him, saw Him coming after himself, who was now 
in the midst of them, that is to say, dwelling after him and the teaching he 
gave in his baptism, in those who, according to reason (or the Word), submitted 
to that purifying rite. The word "after," however, has not the same meaning here 
as it has when Jesus commands us to come "after" Him; for in this case we are 
bidden to go after Him, so that, treading in His steps, we may come to the 
Father; but in the other case, the meaning is that after the teachings of John 
(since "He came in order that all men through Him might believe"), the Word 
dwells with those who have prepared themselves, purified as they are by the 
lesser words for the perfect Word. Firstly, then, stands the Father, being 
without any turning or change; and then stands also His Word, always carrying on 
His work of salvation, and even when He is in the midst of men, not 
comprehended, and not even seen. He stands, also, teaching, and inviting all to 
drink from His abundant spring, for "Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man 
thirst, let him come unto Me and drink." 
23. HERACLEON'S VIEW OF THIS UTTERANCE OF JOHN THE BAPTIST, AND 
INTERPRETATION OF THE SHOE OF JESUS. 
But Heracleon declares the words, "There standeth one among you," to be 
equivalent to "He is already here, and He is in the world and in men, and He is 
already manifest to you all." By this He does away with the meaning which is 
also present in the words, that the Word had permeated the whole world. For we 
must say to him, When is He not present, and when is He not in the world? Does 
not this Gospel say, "He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, and 
the world knew Him not." And this is why those to whom the Logos is He "whom you 
know not," do not know Him: they have never gone out of the world, but the world 
does not know Him. But at what time did He cease to be among men? Was He not in 
Isaiah, when He said, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath 
anointed me," and "I became manifest to those who sought me not." Let them say, 
too, if He was not in David when he said, not from himself, "But I was 
established by Him a king in Zion His holy hill," and the other words spoken in 
the Psalms in the person of Christ. And why should I go over the details of this 
proof,truly they are hard to be numbered, when I can show quite clearly that He 
was always in men? And that is enough to show Heracleon's interpretation of 
"There standeth in the midst of you," to be unsound, when he says it is 
equivalent to "He is already here, and He is in the world and in men." We are 
disposed to agree with him when he says that the words, "Who cometh after me," 
show John to be the forerunner of Christ, for he is in fact a kind of servant 
running before his master. The words, however, "Whose shoe-latchet I am not 
worthy to unloose," receive much too simple an interpretation when it is said 
that "in these words the Baptist confesses that he is not worthy even of the 
least hon-ourable ministration to Christ." After this interpretation he adds, 
not without sense, "I am not worthy that for my sake He should come down from 
His greatness and should take flesh as His footgear, concerning which I am not 
able to give any explanation or description, nor to unloose the arrangement of 
it." In understanding the world by his shoe, Heracleon shows some largeness of 
mind, but immediately after he verges on impiety in declaring that all this is 
to be understood of that person whom John here has in his mind. For he considers 
that it is the demiurge of the world who confesses by these words that he is a 
lesser person than the Christ; and this is the height of impiety. 
For the Father who sent Him, He who is the God of the living as Jesus Himself 
testifies, of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, and He who is greater than 
heaven and earth for the reason that He is the Maker of them, He also alone is 
good and is greater than He who was sent by Him. And even if, as we said, 
Heracleon's idea was a lofty one, that the whole world was the shoe of Jesus, 
yet I think we ought not to agree with him. For how can it be harmonized with 
such a view, that "Heaven is My throne and the earth My footstool," a testimony 
which Jesus accepts as said of the Father? "Swear not by heaven," He says, "for 
it is God's throne, nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of His feet." How, 
if he takes the whole world to be the shoe of Jesus, can he also accept the 
text, "Do not I fill heaven and earth?" saith the Lord. It is also worth while 
to enquire, whether as the Word and wisdom permeated the whole world, and as the 
Father was in the Son, the words are to be understood as above or in this way, 
that He who first of all was girded about with the whole creation, in addition 
to the Son's being in Him, granted to the Saviour, as being second after Him and 
being God the Word, to pervade the whole creation. To those who have it in them 
to take note of the uninterrupted movement of the great heaven, how it carries 
with it from East to West so great a multitude of stars, to them most of all it 
will seem needful to enquire what that force is, how great and of what nature, 
which is present in the whole world. For to pronounce that force to be other 
than the Father and the Son, that perhaps might be inconsistent with piety. 
24. THE NAME OF THE PLACE WHERE JOHN BAPTIZED IS NOT BETHANY, AS IN MOST 
COPIES, BUT BETHABARA. PROOF OF THIS. SIMILARLY "GERGESA" SHOULD BE READ 
FOR"GERASA," IN THE STORY OF THE SWINE. ATTENTION IS TO BE PAID TO THE PROPER 
NAMES IN SCRIPTURE, WHICH ARE OFTEN WRITTEN INACCURATELY, AND ARE OF IMPORTANCE 
FOR INTERPRETATION. 
"These things were done in Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John was 
baptizing." We are aware of the reading which is found in almost all the copies, 
"These things were done in Bethany." This appears, moreover, to have been the 
reading at an earlier time; and in Heracleon we read "Bethany." We are 
convinced, however, that we should not read "Bethany," but "Bethabara." We have 
visited the places to enquire as to the footsteps of Jesus and His disciples, 
and of the prophets. Now, Bethany, as the same evangelist tells us, was the town 
of Lazarus, and of Martha and Mary; it is fifteen stadia from Jerusalem, anti 
the river Jordan is about a hundred and eighty stadia distant from it. Nor is 
there any other place of the same name in the neighbourhood of the Jordan, but 
they say that Bethabara is pointed out on the banks of the Jordan, and that John 
is said to have baptized there. The etymology of the name, too, corresponds with 
the baptism of him who made ready for the Lord a people prepared for Him; for it 
yields the meaning "House of preparation," while Bethany means "House of 
obedience." Where else was it fitting that he should baptize, who was sent as a 
messenger before the face of the Christ, to pre pare His way before Him, but at 
the House of preparation? And what more fitting home for Mary, who chose the 
good part, which was not taken away from her, and for Martha, who was cumbered 
for the reception of Jesus, and for their brother, who is called the friend of 
the Saviour, than Bethany, the House of obedience? Thus we see that he who aims 
at a complete understanding of the Holy Scriptures must not neglect the careful 
examination of the proper names in it. In the matter of proper names the Greek 
copies are often incorrect, and in the Gospels one might be misled by their 
authority. The transaction about the swine, which were driven down a steep place 
by the demons and drowned in the sea, is said to have taken place in the country 
of the Gerasenes. Now, Gerasa is a town of Arabia, and has near it neither sea 
nor lake. And the Evangelists would not have made a statement so obviously and 
demonstrably false; for they were men who informed themselves carefully of all 
matters connected with Judaea. But in a few copies we have found, "into the 
country of the Gadarenes;" and, on this reading, it is to be stated that Gadara 
is a town of Judaea, in the neighbourhood of which are the well-known hot 
springs, and that there is no lake there with overhanging banks, nor any sea. 
But Gergesa, from which the name Gergesenes is taken, is an old town in the 
neighbourhood of the lake now called Tiberias, and on the edge of it there is a 
steep place abutting on the lake, from which it is pointed out that the swine 
were cast down by the demons. Now, the meaning of Gergesa is "dwelling of the 
casters-out," and it contains a prophetic reference to the conduct towards the 
Saviour of the citizens of those places, who "besought Him to depart out of 
their coasts." The same inaccuracy with regard to proper names is also to be 
observed in many passages of the law and the prophets, as we have been at pains 
to learn from the Hebrews, comparing our own copies with theirs which have the 
confirmation of the versions, never subjected to corruption, of Aquila and 
Theodotion and Symmachus. We add a few instances to encourage students to pay 
more attention to such points. One of the sons of Levi, the first, is called 
Geson in most copies, instead of Gerson. His name is the same as that of the 
first-born of Moses; it was given appropriately in each case, both children 
being born, because of the sojourn in Egypt, in a strange land. The second son 
of Juda, again, has with us the name Annan, but with the Hebrews Onan, "their 
labour." Once more, in the departures of the children of Israel in Numbers, we 
find, "They departed from Sochoth and pitched in Buthan;" but the Hebrew, 
instead of Buthan, reads Aiman. And why should I add more points like these, 
when any one who desires it can examine into the proper names and find out for 
himself how they stand? The place-names of Scripture are specially to be 
suspected where many of them occur in a catalogue, as in the account of the 
partition of the country in Joshua, and in the first Book of Chronicles from the 
beginning down to, say, the passage about Dan, and similarly in Ezra. Names are 
not to be neglected, since indications may be gathered from them which help in 
the interpretation of the passages where they occur. We cannot, however, leave 
our proper subject to examine in this place into the philosophy of names. 
25. JORDAN MEANS "THEIR GOING DOWN." SPIRITUAL MEANINGS AND APPLICATION OF 
THIS. 
Let us look at the words of the Gospel now before us. "Jordan" means "their 
going down." The name "Jared" is etymologically akin to it, if I may say so; it 
also yields the meaning "going down;" for Jared was born to Maleleel, as it is 
written in the Book of Enoch--if any one cares to accept that book as sacred--in 
the days when the sons of God came down to the daughters of men. Under this 
descent some have supposed that there is an enigmatical reference to the descent 
of souls into bodies, taking the phrase "daughters of men" as a tropical 
expression for this earthly tabernacle. Should this be so, what river will 
"their going down" be, to which one must come to be purified, a river going 
down, not with its own descent, but "theirs," that, namely, of men, what but our 
Saviour who separates those who received their lots from Moses from those who 
obtained their own portions through Jesus (Joshua)? His current, flowing in the 
descending stream, makes glad, as we find in the Psalms, the city of God, not 
the visible Jerusalem--for it has no river beside it--but the blameless Church 
of God, built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus our 
Lord being the chief corner-stone. Under the Jordan, accordingly, we have to 
understand the Word of God who became flesh and tabernacled among us, Jesus who 
gives us as our inheritance the humanity which He assumed, for that is the head 
corner-stone, which being taken up into the deity of the Son of God, is washed 
by being so assumed, and then receives into itself the pure and guileless dove 
of the Spirit, bound to it and no longer able to fly away from it. For "Upon 
whomsoever," we read, "thou shall see the Spirit descending and abiding upon 
Him, the same is He that baptizeth with the Holy Spirit." Hence, he who receives 
the Spirit abiding on Jesus Himself is able to baptize those who come to him in 
that abiding Spirit. But John baptizes beyond Jordan, in the regions verging on 
the outside of Judaea, in Bethabara, being the forerunner of Him who came to 
call not the righteous but sinners, and who taught that the whole have no need 
of a physician, but they that are sick. For it is for forgiveness of sins that 
this washing is given. 
26.THE STORY OF ISRAEL CROSSING JORDAN UNDER JOSHUA IS TYPICAL OF CHRISTIAN 
THINGS, AND IS WRITTEN FOR OUR INSTRUCTION. 
Now, it may very well be that some one not versed in the various aspects of 
the Saviour may stumble at the interpretation given above of the Jordan; because 
John says, "I baptize with water, but He that cometh after me is stronger than 
I; He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit." To this we reply that, as the 
Word of God in His character as something to be drunk is to one set of men 
water, and to another wine, making glad the heart of man, and to others blood, 
since it is said, "Except ye drink My blood, ye have no life in you," and as in 
His character as food He is variously conceived as living bread or as flesh, so 
also He, the same person, is baptism of water, and baptism of Holy Spirit and of 
fire, and to some, also, of blood. It is of His last baptism, as some hold, that 
He speaks in the words, "I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I 
straitened till it be accomplished?" And it agrees with this that the disciple 
John speaks in his Epistle of the Spirit, and the water, and the blood, as being 
one. And again He declares Himself to be the way and the door, but clearly He is 
not the door to those to whom He is the way, and He is no longer the way to 
those to whom He is the door. All those, then, who are being initiated in the 
beginning of the oracles of God, and come to the voice of him who cries in the 
wilderness, "Make straight the way of the Lord," the voice which sounds beyond 
Jordan at the house of preparation, let them prepare themselves so that they may 
be in a state to receive the spiritual word, brought home to them by the 
enlightenment of the Spirit. As we are now, as our subject requires, bringing 
together all that relates to the Jordan, let us look at the "river." God, by 
Moses, carried the people through the Red Sea, making the water a wall for them 
on the right hand and on the left, and by Joshua He carried them through Jordan. 
Now, Paul deals with this Scripture, and his warfare is not according to the 
flesh of it, for he knew that the law is spiritual in a spiritual sense. And he 
shows us that he understood what is said about the passage of the Red Sea; for 
he says in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, "I would not, brethren, have 
you ignorant, how that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed 
through the sea, and were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, 
and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink; for 
they drank of the spiritual rock which followed them, and the rock was Christ." 
In the spirit of this passage let us also pray that we may receive from God to 
understand the spiritual meaning of Joshua's passage through Jordan. Of it, 
also, Paul would have said, "I would not, brethren, have you ignorant, that all 
our fathers went through Jordan, and were all baptized into Jesus in the spirit 
and in the river." And Joshua, who succeeded Moses, was a type of Jesus Christ, 
who succeeds the dispensation through the law, and replaces it by the preaching 
of the Gospel. And even if those Paul speaks of were baptized in the cloud and 
in the sea, there is something harsh and salt in their baptism. They are still 
in fear of their enemies, and crying to the Lord and to Moses, saying, "Because 
there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou brought us forth to slay us in the 
wilderness? Why hast thou dealt thus with us, to bring us forth out of Egypt?" 
But the baptism to Joshua, which takes place in quite sweet and drinkable water, 
is in many ways superior to that earlier one, religion having by this time grown 
clearer and assuming a becoming order. For the ark of the covenant of the Lord 
our God is carried in procession by the priests and levites, the people 
following the ministers of God, it, also, accepting the law of holiness. For 
Joshua says to the people, "Sanctify yourselves against tomorrow; the Lord will 
do wonders among you." And he commands the priests to go before the people with 
the ark of the covenant, wherein is plainly showed forth the mystery of the 
Father's economy about the Son, which is highly exalted by Him who gave the Son 
this office; "That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven and things on earth and things under the earth, and that every tongue 
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." This 
is pointed out by what we find in the book called Joshua, "In that day I will 
begin to exalt thee before the children of Israel." And we hear our Lord Jesus 
saying to the children of Israel, "Come hither and hear the words of the Lord 
your God. Hereby ye shall know that the living God is in (among) you;" for when 
we are baptized to Jesus, we know that the living God is in us. And, in the 
former case, they kept the passover in Egypt, and then began their journey, but 
with Joshua, after crossing Jordan on the tenth day of the first month they 
pitched their camp in Galgala; for a sheep had to be procured before invitations 
could be issued to the banquet after Joshua's baptism. Then the children of 
Israel, since the children of those who came out of Egypt had not received 
circumcision, were circumcised by Joshua with a very sharp stone; the Lord 
declares that He takes away the reproach of Egypt on the day of Joshua's 
baptism, when Joshua purified the children of Israel. For it is written: "And 
the Lord said to Joshua, the son of Nun, This day have I taken away the reproach 
of Egypt from off you." Then the children of Israel kept the passover on the 
fourteenth day of the month, with much greater gladness than in Egypt, for they 
ate unleavened bread of the corn of the holy land, and fresh food better than 
manna. For when they received the land of promise God did not entertain them 
with scantier food, nor when such a one as Joshua was their leader do they get 
inferior bread. This will be plain to him who thinks of the true holy land and 
of the Jerusalem above. Hence it is written in this same Gospel: Your fathers 
did eat bread in the wilderness, and are dead; he that eateth of this bread 
shall live for ever. For the manna, though it was given by God, yet was bread of 
travel, bread supplied to those still under discipline, well fitted for those 
who were under tutors and governors. And the new bread Joshua managed to get 
from corn they cut in the country, in the land of promise, others having 
laboured and his disciples reaping,--that was bread more full of life, 
distributed as it was to those who, for their perfection, were able to receive 
the inheritance of their fathers. Hence, he who is still under discipline to 
that bread may receive death as far as it is concerned, but he who has attained 
to the bread that follows that, eating it, shall live for ever. All this has 
been added, not, I conceive, without appropriateness, to our study of the 
baptism at the Jordan, administered by John at Bethabara. 
27. OF ELIJAH AND ELISHA CROSSING THE JORDAN. 
Another point which we must not fail to notice is that when Elijah was about 
to be taken up in a whirlwind, as if to heaven, he took his mantle and wrapped 
it together and smote the water, which was divided hither and thither, and they 
went over both of them, that is, he and Elisha. His baptism in the Jordan made 
him fitter to be taken up, for, as we showed before, Paul gives the name of 
baptism to such a remarkable passage through the water. And through this same 
Jordan Elisha receives, through Elijah, the gift he desired, saying, "Let a 
double portion of thy spirit be upon me." What enabled him to receive this gift 
of the spirit of Elijah was, perhaps, that he had passed through Jordan twice, 
once with Elijah, and the second time, when, after receiving the mantle of 
Elijah, he smote the water and said, "Where is the God of Elijah, even He? And 
he smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither." 
28. NAAMAN THE SYRIAN AND THE JORDAN. NO OTHER STREAM HAS THE SAME HEALING 
POWER. 
Should any one object to the expression "He smote the water," on account of 
the conclusion we arrived at above with respect to the Jordan, that it is a type 
of the Word who descended for us our descending, we rejoin that with the Apostle 
the rock is plainly said to be Christ, and that it is smitten twice with the 
rod, so that the people may drink of the spiritual rock which follows them. The 
"smiting" in this new difficulty is that of those who are fond of suggesting 
something that contradicts the conclusion even before they have learned what the 
question is which is in hand. From such God sets us free, since, on the one 
hand, He gives us to drink when we are thirsty, and on the other He prepares for 
us, in the immense and trackless deep, a road to pass over, namely, by the 
dividing of His Word, since it is by the reason which distinguishes (divides) 
that most things are made plain to us. But that we may receive the right 
interpretation about this Jordan, so good to drink, so full of grace, it may be 
of use to compare the cleansing of Naaman the Syrian from his leprosy, and what 
is said of the rivers of religion of the enemies of Israel. It is recorded of 
Naaman that he came with horse and chariot, and stood at the door of the house 
of Elisha. And Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, "Go, wash seven times in 
the Jordan, and thy flesh shall come again unto thee, and thou shalt be 
cleansed." Then Naaman is angry; he does not see that our Jordan is the cleanser 
of those who are impure from leprosy, from that impurity, and their restorer to 
health; it is the Jordan that does this, and not the prophet; the office of the 
prophet is to direct to the healing agency. Naaman then says, not understanding 
the great mystery of the Jordan, "Behold, I said that he will certainly come out 
to me, and will call upon the name of the Lord his God, and lay his hand upon 
the place, and restore the leper." For to put his hand on the leprosy and 
cleanse it is a work belonging to our Lord Jesus only; for when the leper 
appealed to Him with faith, saying, "If Thou wilt Thou canst make me clean," He 
not only said, "I will, be thou clean," but in addition to the word He touched 
him, and he was cleansed from his leprosy. Naaman, then, is still in error, and 
does not see how far inferior other rivers are to the Jordan for the cure of the 
suffering; he extols the rivers of Damascus, Arbana, and Pharpha, saying, "Are 
not Arbana and Pharpha, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of 
Israel? Shall I not wash in them and be clean?" For as none is good but one, God 
the Father, so among rivers none is good but the Jordan, nor able to cleanse 
from his leprosy him who with faith washes his soul in Jesus. And this, I 
suppose, is the reason why the Israelites are recorded to have wept when they 
sat by the rivers of Babylon and remembered Zion; those who are carried captive, 
on account of their wickedness, when they taste other waters after sacred 
Jordan, are led to remember with longing their own river of salvation. Therefore 
it is said of the rivers of Babylon, "There we sat down," clearly because they 
were unable to stand, "and wept." And Jeremiah rebukes those who wish to drink 
the waters of Egypt, and desert the water which comes down from heaven, and is 
named from its so coming down--namely, the Jordan. He says, "What hast thou to 
do with the way of Egypt, to drink the water of Geon, and to drink the water of 
the river," or, as it is in the Hebrew, "to drink the water of Sion."Of which 
water we have now to speak. 
29. THE RIVER OF EGYPT AND ITS DRAGON, CONTRASTED WITH THE JORDAN. 
But that the Spirit in the inspired Scriptures is not speaking mainly of 
rivers to be seen with the eyes, may be gathered from Ezekiel's prophecies 
against Pharaoh, king of Egypt: "Behold I am against thee, Pharaoh, king of 
Egypt, the great dragon, seated in the midst of rivers, who sayest, Mine are the 
rivers, and I made them. And I will put traps in thy jaws, and I will make the 
fishes of the river to stick to thy fins, and I will bring thee up from the 
midst of thy river, and all the fish of the river, and I will cast thee down 
quickly and all the fish of the river; thou shalt fall upon the face of thy 
land, and thou shalt not be gathered together, and thou shalt not be adorned." 
For what real bodily dragon has ever been reported as having been seen in the 
material river of Egypt? But consider if the river of Egypt be not the dwelling 
of the dragon who is our enemy, who was not even able to kill the child Moses. 
But as the dragon is in the river of Egypt, so is God in the river which makes 
glad the city of God; for the Father is in the Son. Hence those who come to wash 
themselves in Him put away the reproach of Egypt, and become more fit to be 
restored. They are cleansed from that foulest leprosy, receive a double portion 
of spiritual gifts, and are made ready to receive the Holy Spirit, since the 
spiritual dove does not light on any other stream. Thus we have considered in a 
way more worthy of the sacred subject the Jordan and the purification that is in 
it, and Jesus being washed in it, and the house of preparation. Let us, then, 
draw from the river as much help as we require. 
30. OF WHAT JOHN LEARNED FROM JESUS WHEN MARY VISITED ELISABETH IN THE 
HILLCOUNTRY. 
"The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him." The mother of Jesus had 
formerly, as soon as she conceived, stayed with the mother of John, also at that 
time with child, and the Former then communicated to the Formed with some 
exactness His own image, and caused him to be conformed to His glory. And from 
this outward similarity it came that with those who did not distinguish between 
the image itself and that which was according to the image, John was thought to 
be Christ and Jesus was supposed to be John risen from the dead. So now Jesus, 
after the testimonies of John to Him which we have examined, is Himself seen by 
the Baptist coming to him. It is to be noticed that on the former occasion, when 
the voice of Mary's salutation came to the ears of Elisabeth, the babe John 
leaped in the womb of his mother, who then received the Holy Spirit, as it were, 
from the ground. For it came to pass, we read, "when Elisabeth heard the 
salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with 
the Holy Spirit, and she lifted up her voice with a loud cry and said," etc. On 
this occasion, similarly, John sees Jesus coming to him and says, "Behold the 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world." For with regard to matters 
of great moment one is first instructed by hearing and afterwards one sees them 
with one s own eyes. That John was helped to the shape he was to wear by the 
Lord who, still in the process of formation and in His mother's womb, approached 
Elisabeth, will be clear to any one who has grasped our proof that John is a 
voice but that Jesus is the Word, for when Elisabeth was filled with the Holy 
Spirit at the salutation of Mary there was a great voice in her, as the words 
themselves bear; for they say, "And she spake out with a loud voice." Elisabeth, 
it is plain, did this, "and she spake." For the voice of Mary's salutation 
coming to the ears of Elisabeth filled John with itself; hence John leaps, and 
his mother becomes, as it were, the mouth of her son and a prophetess, crying 
out with a loud voice and saying, "Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is 
the fruit of thy womb." Now we see clearly how it was with Mary's hasty journey 
to the hill country, and her entrance into the house of Zacharias, and the 
greeting with which she salutes Elisabeth; it was that she might communicate 
some of the power she derived from Him she had conceived, to John, yet in his 
mother's womb, and that John too might communicate to his mother some of the 
prophetic grace which had come to him, that all these things were done. And most 
rightly was it in the hill country that these transactions took place, since no 
great thing can be entertained by those who are low and may be thence called 
valleys. Here, then, after the testimonies of John,--the first, when he cried 
and spoke about His deity; the second, addressed to the priests and levites who 
were sent by the Jews from Jerusalem; and the third, in answer to the sharper 
questions of those from the Pharisees,--Jesus is seen by the witness-bearer 
coming to him while he is still advancing and growing better. 
This advance and improvement is symbolically indicated in the phrase, "On the 
morrow." For Jesus came in the consequent illumination, as it were, and on the 
day after what had preceded, not only known as standing in the midst even of 
those who knew Him not, but now plainly seen advancing to him who had formerly 
made such declarations about Him. On the first day the testimonies take place, 
and on the second Jesus comes to John. On the third John, standing with two of 
his disciples and looking upon Jesus as He walked, said, "Behold the Lamb of 
God," thus urging those who were there to follow the Son of God. On the fourth 
day, too, He was minded to go forth into Galilee, and He who came forth to seek 
that which Was lost finds Philip and says to him, "Follow Me." And on that day, 
after the fourth, which is the sixth from the beginning of those we have 
enumerated, the marriage takes place in Cana of Galilee, which we shall have to 
consider when we get to the passage. Note this, too, that Mary being the greater 
comes to Elisabeth, who is the less, and the Son of God comes to the Baptist; 
which should encourage us to render help without delay to those who are in a 
lower position, and to cultivate for ourselves a moderate station. 
31. OF THE CONVERSATION BETWEEN JOHN AND JESUS AT THE BAPTISM, RECORDED BY 
MATTHEW ONLY. 
John the disciple does not tell us where the Saviour comes from to John the 
Baptist, but we learn this from Matthew, who writes: "Then cometh Jesus from 
Galilee to Jordan to John, to be baptized of him." And Mark adds the place in 
Galilee; he says, "And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from 
Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized by John in Jordan." Luke does not mention 
the place Jesus came from, but on the other hand he tells us what we do not 
learn from the others, that immediately after the baptism, as He was coming up, 
heaven was opened to Him, and the Holy Spirit descended on Him in bodily form 
like a dove. Again, it is Matthew alone who tells us of John's preventing the 
Lord, saying to the Saviour, "I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest 
Thou to me?" None of the others added this after Matthew, so that they might not 
be saying just the same as he. And what the Lord rejoined, "Suffer it now, for 
thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness," this also Matthew alone 
recorded. 
32. JOHN CALLS JESUS A "LAMB." WHY DOES HE NAME THIS ANIMAL SPECIALLY? OF THE 
TYPOLOGY OF THE SACRIFICES, GENERALLY. 
"And he sayeth, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the 
world." There were five animals which were brought to the altar, three that walk 
and two that fly; and it seems to be worth asking why John calls the Saviour a 
lamb and not any of these other creatures, and why, when each of the animals 
that walk is offered of three kinds he used for the sheep-kind the term "lamb." 
The five animals are as follows: the bullock, the sheep, the goat, the 
turtle-dove, the pigeon. And of the walking animals these are the three 
kinds--bullock, ox, calf; ram, sheep, lamb; he-goat, goat, kid. Of the flying 
animals, of pigeons we only hear of two young ones; of turtle doves only of a 
pair. He, then, who would accurately understand the spiritual rationale of the 
sacrifices must enquire of what heavenly things these were the pattern and the 
shadow, and also for what end the sacrifice of each victim is prescribed, and he 
must specially collect the points connected with the lamb. Now that the 
principle of the sacrifice must be apprehended with reference to certain 
heavenly mysteries, appears from the words of the Apostle, who somewhere says, 
"Who serve a pattern and shadow of heavenly things," and again, "It was 
necessary that the patterns of the things in the heavens should be purified with 
these, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these." 
Now to find out all the particulars of these and to state in its relation to 
them that sacrifice of the spiritual law which took place in Jesus Christ (a 
truth greater than human nature can comprehend)--to do this belongs to no other 
than the perfect man, who, by reason of use, has his senses exercised to discern 
good and evil, and who is able to say, from a truth-loving disposition, "We 
speak wisdom among them that are perfect." Of these things truly and things like 
these, we can say, "Which none of the rulers of this world knew." 
33. A LAMB WAS OFFERED AT THE MORNING AND EVENING SACRIFICE. SIGNIFICANCE OF 
THIS. 
Now we find the lamb offered in the continual (daily) sacrifice. Thus it is 
written, "This is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of the 
first year day by day continually, for a continual sacrifice. The one lamb thou 
shalt offer in the morning, and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and a 
tenth part of fine flour mingled with beaten oil, the fourth part of a hin; and 
for a drink-offering the fourth part of a bin of wine to the first lamb. And the 
other lamb thou shalt offer in the evening, according to the first sacrifice and 
according to its drink-offering. Thou shalt offer a sweet savour, an offering to 
the Lord, a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of 
tent of witness before the Lord, where I will make myself known to thee, to 
speak unto thee. And I will appoint thee for the children of Israel, and I will 
be sanctified in my glory, and with sanctification I will sanctify the tent of 
witness." But what other continual sacrifice can there be to the man of reason 
in the world of mind, but the Word growing to maturity, the Word who is 
symbolically called a lamb and who is offered as soon as the soul receives 
illumination. This would be the continual sacrifice of the morning, and it is 
offered again when the sojourn of the mind with divine things comes to an end. 
For it cannot maintain for ever its inter course with higher things, seeing that 
the soul is appointed to be yoked together with the body which is of earth and 
heavy. 
34. THE MORNING AND EVENING SACRIFICES OF THE SAINT IN HIS LIFE OF THOUGHT. 
But if any one asks what the saint is to do in the time between morning and 
evening, let him follow what takes place in the cultus and infer from it the 
principle he asks for. In that case the priests begin their offerings with the 
continual sacrifice, and before they come to the continuous one of the evening 
they offer the other sacrifices which the law prescribes, as, for example, that 
for transgression, or that for involuntary offences, or that connected with a 
prayer for salvation, or that of jealousy, or that of the Sabbath, or of the new 
moon, and so on, which it would take too long to mention. So we, beginning our 
oblation with the discourse of that type which is Christ, can go on to discourse 
about many other most useful things. And drawing to a close still in the things 
of Christ, we come. as it were, to evening and night, when we arrive at the 
bodily features of His manifestation. 
35. JESUS IS A LAMB IN RESPECT OF HIS HUMAN NATURE. 
If we enquire further into the sinificance of Jesus being pointed out by 
John, when he says, "This is the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the 
world," we may take our stand at the dispensation of the bodily advent of the 
Son of God in human life, and in that case we shall conceive the lamb to be no 
other than the man. For the man "was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a 
lamb, dumb before his shearers," saying, "I was as like a gentle lamb led to the 
slaughter." Hence, too, in the Apocalypse a lamb is seen, standing as if slain. 
This slain lamb has been made, according to certain hidden reasons, a 
purification of the whole world, for which, according to the Father's love to 
man, He submitted to death, purchasing us back by His own blood from him who had 
got us into his power, sold under sin. And He who led this lamb to the slaughter 
was God in man, the great High-Priest, as he shows by the words: "No one taketh 
My life away from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have power to lay it down, 
and I have power to take it again." 
36. OF THE DEATH OF THE MARTYRS CONSIDERED AS A SACRIFICE, AND IN WHAT WAY IT 
OPERATES TO THE BENEFIT OF OTHERS. 
Akin to this sacrifice are the others of which the sacrifices of the law are 
symbols, and another kind of sacrifice also appears to me to be of the same 
nature; namely, the shedding of the blood of the noble martyrs, whom the 
disciple John saw, for this is not without significance, standing beside the 
heavenly altar. "Who is wise, and he shall understand these things, prudent, and 
he shall know them?" It is a matter of higher speculation to consider even 
slightly the rationale of those sacrifices which cleanse those for whom they are 
offered. Jephthah's sacrifice of his daughter should receive attention; it was 
by vowing it that he conquered the children of Ammon, and the victim approved 
his vow, for when her father said, "I have opened my mouth unto the Lord against 
thee," she answered, "If thou hast opened thy mouth unto the Lord against me, do 
that which thou hast vowed." The story suggests that the being must be a very 
cruel one to whom such sacrifices are offered for the salvation of men; and we 
require some breadth of mind and some ability to solve the difficulties raised 
against Providence, to be able to account for such things and to see that they 
are mysteries and exceed our human nature. Then we shall say, "Great are the 
judgments of God, and hard to be described; for this cause untutored souls have 
gone astray." Among the Gentiles, too, it is recorded that many a one, when 
pestilential disease broke out in his country, offered himself a victim for the 
public good. That this was the case the faithful Clement assumes, on the faith 
of the narratives, to whom Paul bears witness when he says, "With Clement also, 
and the others, my fellow-labourers, whose names are in the book of life." If 
there is anything in these narratives that appears incongruous to one who is 
minded to carp at mysteries revealed to few, the same difficulty attaches to the 
office that was laid on the martyrs, for it was God's will that we should rather 
endure all the dreadful reproaches connected with confessing Him as God, than 
escape for a short time from such sufferings (which men count evil) by allowing 
ourselves by our words to conform to the will of the enemies of the truth. We 
are, therefore, led to believe that the powers of evil do suffer defeat by the 
death of the holy martyrs; as if their patience, their confession, even unto 
death, and their zeal for piety blunted the edge of the onset of evil powers 
against the sufferer, and their might being thus dulled and exhausted, many 
others of those whom they had conquered raised their heads and were set free 
from the weight with which the evil powers formerly oppressed and injured them. 
And even the martyrs themselves are no longer involved in suffering, even though 
those agents which formerly wrought ill to others are not exhausted; for he who 
has offered such a sacrifice overcomes the power which opposed him, as I may 
show by an illustration which is suited to this subject. He who destroys a 
poisonous animal, or lulls it to sleep with charms, or by any means deprives it 
of its venom, he does good to many who would otherwise have suffered from that 
animal had it not been destroyed, or charmed, or emptied of its venom. Moreover, 
if one of those who were formerly bitten should come to know of this, and should 
be cured of his malady and look upon the death of that which injured him, or 
tread on it, or touch it when dead, or taste a part of it, then he, who was 
formerly a sufferer, would owe cure and benefit to the destroyer of the 
poisonous animal. In some such way must we suppose the death of the most holy 
martyrs to operate, many receiving benefit from it by an influence we cannot 
describe. 
37. OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DEATH OF CHRIST, OF HIS TRIUMPH AFTER IT, AND OF 
THE REMOVAL BY HIS DEATH OF THE SINS OF MEN. 
We have lingered over this subject of the martyrs and over the record of 
those who died on account of pestilence, because this lets us see the excellence 
of Him who was led as a sheep to the slaughter and was dumb as a lamb before the 
shearer. For if there is any point in these stories of the Greeks, and if what 
we have said of the martyrs is well rounded,--the Apostles, too, were for the 
same reason the filth of the world and the offscouring of all things, --what and 
how great things must be said of the Lamb of God, who was sacrificed for this 
very reason, that He might take away the sin not of a few but of the whole 
world, for the sake of which also He suffered? If any one sin, we read, "We have 
an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and He is the 
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for those of the whole 
world," since He is the Saviour of all men, especially of them that believe, who 
blotted out the written bond that was against us by His own blood, and took it 
out of the way, so that not even a trace, not even of our blotted-out sins, 
might still be found, and nailed it to His cross; who having put off from 
Himself the principalities and powers, made a show of them openly, triumphing 
over them by His cross. And we are taught to rejoice when we suffer afflictions 
in the world, knowing the ground of our rejoicing to be this, that the world has 
been conquered and has manifestly been subjected to its conqueror. Hence all the 
nations, released from their former rulers, serve Him, because He saved the poor 
from his tyrant by His own passion, and the needy who had no helper. This 
Saviour, then, having humbled the calumniator by humbling Himself, abides with 
the visible sun before His illustrious church, tropically called the moon, from 
generation to generation. And having by His passion destroyed His enemies, He 
who is strong in battle and a mighty Lord required after His mighty deeds a 
purification which could only be given Him by His Father alone; and this is why 
He forbids Mary to touch Him, saying, "Touch Me not, for I am not yet ascended 
to My Father; bat go and tell My disciples, I go to My Father and your Father, 
to My God and your God." And when He comes, loaded with victory and with 
trophies, with His body which has risen from the dead,--for what other meaning 
can we see in the words, "I am not yet ascended to My Father," and "I go unto My 
Father,"--then there are certain powers which say, Who is this that cometh from 
Edom, red garments from Bosor; this that is beautiful? Then those who escort Him 
say to those that are upon the heavenly gates, "Lift up your gates, ye rulers, 
and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the king of glory shall come in." 
But they ask again, seeing as it were His right hand red with blood and His 
whole person covered with the marks of His valour, "Why are Thy garments red, 
and Thy clothes like the treading of the full winefat when it is trodden?" And 
to this He answers, "I have crushed them." For this cause He had need to wash 
"His robe in wine, and His garment in the blood of the grape." For when He had 
taken up our infirmities and carried our diseases, and had borne the sin of the 
whole world, and had conferred blessings on so many, then, perhaps, He received 
that baptism which is greater than any that could ever be conceived among men, 
and of which I think He speaks when He says, "I have a baptism to be baptized 
with, and how am I straitened till it be accomplished?" I enquire here with 
boldness and I challenge the ideas put forward by most writers. They say that 
the greatest baptism, beyond which no greater can be conceived, is His passion. 
But if this be so, why should He say to Mary after it, "Touch Me not"? He should 
rather have offered Himself to her touch, when by His passion He had received 
His perfect baptism. But if it was the case, as we said before, that after all 
His deeds of valour done against His enemies, He had need to wash "His robe in 
wine, His gar-merit in the blood of the grape," then He was on His way up to the 
husbandman of the true vine, the Father, so that having washed there and after 
having gone up on high, He might lead captivity captive and come down bearing 
manifold gifts--the tongues, as of fire, which were divided to the Apostles, and 
the holy angels which are to be present with them in each action and to deliver 
them. For before these economies they were not yet cleansed and angels could not 
dwell with them, for they too perhaps do not desire to be with those who have 
not prepared themselves nor been cleansed by Jesus. For it was of Jesus' 
benignity alone that He ate and drank with publicans and sinners, and suffered 
the penitent woman who was a sinner to wash His feet with her tears, and went 
down even to death for the ungodly, counting it not robbery to be equal with 
God, and emptied Himself, assuming the form of a servant. And in accomplishing 
all this He fulfils rather the will of the Father who gave Him up for sinners 
than His own. For the Father is good, but the Saviour is the image of His 
goodness; and doing good to the world in all things, since God was in Christ 
reconciling the world to Himself, which formerly for its wickedness was all 
enemy to Him, He accomplishes His good deeds in order and succession, and does 
not all at once take all His enemies for His footstool. For the Father says to 
Him, to the Lord of us all, "Sit Thou on My right hand, until I make Thy enemies 
the footstool of Thy feet." And this goes on till the last enemy, Death, is 
overcome by Him. 
And if we consider what is meant by this subjection to Christ and find an 
explanation of this mainly from the saying, "When all things shall have been put 
under Him, then shall the Son Himself be subjected to Him who put all things 
under Him," then we shall see how the conception agrees with the goodness of the 
God of all, since it is that of the Lamb of God, taking away the sin of the 
world. Not all men's sin, however, is taken away by the Lamb of God, not the sin 
of those who do not grieve and suffer affliction till it be taken away. For 
thorns are not only fixed but deeply rooted in the hand of every one who is 
intoxicated by wickedness and has parted with sobriety, as it is said in the 
Proverbs, "Thorns grow in the hand of the drunkard," and what pain they must 
cause him who has admitted such growth in the substance of his soul, it is hard 
even to tell. Who has allowed wickedness to establish itself so deeply in his 
soul as to be a ground full of thorns, he must be cut down by the quick and 
powerful word of God, which is sharper than a two-edged sword, and which is more 
caustic than any fire. To such a soul that fire must be sent which finds out 
thorns, and by its divine virtue stands where they are and does not also burn up 
the threshing-floors or standing corn. But of the Lamb which takes away the sin 
of the world and begins to do so by His own death there are several ways, some 
of which are capable of being clearly understood by most, but others are 
concealed from most, and are known to those only who are worthy of divine 
wisdom. Why should we count up all the ways by which we come to believe among 
men? That is a thing which every one living in the body is able to see for 
himself. And in the ways in which we believe in these also,sin is taken away; by 
afflictions and evil spirits and dangerous diseases and grievous sicknesses. And 
who knows what follows after this? So much as we have said was not 
unnecessary--we could not neglect the thought which is so clearly connected with 
that of the words, "Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the 
world," and had therefore to attend somewhat closely to this part of our 
subject. This has brought us to see that God convicts some by His wrath and 
chastens them by His anger, since His love to men is so great that He will not 
leave any without conviction and chastening; so that we should do what in us 
lies to be spared such conviction and such chastening by the sorest trials. 
38.THE WORLD, OF WHICH THE SIN IS TAKEN AWAY, IS SAID TO BE THE CHURCH. 
REASONS FOR NOT AGREEING WITH THIS OPINION. 
The reader will do well to consider what was said above and illustrated from 
various quarters on the question what is meant in Scripture by the word "world"; 
and I think it proper to repeat this. I am aware that a certain scholar 
understands by the world the Church alone, since the Church is the adornment of 
the world, and is said to be the light of the world. "You," he says, "are the 
light of the world." Now, the adornment of the world is the Church, Christ being 
her adornment, who is the first light of the world. We must consider if Christ 
is said to be the light of the same world as His disciples. When Christ is the 
light of the world, perhaps it is meant that He is the light of the Church, but 
when His disciples are the light of the world, perhaps they are the light of 
others who call on the Lord, others in addition to the Church, as Paul says on 
this point in the beginning of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he 
writes, "To the Church of God, with all who call on the name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ." Should any one consider that the Church is called the light of the 
world, meaning thereby of the rest of the race of men, including unbelievers, 
this may be true if the assertion is taken prophetically and theologically; but 
if it is to be taken of the present, we remind him that the light of a thing 
illuminates that thing, and would ask him to show how the remainder of the race 
is illuminated by the Church's presence in the world. If those who hold the view 
in question cannot show this, then let them consider if our interpretation is 
not a sound one, that the light is the Church, and the world those others who 
call on the Name. 
The words which follow the above in Matthew will point out to the careful 
enquirer the proper interpretation. "You," it is said, "are the salt of the 
earth," the rest of mankind being conceived as the earth, and believers are 
their salt; it is because they believe that the earth is preserved. For the end 
will come if the salt loses its savour, and ceases to salt and preserve the 
earth, since it is clear that if iniquity is multiplied and love waxes cold upon 
the earth, as the Saviour Himself uttered an expression of doubt as to those who 
would witness His coming, saying, "When the Son of man cometh, shall He find 
faith upon the earth?" then the end of the age will come. Supposing, then, the 
Church to be called the world, since the Saviour's light shines on it--we have 
to ask in connection with the text, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world," whether the world here is to be taken intellectually of 
the Church, and the taking away of sin is limited to the Church. In that case 
what are we to make of the saying of the same disciple with regard to the 
Saviour, as the propitiation for sin? "If any man sin," we read, "we have an 
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and He is the propitiation 
for our sins, and not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world?" 
Paul's dictum appears to me to be to the same effect, when he says, "Who is the 
Saviour of all men, especially of the faithful." Again, Heracleon, dealing with 
our passage, declares, without any proof or any citation of witnesses to that 
effect, that the words, "Lamb of God," are spoken by John as a prophet, but the 
words, "who taketh away the sin of the world," by John as more than a prophet. 
The former expression he considers to be used of His body, but the latter of Him 
who was in that body, because the lamb is an imperfect member of the genus 
sheep; the same being true of the body as compared with the dweller in it. Had 
he meant to attribute perfection to the body he would have spoken of a ram as 
about to be sacrificed. After the careful discussions given above, I do not 
think it necessary to enter into repetitions on this passage, or to controvert 
Heracleon's careless utterances. One point only may be noted, that as the world 
was scarcely able to contain Him who had emptied Himself, it required a lamb and 
not a ram, that its sin might be taken away. 

