
Origen











Origen DE PRINCIPIIS 
BOOK II. 
CHAP. I.--ON THE WORLD. 
I. Although all the discussions in the preceding book have had reference to 
the world and its arrangements, it now seems to follow mat we should specially 
re-discuss a few points respecting the world itself, i.e., its beginning and 
end, or those dispensations of Divine Providence which have taken place between 
the beginning and the end, or those events which are supposed to have occurred 
before the creation of the world, or are to take place after the end. 
In this investigation, the first point which clearly appears is, that the 
world in all its diversified and varying conditions is composed not only of 
rational and diviner natures, and of a diversity of bodies, but of dumb animals, 
wild and tame beasts, of birds, and of all things which live in the waters; 
then, secondly, of places, i.e., of the heaven or heavens, and of the earth or 
water, as well as of the air, which is intermediate, and which they term aether, 
and of everything which proceeds from the earth or is born in it. Seeing, then, 
there is so great a variety in the world, and so great a diversity among 
rational beings themselves, on account of which every other variety and 
diversity also is supposed to have come into existence, what other cause than 
this ought to be assigned for the existence of the world, especially if we have 
regard to that end by means of which it was shown in the preceding book that all 
things are to be restored to their original condition? 
And if this should seem to be logically stated, what other cause, as we have 
already said, are we to imagine for so great a diversity in the world, save the 
diversity and variety in the movements and declensions of those who fell from 
that primeval unity and harmony in which they were at first created by God, and 
who, being driven from that state of goodness, and drawn in various directions 
by the harassing influence of different motives and desires, have changed, 
according to their different tendencies, the single and undivided goodness of 
their nature into minds of various sorts? 
2. But God, by the ineffable skill of His wisdom, transforming and restoring 
all things, in whatever manner they are made, to some useful aim, and to the 
common advantage of all, recalls those very creatures which differed so much 
from each other in mental conformation to one agreement of labour and purpose; 
so that, although they are under the influence of different motives, they 
nevertheless complete the fulness and perfection of one world, and the very 
variety of minds tends to one end of perfection. For it is one power which 
grasps and holds together all the diversity of the world, and leads the 
different movements towards one work, lest so immense an undertaking as that of 
the world should be dissolved by the dissensions of souls. And for this reason 
we think that God, the Father of all things, in order to ensure the salvation of 
all His creatures through the ineffable plan of His word and wisdom, so arranged 
each of these, that every spirit, whether soul or rational existence, however 
called, should not be compelled by force, against the liberty of his own will, 
to any other course than that to which the motives of his own mind led him (lest 
by so doing the power of exercising free-will should seem to be taken away, 
which certainly would produce a change in the nature of the being itself); and 
that the varying purposes of these would be suitably and usefully adapted to the 
harmony of one world, by some of them requiring help, and others being able to 
give it, and others again being the cause of struggle and contest to those who 
are making progress, amongst whom their diligence would be deemed more worthy of 
approval, and the place of rank obtained after victory be held with greater 
certainty, which should be established by the difficulties of the contest. 
3. Although the whole world is arranged into offices of different kinds, its 
condition, nevertheless, is not to be supposed as one of internal discrepancies 
and discordances; but as our one body is provided with many members, and is held 
together by one soul, so I am of opinion that the whole world also ought to be 
regarded as some huge and immense animal, which is kept together by the power 
and reason of God as by one soul. This also, I think, is indicated in sacred 
Scripture by the declaration of the prophet, "Do not I fill heaven and earth? 
saith the Lord;" and again, "The heaven is My throne, and the earth is My 
footstool;" and by the Saviour's words, when He says that we are to swear 
"neither by heaven, for it is God's throne; nor by the earth, for it is His 
footstool:" To the same effect also are the words of Paul, in his address to the 
Athenians, when he says, "In Him we live, and move, and have our being." For how 
do we live, and move, and have our being in God, except by His comprehending and 
holding together the whole world by His power? And how is heaven the throne of 
God, and the earth His footstool, as the Saviour Himself declares, save by His 
power filling all things both in heaven and earth, according to the Lord's own 
words? And that God, the Father of all things, fills and holds together the 
world with the fulness of His power, according to those passages which we have 
quoted, no one, I think, will have any difficulty in admitting. And now, since 
the course of the preceding discussion has shown that the different movements of 
rational beings, and their varying opinions, have brought about the diversity 
that is in the world, we must see whether it may not be appropriate that this 
world should have a termination like its beginning. For there is no doubt that 
its end must be sought amid much diversity and variety; which variety, being 
found to exist in the termination of the world, will again furnish ground and 
occasion for the diversities of the other world which is to succeed the present. 

4. If now, in the course of our discussion, it has been ascertained that 
these things are so, it seems to follow that we next consider the nature of 
corporeal being, seeing the diversity in the world cannot exist without bodies. 
It is evident from the nature of things themselves, that bodily nature admits of 
diversity and variety of change, so that it is capable of undergoing all 
possible transformations, as, e.g., the conversion of wood into fire, of fire 
into smoke, of smoke into air, of oil into fire. Does not food itself, whether 
of man or of animals, exhibit the same ground of change? For whatever we take as 
food, is converted into the substance of our body. But how water is changed into 
earth or into air, and air again into fire, or fire into air, or air into water, 
although not difficult to explain, yet on the present occasion it is enough 
merely to mention them, as our object is to discuss the nature of bodily matter. 
By matter, therefore, we understand that which is placed under bodies, viz., 
that by which, through the bestowing and implanting of qualities, bodies exist; 
and we mention four qualities--heat, cold, dryness, humidity. These four 
qualities being implanted in the ulh, or matter (for matter is found to 
exist in its own nature without those qualities before mentioned), produce the 
different kinds of bodies. Although this matter is, as we have said above, 
according to its own proper nature without qualities, it is never found to exist 
without a quality. And I cannot understand how so many distinguished men have 
been of opinion that this matter, which is so great, and possesses such 
properties as to enable it to be sufficient for all the bodies in the world 
which God willed to exist, and to be the attendant and slave of the Creator for 
whatever forms and species He wished in all things, receiving into itself 
whatever qualities He desired to bestow upon it, was uncreated, i.e., not formed 
by God Himself, who is the Creator of all things, but that its nature and power 
were the result of chance. And I am astonished that they should find fault with 
those who deny either God's creative power or His providential administration of 
the world, and accuse them of impiety for thinking that so great a work as the 
world could exist without an architect or overseer; while they themselves incur 
a similar charge of impiety in saying that matter is uncreated, and co-eternal 
with the uncreated God. According to this view, then, if we suppose for the sake 
of argument that matter did not exist, as these maintain, saying that God could 
not create anything when nothing existed, without doubt He would have been idle, 
not having matter on which to operate, which matter they say was furnished Him 
not by His own arrangement, but by accident; and they think that this, which was 
discovered by chance, was able to suffice Him for an undertaking of so vast an 
extent, and for the manifestation of the power of His might, and by admitting 
the plan of all His wisdom, might be distinguished and formed into a world. Now 
this appears to me to be very absurd, and to be the opinion of those men who are 
altogether ignorant of the power and intelligence of un-crested nature. But that 
we may see the nature of things a little more clearly, let it be granted that 
for a little time matter did not exist, and that God, when nothing formerly 
existed, caused those things to come into existence which He desired, why are we 
to suppose that God would create matter either better or greater, or of another 
kind, than that which He did produce from His own power and wisdom, in order 
that that might exist which formerly did not? Would He cream a worse and 
inferior matter, or one the same as that which they call uncreated? Now I think 
it will very easily appear to any one, that neither a better nor inferior matter 
could have assumed the forms and species of the world, if it had not been such 
as that which actually did assume them. And does it not then seem impious to 
call that uncreated, which, if believed to be formed by God, would doubtless be 
found to be such as that which they call uncreated? 
5. But that we may believe on the authority of holy Scripture that such is 
the case, hear how in the book of Maccabees, where the mother of seven martyrs 
exhorts her son to endure torture, this truth is confirmed; for she says, "I ask 
of thee, my son, to look at the heaven and the earth, and at all things which 
are in them, and beholding these, to know that God made all these things when 
they did not exist." In the book of the Shepherd also, in the first commandment, 
he speaks as follows: "First of all believe that there is one God who created 
and arranged all things, and made all things to come into existence, and out of 
a state of nothingness." Perhaps also the expression in the Psalms has reference 
to this: "He spake, and they were made; He commanded, and they were created." 
For the words, "He spake, and they were made," appear to show that the substance 
of those things which exist is meant; while the others, "He commanded, and they 
were created," seem spoken of the qualities by which the substance itself has 
been moulded. 
CHAP. II. -- ON THE PERPETUITY OF BODILY NATURE. 
I. On this topic some are wont to inquire whether, as the Father generates an 
uncreated Son, and brings forth a Holy Spirit, not as if He had no previous 
existence, but because the Father is the origin and source of the Son or Holy 
Spirit, and no anteriority or posteriority can be understood as existing in 
them; so also a similar kind of union or relationship can be understood as 
subsisting between rational natures and bodily matter. And that this point may 
be more fully and thoroughly examined, the commencement of the discussion is 
generally directed to the inquiry whether this very bodily nature, which bears 
the lives and contains the movements of spiritual and rational minds, will be 
equally eternal with them, or will altogether perish and be destroyed. And that 
the question may be determined with greater precision, we have, in the first 
place, to inquire if it is possible for rational natures to remain altogether 
incorporeal after they have reached the summit of holiness and happiness (which 
seems to me a most difficult and almost impossible attainment), or whether they 
must always of necessity be united to bodies. If, then, any one could show a 
reason why it was possible for them to dispense wholly with bodies, it will 
appear to follow,: hat as a bodily nature, created out of nothing after 
intervals of time, was produced when it did not exist, so also it must cease to 
be when the purposes which it served had no longer an existence. 
2. If, however, it is impossible for this point to be at all maintained, 
viz., that any other nature than the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit can live 
without a body, the necessity of logical reasoning compels us to understand that 
rational natures were indeed created at the beginning, but that material 
substance was separated from them only in thought and understanding, and appears 
to have been formed for them, or after them, and that they never have lived nor 
do live without it; for an incorporeal life will rightly be considered a 
prerogative of the Trinity alone. As we have remarked above, therefore, that 
material substance of this world, possessing a nature admitting of all possible 
transformations, is, when dragged down to beings of a lower order, moulded into 
the crasser and more solid condition of a body, so as to distinguish those 
visible and varying forms of the world; but when it becomes the servant of more 
perfect and more blessed beings, it shines in the splendour of celestial bodies, 
and adorns either the angels of God or the sons of the resurrection with the 
clothing of a spiritual body, out of all which will be filled up the diverse and 
varying state of the one world. But if any one should desire to discuss these 
matters more fully, it will be necessary, with all reverence and fear of God, to 
examine the sacred Scriptures with greater attention and diligence, to ascertain 
whether the secret and hidden sense within them may perhaps reveal anything 
regarding these matters; and something may be discovered in their abstruse and 
mysterious language, through the demonstration of the Holy Spirit to those who 
are worthy, after many testimonies have been collected on this very point. 
CHAP. III. -- ON THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD, AND ITS CAUSES. 
I. The next subject of inquiry is, whether there was any other world before 
the one which now exists; and if so, whether it was such as the present, or 
somewhat different, or inferior; or whether there was no world at all, but 
something like that which we understand will be after the end of all things, 
when the kingdom shall be delivered up to God, even the Father; which 
nevertheless may have been the end of another world,--of that, namely, after 
which this world took its beginning; and whether the various lapses of 
intellectual natures provoked God to produce this diverse and varying condition 
of the world. This point also, I think, must be investigated in a similar way, 
viz., whether after this world there will be any (system of) preservation and 
amendment, severe indeed, and attended with much pain to those who were 
unwilling to obey the word of God, but a process through which, by means of 
instruction and rational training, those may arrive at a fuller understanding of 
the truth who have devoted themselves in the present life to these pursuits, and 
who, after having had their minds purified, have advanced onwards so as to 
become capable of attaining divine wisdom; and after this the end of all things 
will immediately follow, and there will be again, for the correction and 
improvement of those who stand in need of it, another world, either resembling 
that which now exists, or better than it, or greatly inferior; and how long that 
world, whatever it be that is to come after this, shall continue; and if there 
will be a time when no world shall anywhere exist, or if there has been a time 
when there was no world at all; or if there have been, or will be several; or if 
it shall ever come to pass that there will be one resembling another, like it in 
every respect, and indistinguishable from it. 
2. That it may appear more clearly, then, whether bodily matter can exist 
during intervals of time, and whether, as it did not exist before it was made, 
so it may again be resolved into non-existence, let us see, first of all, 
whether it is possible for any one to live without a body. For if one person can 
live without a body, all things also may dispense with them; seeing our former 
treatise has shown that all things tend towards one end. Now, if all things may 
exist without bodies, there will undoubtedly be no bodily substance, seeing 
there will be no use for it. But how shall we understand the words of the 
apostle in those passages, in which, discussing the resurrection of the dead, he 
says, "This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on 
immortality. When this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this 
mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying 
which is written, Death is swallowed up in victory! Where, O death, is thy 
victory? O death, thy sting has been swallowed up: the sting of death is sin, 
and the strength of sin is the law." Some such meaning, then, as this, seems to 
be suggested by the apostle. For can the expression which he employs, "this 
corruptible," and "this mortal," with the gesture, as it were, of one who 
touches or points out, apply to anything else than to bodily matter? This matter 
of the body, then, which is now corruptible shall put on incorruption when a 
perfect soul, and one furnished with the marks of incorruption, shall have begun 
to inhabit it. And do not be surprised if we speak of a perfect soul as the 
clothing of the body (which, on account of the Word of God and His wisdom, is 
now named incorruption), when Jesus Christ Himself, who is the Lord and Creator 
of the soul, is said to be the clothing of the saints, according to the language 
of the apostle, "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ." As Christ, then, is the 
clothing of the soul, so for a kind of reason sufficiently intelligible is the 
soul said to be the clothing of the body, seeing it is an ornament to it, 
covering and concealing its mortal nature. The expression, then, "This 
corruptible must put on incorruption," is as if the apostle had said, "This 
corruptible nature of the body must receive the clothing of incorruption--a soul 
possessing in itself incorruptibitity," because it has been clothed with Christ, 
who is the Wisdom and Word of God. But when this body, which at some future 
period we shall possess in a more glorious state, shall have become a partaker 
of life, it will then, in addition to being immortal, become also incorruptible. 
For whatever is mortal is necessarily also corruptible; but whatever is 
corruptible cannot also be said to be mortal. We say of a stone or a piece of 
wood that it is corruptible, but we do not say that it follows that it is also 
mortal. But as the body partakes of life, then because life may be, and is, 
separated from it, we consequently name it mortal, and according to another 
sense also we speak of it as corruptible. The holy apostle therefore, with 
remarkable insight, referring to the general first cause of bodily matter, of 
which (matter), whatever be the qualities with which it is endowed (now indeed 
carnal, but by and by more refined and pure, which are termed spiritual), the 
soul makes constant use, says, 
"This corruptible must put on incorruption." And in the second place, looking 
to the special cause of the body, he says, "This mortal must put on 
immortality." Now, what else will in-corruption and immortality be, save the 
wisdom, and the word, and the righteousness of God, which mould; and clothe, and 
adorn the soul? And hence it happens that it is said, "The corruptible will put 
on incorruption, and the mortal immortality." For although we may now make great 
proficiency, yet as we only know in part, and prophesy in part, and see through 
a glass, darkly, those very things which we seem to understand, this corruptible 
does not yet put on incorruption, nor is this mortal yet clothed with 
immorality; and as this training of ours in the body is protracted doubtless to 
a longer period, up to the time, viz., when those very bodies of ours with which 
we are enveloped may, on account of the word of God, and His wisdom and perfect 
righteousness, earn incorruptibility and immortality, therefore is it said, 
"This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on 
immortality." 
3. But, nevertheless, those who think that rational creatures can at any time 
lead an existence out of the body, may here raise such questions as the 
following. If it is true that this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and 
this mortal put on immortality, and that death is swallowed up at the end; this 
shows that nothing else than a material nature is to be destroyed, on which 
death could operate, while the mental acumen of those who are in the body seems 
to be blunted by the nature of corporeal matter. If, however, they are out of 
the body, then they will altogether escape the annoyance arising from a 
disturbance of that kind. But as they will not be able immediately to escape all 
bodily clothing, they are just to be considered as inhabiting more refined and 
purer bodies, which possess the property of being no longer overcome by death, 
or of being wounded by its sting; so that at last, by the gradual disappearance 
of the material nature, death is both swallowed up, and even at the end 
exterminated, and all its sting completely blunted by the divine grace which the 
soul has been rendered capable of receiving, and has thus deserved to obtain 
incorruptibility and immortality. And then it will be deservedly said by all, "O 
death, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting? The sting of death is 
sin." If these conclusions, then, seem to hold good, it follows that we must 
believe our condition at some future time to be incorporeal; and if this is 
admitted, and all are said to be subjected to Christ, this (incorporeity) also 
must necessarily be bestowed on all to whom the subjection to Christ extends; 
since all who are subject to Christ will be in the end subject to God the 
Father, to whom Christ is said to deliver up the kingdom; and thus it appears 
that then also the need of bodies will cease. And if it ceases, bodily matter 
returns to nothing, as formerly also it did not exist. 
Now let us see what can be said in answer to those who make these assertions. 
For it will appear to be a necessary consequence that, if bodily nature be 
annihilated, it must be again restored and created; since it seems a possible 
thing that rational natures, from whom the faculty of free-will is never taken 
away, may be again subjected to movements of some kind, through the special act 
of the Lord Himself, lest perhaps, if they were always to occupy a condition 
that was unchangeable, they should be ignorant that it is by the grace of God 
and not by their own merit that they have been placed in that final state of 
happiness; and these movements will undoubtedly again be attended by variety and 
diversity of bodies, by which the world is always adorned; nor will it ever be 
composed (of anything) save of variety and diversity,--an effect which cannot be 
produced without a bodily matter. 
4. And now I do not understand by what proofs they can maintain their 
position, who assert that worlds sometimes come into existence which are not 
dissimilar to each other, but in all respects equal. For if there is said to be 
a world similar in all respects (to the present), then it will come to pass that 
Adam and Eve will do the same things which they did before: there will be a 
second time the same deluge, and the same Moses will again lead a nation 
numbering nearly six hundred thousand out of Egypt; Judas will also a second 
time betray the Lord; Paul will a second time keep the garments of those who 
stoned Stephen; and everything which has been done in this life will be said to 
be repeated,--a state of things which I think cannot be established by any 
reasoning, if souls are actuated by freedom of will, and maintain either their 
advance or retrogression according to the power of their will. For souls are not 
driven on in a cycle which returns after many ages to the same round, so as 
either to do or desire this or that; but at whatever point the freedom of their 
own will aims, thither do they direct the course of their actions. For what 
these persons say is much the same as if one were to assert that if a medimnus 
of grain were to be poured out on the ground, the fall of the grain would be on 
the second occasion identically the same as on the first, so that every 
individual grain would lie for the second time close beside that grain where it 
had been thrown before, and so the medimnus would be scattered in the same 
order, and with the same marks as formerly; which certainly is an impossible 
result with the countless grains of a medimnus, even if they were to be poured 
out without ceasing for many ages. So therefore it seems to me impossible for a 
world to be restored for the second time, with the same order and with the same 
amount of births, and deaths, and actions; but that a diversity of worlds may 
exist with changes of no unimportant kind, so that the state of another world 
may be for some unmistakeable reasons better (than this), and for others worse, 
and for others again intermediate. But what may be the number or measure of this 
I confess myself ignorant, although, if any one can tell it, I would gladly 
learn. 
5. But this world, which is itself called an age, is said to be the 
conclusion of many ages. Now the holy apostle teaches that in that age which 
preceded this, Christ did not suffer, nor even in the age which preceded that 
again; and I know not that I am able to enumerate the number of anterior ages in 
which He did not suffer. I will show, however, from what statements of Paul I 
have arrived at this understanding. He says, "But now once in the consummation 
of ages, He was manifested to take away sin by the sacrifice of Himself." For He 
says that He was once made a victim, and in the consummation of ages was 
manifested to take away sin. Now that after this age, which is said to be formed 
for the consummation of other ages, there will he other ages again to follow, we 
have clearly learned from Paul himself, who says, "That in the ages to come He 
might show the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness towards us." He has 
not said, "in the age to come," nor "in the two ages to come," whence I infer 
that by his language many ages are indicated. Now if there is something greater 
than ages, so that among created beings certain ages may be understood, but 
among other beings which exceed and surpass visible creatures, (ages still 
greater) (which perhaps will be the case at the restitution of all things, when 
the whole universe will come to a perfect termination), perhaps that period in 
which the consummation of all things will take place is to be understood as 
something more than an age. But here the authority of holy Scripture moves me, 
which says, "For an age and more." Now this word "more" undoubtedly means 
something greater than an age; and see if that expression of the Saviour, "I 
will that where I am, these also may be with Me; and as I and Thou are one, 
these also may be one in Us," may not seem to convey something more than an age 
and ages, perhaps even more than ages of ages, -- that period, viz., when all 
things are now no longer in an age, but when God is in all. 
6. Having discussed these points regarding the nature of the world to the 
best of our ability, it does not seem out of place to inquire what is the 
meaning of the term world, which in holy Scripture is shown frequently to have 
different significations. For what we call in Latin mundus, is termed in Greek 
kosmos, and kosmos signifies not only a world, but also an 
ornament. Finally, in Isaiah, where the language of reproof is directed to the 
chief daughters of Sion, and where he says, "Instead of an ornament of a golden 
head, thou wilt have baldness on account of thy works," he employs the same term 
to denote ornament as to denote the world, viz., kosmos. For the plan of 
the world is said to be contained in the clothing of the high priest, as we find 
in the Wisdom of Solomon, where he says, "For in the long garment was the whole 
world." That earth of ours, with its inhabitants, is also termed the world, as 
when Scripture says, "The whole world lieth in wickedness." Clement indeed, a 
disciple of the apostles, makes mention of those whom the Greeks called 
'Antikqones, and other parts of the earth, to which no one of our people 
can approach, nor can any one of those who are there cross over to us, which he 
also termed worlds, saying, "The ocean is impassable to men; and those are words 
which are on the other side of it, which are governed by these same arrangements 
of the ruling God." That universe which is bounded by heaven and earth is also 
called a world, as Paul declares: "For the fashion of this world will pass 
away." Our Lord and Saviour also points out a certain other world besides this 
visible one, which it would indeed be difficult to describe and make known. He 
says, "I am not of this world." For, as if He were of a certain other world, He 
says, "I am not of this world." Now, of this world we have said beforehand, that 
the explanation was difficult; and for this reason, that there might not be 
afforded to any an occasion of entertaining the supposition that we maintain the 
existence of certain images which the Greeks call "ideas:" for it is certainly 
alien to our (writers) to speak of an incorporeal world existing in the 
imagination alone, or in the fleeting. world of thoughts; and how they can 
assert either that the Saviour comes from thence, or that the saints will go 
thither, I do not see. There is no doubt, however, that something more 
illustrious and excellent than this present world is pointed out by the Saviour, 
at which He incites and encourages believers to aim. But whether that world to 
which He desires to allude be far separated and divided from this either by 
situation, or nature, or glory; or whether it be superior in glory and quality, 
but confined within the limits of this world (which seems to me more probable), 
is nevertheless uncertain, and in my opinion an unsuitable subject for human 
thought. But from what Clement seems to indicate when he says, "The ocean is 
impassable to men, and those worlds which are behind it," speaking in the plural 
number of the worlds which are behind it, which he intimates are administered 
and governed by the same providence of the Most High God, he appears to throw 
out to us some germs of that view by which the whole universe of existing 
things, celestial and super-celestial, earthly and infernal, is generally called 
one perfect world, within which, or by which, other worlds, if any there are, 
must be supposed to be contained. For which reason he wished the globe of the 
sun or moon, and of the other bodies called planets, to be each termed worlds. 
Nay, even that pre-eminent globe itself which they call the non-wandering 
(aplanh), they nevertheless desire to have properly called world. 
Finally, they summon the book of Baruch the prophet to bear witness to this 
assertion, because in it the seven worlds or heavens are more clearly pointed 
out. Nevertheless, above that sphere which they call non-wandering 
(aplanh), they will have another sphere to exist, which they say, exactly 
as our heaven contains all things which are under it, comprehends by its immense 
size and indescribable extent the spaces of all the spheres together within its 
more magnificent circumference; so that all things are within it, as this earth 
of ours is under heaven. And this also is believed to be called in the holy 
Scriptures the good land, and the land of the living, having its own heaven, 
which is higher, and in which the names of the saints are said to be written, or 
to have been written, by the Saviour; by which heaven that earth is confined and 
shut in, which the Saviour in the Gospel promises to the meek and merciful. For 
they would have this earth of ours, which formerly was named "Dry," to have 
derived its appellation from the name of that earth, as this heaven also was 
named firmament from the title of that heaven. But we have treated at greater 
length of such opinions in the place where we had to inquire into the meaning of 
the declaration, that in the beginning "God made the heavens and the earth." For 
another heaven and another earth are shown to exist besides that "firmanent" 
which is said to have been made after the second day, or that "dry land" which 
was afterwards called "earth." Certainly, what some say of this world, that it 
is corruptible because it was made, and yet is not corrupted, because the will 
of God, who made it and holds it together lest corruption should rule over it, 
is stronger and more powerful than corruption, may more correctly be supposed of 
that world which we have called above a "non-wandering "sphere, since by the 
will of God it is not at all subject to corruption, for the reason that it has 
not admired any causes of corruption, seeing it is the world of the saints and 
of the thoroughly purified, and not of the wicked, like that world of ours. We 
must see, moreover, lest perhaps it is with reference to this that the apostle 
says, "While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which 
are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which 
are unseen are eternal. For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle 
were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal 
in the heavens." And when he says elsewhere, "Because I shall see the heavens, 
the works of Thy fingers," and when God said, regarding all things visible, by 
the mouth of His prophet, "My hand has formed all these things," He declares 
that that eternal house in the heavens which He promises to His saints was not 
made with hands, pointing out, doubtless, the difference of creation in things 
which are seen and in those which are not seen. For the same thing is not to be 
understood by the expressions, "those things which are not seen," and "those 
things which are invisible." For those things which are invisible are not only 
not seen, but do not even possess the property of visibility, being what the 
Greeks call aswmata, i.e., incorporeal; whereas those of which Paul says, 
"They are not seen," possess indeed the property of being seen, but, as he 
explains, are not yet beheld by those to whom they are promised. 
7. Having sketched, then, so far as we could understand, these three opinions 
regarding the end of all things, and the supreme blessedness, let each one of 
our readers determine for himself, with care and diligence, whether any one of 
them can be approved and adopted. For it has been said that we must suppose 
either that an incorporeal existence is possible, after all things have become 
subject to Christ, and through Christ to God the Father, when God, will be all 
and in all; or that when, notwithstanding all things have been made subject to 
Christ, and through Christ to God (with whom they formed also one spirit, in 
respect of spirits being rational natures), then the bodily substance itself 
also being united to most pure and excellent spirits, and being changed into an 
ethereal condition in proportion to the quality or merits of those who assume it 
(according to the apostle's words, "We also shall be changed"), will shine forth 
in splendour; or at least that when the fashion of those things which are seen 
passes away, and all corruption has been shaken off and cleansed away, and when 
the whole of the space occupied by this world, in which the spheres of the 
planets are said to be, has been left behind and beneath, then is reached the 
fixed abode of the pious and the good situated above that sphere, which is 
called non-wandering (aplanhs), as in a good land, in a land of the 
living, which will be inherited by the meek and gentle; to which land belongs 
that heaven (which, with its more magnificent extent, surrounds and contains 
that land itself) which is called truly and chiefly heaven, in which heaven and 
earth, the end and perfection of all things, may be safely and most confidently 
placed,--where, viz., these, after their apprehension and their chastisement for 
the offences which they have undergone by way of purgation, may, after having 
fulfilled and discharged every obligation, deserve a habitation in that land; 
while those who have been obedient to the word of God, and have henceforth by 
their obedience shown themselves capable of wisdom, are said to deserve the 
kingdom of that heaven or heavens; and thus the prediction is more worthily 
fulfilled, "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth;" and, 
"Blessed are the poor in spirit, for they shall inherit the kingdom of heaven;" 
and the declaration in the Psalm, "He shall exalt thee, and thou shalt inherit 
the land." For it is called a descent to this earth, but an exaltation to that 
which is on high. In this way, therefore, does a sort of road seem to be opened 
up by the departure of the saints from that earth to those heavens; so that they 
do not so much appear to abide in that land, as to inhabit it with an intention, 
viz., to pass on to the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, when they have 
reached that degree of perfection also. 
CHAP. IV.--THE GOD OF THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS, AND THE FATHER OF OUR LORD 
JESUS CHRIST, IS THE SAME GOD. 
I. Having now briefly arranged these points in order as we best could, it 
follows that, agreeably to our intention from the first, we refute those who 
think that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is a different God from Him who 
gave the answers of the law to Moses, or commissioned the prophets, who is the 
God of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For in this article of faith, 
first of all, we must be firmly grounded. We have to consider, then, the 
expression of frequent recurrence in the Gospels, and subjoined to all the acts 
of our Lord and Saviour, "that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by this or 
that prophet," it being manifest that the prophets are the prophets of that God 
who made the world. From this therefore we draw the conclusion, that He who sent 
the prophets, Himself predicted what was to be foretold of Christ. And there is 
no doubt that the Father Himself, and not another different from Him, uttered 
these predictions. The practice, moreover, of the Saviour or His apostles, 
frequently quoting illustrations from the Old Testament, shows that they 
attribute authority to the ancients. The injunction also of the Saviour, when 
exhorting His disciples to the exercise of kindness, "Be ye perfect, even as 
your Father who is in heaven is perfect; for He commands His sun to rise upon 
the evil and the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust," most 
evidently suggests even to a person of feeble understanding, that He is 
proposing to the imitation of His disciples no other God than the maker of 
heaven and the bestower of the rain. Again, what else does the expression, which 
ought to be used by those who pray, "Our Father who art in heaven," appear to 
indicate, save that God is to be sought in the better parts of the world, i.e., 
of His creation? Further, do not those admirable principles which 
He lays down respecting oaths, saying that we ought not to "swear either by 
heaven, because it is the throne of God; nor by the earth, because it is His 
footstool," harmonize most clearly with the words of the prophet, "Heaven is My 
throne, and the earth is My footstool?" And also when casting out of the temple 
those who sold sheep, and oxen, and doves, and pouring out the tables of the 
money-changers, and saying, "Take these things, hence, and do not make My 
Father's house a house of merchandise," He undoubtedly called Him His Father, to 
whose name Solomon had raised a magnificent temple. The words, moreover, "Have 
you not read what was spoken by God to Moses: I am the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; He is not a God of the dead, but of the 
living," most clearly teach us, that He called the God of the patriarchs 
(because they were holy, and were alive) the God of the living, the same, viz., 
who had said in the prophets, "I am God, and besides Me there is no God." For if 
the Saviour, knowing that He who is written in the law is the God of Abraham, 
and that it is the same who says, "I am God, and besides Me there is no God, 
acknowledges that very one to be His Father who is ignorant of the existence of 
any other God above Himself, as the heretics suppose, He absurdly declares Him 
to be His Father who does not know of a greater God. But if it is not from 
ignorance, but from deceit, that He says there is no other God than Himself, 
then it is a much greater absurdity to confess that His Father is guilty of 
falsehood. From all which this conclusion is arrived at, that He knows of no 
other Father than God, the Founder and Creator of all things. 
2. It would be tedious to collect out of all the passages in the Gospels the 
proofs by which the God of the law and of the Gospels is shown to be one and the 
same. Let us touch briefly upon the Acts of the Apostles, where Stephen and the 
other apostles address their prayers to that God who made heaven and earth, and 
who spoke by the mouth of His holy prophets, calling Him the "God of Abraham, of 
Isaac, and of Jacob;" the God who "brought forth His people out of the land of 
Egypt." Which expressions undoubtedly clearly direct our understandings to faith 
in the Creator, and implant an affection for Him in those who have learned 
piously and faithfully thus to think of Him; according to the words of the 
Saviour Himself, who, when He was asked which was the greatest commandment in 
the law, replied, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy mind. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself." And to these He added: "On these two 
commandments hang all the law and the prophets." How is it, then, that He 
commends to him whom He was instructing, and was leading to enter on the office 
of a disciple, this commandment above all others, by which undoubtedly love was 
to be kindled in him towards the God of that law, inasmuch as such had been 
declared by the law in these very words? But let it be granted, notwithstanding 
all these most evident proofs, that it is of some other unknown God that the 
Saviour says, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," etc., etc. 
How, in that case, if the law and the prophets are, as they say, from the 
Creator, i.e., from another God than He whom He calls good, shall that appear to 
be logically said which He subjoins, viz., that "on these two commandments hang 
the law and the prophets?" For how shall that which is strange and foreign to 
God depend upon Him? And when Paul says, "I thank my God, whom I serve my spirit 
from my forefathers with pure conscience," he clearly shows that he came not to 
some new God, but to Christ. For what other forefathers of Paul can be intended, 
except those of whom he says, "Are they Hebrews? so am I: are they Israelites? 
so am I." Nay, will not the very preface of his Epistle to the Romans clearly 
show the same thing to those who know how to understand the letters of Paul, 
viz., what God he preaches? For his words are: "Paul, the servant of Jesus 
Christ, called to be an apostle, set apart to the Gospel of God, which He had 
promised afore by His prophets in the holy Scriptures concerning His Son, who 
was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and who was declared to be 
the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the 
resurrection from the dead of Christ Jesus our Lord,"etc. Moreover, also the 
following, "Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the 
corn. Doth God take care for oxen? or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For 
our sakes, no doubt, this is written, that he that plougheth should plough in 
hope, and he that thresheth in hope of partaking of the fruits." By which he 
manifestly shows that God, who gave the law on our account, i.e., on account of 
the apostles, says, "Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out 
the corn;" whose care was not for oxen, but for the apostles, who were preaching 
the Gospel of 
Christ. In other passages also, Paul, embracing the promises of the law, 
says, "Honour thy father and thy mother, which is the first commandment with 
promise; that it may be well with thee, and that thy days may be long upon the 
land, the good land, which the Lord thy God will give thee." By which he 
undoubtedly makes known that the law, and the God of the law, and His promises, 
are pleasing to him. 
3. But as those who uphold this heresy are sometimes accustomed to mislead 
the hearts of the simple by certain deceptive sophisms, I do not consider it 
improper to bring forward the assertions which they are in the habit of making, 
and to refute their deceit and falsehood. The following, then, are their 
declarations. It is written, that "no man hath seen God at any time." 
But that God whom Moses preaches was both seen by Moses himself, and by his 
fathers before him; whereas He who is announced by the Saviour has never been 
seen at all by any one. Let us therefore ask them and ourselves whether they 
maintain that He whom they acknowledge to be God, and allege to be a different 
God from the Creator, is visible or invisible. And if they shall say that He is 
visible, besides being proved to go against the declaration of Scripture, which 
says of the Saviour, "He is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of 
every creature," they will fall also into the absurdity of asserting that God is 
corporeal. For nothing can be seen except by help of form, and size, and colour, 
which are special properties of bodies. And if God is declared to be a body, 
then He will also be found to be material, since every body is composed of 
matter. But if He be composed of matter, and matter is undoubtedly corruptible, 
then, according to them, God is liable to corruption! We shall put to them a 
second question. Is matter made, or is it uncreated, i.e., not made? And if they 
shall answer that it is not made, i.e., uncreated, we shall ask them if one 
portion of matter is God, and the other part the world? But if they shall say of 
matter that it is made, it will undoubtedly follow that they confess Him whom 
they declare to be God to have been made!--a result which certainly neither 
their reason nor ours can admit. 
But they will say, God is invisible. And what will you do? If you say that He 
is invisible by nature, then neither ought He to be visible to the Saviour. 
Whereas, on the contrary, God, the Father of Christ, is said to be seen, 
because "he who sees the Son," he says, "sees also the Father." This certainly 
would press us very hard, were the expression not understood by us more 
correctly of understanding, and not of seeing. For he who has understood the Son 
will understand the Father also. In this way, then, Moses too must be supposed 
to have seen God, not beholding Him with the bodily eye, but understanding Him 
with the vision of the heart and the perception of the mind, and that only in 
some degree. For it is manifest that He, viz., who gave answers to Moses, said, 
"You shall not see My face, but My hinder parts." 
These words are, of course, to be understood in that mystical sense which is 
befitting divine words, those old wives' fables being rejected and despised 
which are invented by ignorant persons respecting the anterior and posterior 
parts of God. Let no one indeed suppose that we have indulged any feeling of 
impiety in saying that even to the Saviour the Father is not visible. Let him 
consider the distinction which we employ in dealing with heretics. For we have 
explained that it is one thing to see and to be seen, and another to know and to 
be known, or to understand and to be understood. To see, then, and to be seen, 
is a property of bodies, which certainly will not be appropriately applied 
either to the Father, or to the Son, or to the Holy Spirit, in their mutual 
relations with one another. For the nature of the Trinity surpasses the measure 
of vision, granting to those who are in the body, i.e., to all other creatures, 
the property of vision in reference to one another. But to a nature that is 
incorporeal and for the most part intellectual, no other attribute is 
appropriate save that of knowing or being known, as the Saviour Himself declares 
when He says, "No man knoweth the Son, save the Father; nor does any one know 
the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal Him." 
It is clear, then, that He has not said, "No one has seen the Father, save 
the Son;" but, "No one knoweth the Father, save the Son." 
4. And now, if, on account of those expressions which occur in the Old 
Testament, as when God is said to be angry or to repent, or when any other human 
affection or passion is described, (our opponents) think that they are furnished 
with grounds for refuting us, who maintain that God is altogether impassible, 
and is to be regarded as wholly free from all affections of that kind, we have 
to show them that similar statements are found even in the parables of the 
Gospel; as when it is said, that he who planted a vineyard, and let it out to 
husbandmen, who slew the servants that were sent to them, and at last put to 
death even the son, is said in anger to have taken away the vineyard from them, 
and to have delivered over the wicked husbandmen to destruction, and to have 
handed over the vineyard to others, who would yield him the fruit in its season. 
And so also with regard to those citizens who, when the head of the household 
had set out to receive for himself a kingdom, sent messengers after him, saying, 
"We will not have this man to reign over us;'' for the head of the household 
having obtained the kingdom, returned, and in anger commanded them to be put to 
death before him, and burned their city with fire. But when we read either in 
the Old Testament or in the New of the anger of God, we do not take such 
expressions literally, but seek in them a spiritual meaning, that we may think 
of God as He deserves to be thought of. And on these points, when expounding the 
verse in the second Psalm, "Then shall He speak to them in His anger, and 
trouble them in His fury,'' we showed, to the best of our poor ability, how such 
an expression ought to be understood. 
CHAP. V.--ON JUSTICE AND GOODNESS. 
I. Now, since this consideration has weight with some, that the leaders of 
that heresy (of which we have been speaking) think they have established a kind 
of division, according to which they have declared that justice is one thing and 
goodness another, and have applied this division even to divine things, 
maintaining that the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is indeed a good God, but 
not a just one, whereas the God of the law and the prophets is just, but not 
good; I think it necessary to return, with as much brevity as possible, an 
answer to these statements. These persons, then, consider goodness to be some 
such affection as would have benefits conferred on all, although the recipient 
of them be unworthy and undeserving of any kindness; but here, in my opinion, 
they have not rightly applied their definition, inasmuch as they think that no 
benefit is conferred on him who is visited with any suffering or calamity. 
Justice, on the other hand, they view as.that quality which rewards every one 
according to his deserts. But here, again, they do not rightly interpret the 
meaning of their own definition. For they think that it is just to send evils 
upon the wicked and benefits upon the good; i.e., so that, according to their 
view, the just God does not appear to wish well to the bad, but to be animated 
by a kind of hatred against them. And they gather together instances of this, 
Wherever they find a history in the Scriptures of the Old Testament, relating, 
e.g., the punishment of the deluge, or the fate of those who are described as 
perishing in it, or the, destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by a shower of fire 
and brimstone, or the falling of all the people in the wilderness on account of 
their sins, so that none of those who had left Egypt were found to have entered 
the promised land, with the exception of Joshua and Caleb. Whereas from the New 
Testament they gather together words of compassion and piety, through which the 
disciples are trained by the Saviour, and by which it seems to be declared that 
no one is good save God the Father only; and by this means they have ventured to 
style the Father of the Saviour Jesus Christ a good God, but to say that the God 
of the world is a different one, whom they are pleased to term just, but not 
also good. 
2. Now I think they must, in the first place, be required to show, if they 
can, agreeably to their own definition, that the Creator is just in punishing 
according to their deserts, either those who perished at the time of the deluge, 
or the inhabitants of Sodom, or those who had quitted Egypt, seeing we sometimes 
behold committed crimes more wicked and detestable than those for which the 
above-mentioned persons were destroyed, while we do not yet sere every sinner 
paying the penalty of his misdeeds. Will they say that He who at one time was 
just has been made good? Or will they rather be of opinion that He is even now 
just, but is patiently enduring human offences, while that then He was not even 
just, inasmuch as He exterminated innocent and sucking children along with cruel 
and ungodly giants? Now, such are their opinions, because they know not how to 
understand anything beyond the letter; otherwise they would show how it is 
literal justice for sins to be visited upon the heads of children to the third 
and fourth generation, and on children's children after them. By us, however, 
such things are not understood literally; but, as Ezekiel taught when relating 
the parable, we inquire what is the inner meaning contained in the parable 
itself. Moreover, they ought to explain this also, how He is just, and rewards 
every one according to his merits, who punishes earthly-minded persons and the 
devil, seeing they have done nothing worthy of punishment. For they could not do 
any good if, according to them, they were of a wicked and ruined nature. For as 
they style Him a judge, He appears to be a judge not so much of actions as of 
natures; and if a bad nature cannot do good, neither can a good nature do evil. 
Then, in the next place, if He whom the), call good is good to all, He is 
undoubtedly good also to those who are destined to perish. And why does He not 
save them? If He does not desire to do so, He will be no longer good; if He does 
desire it, and cannot effect it, He will not be omnipotent. Why do they not 
rather hear the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospels, preparing fire 
for the devil and his angels? And how shall that proceeding, as penal as it is 
sad, appear to be, according to their view, the work of the good God? Even the 
Saviour Himself, the Son of the good God, protests in the Gospels, and declares 
that "if signs and wonders had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have 
repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes." And when He had come near to 
those very cities, and had entered their territory, why, pray, does He avoid 
entering those cities, and exhibiting to them abundance of signs and wonders, if 
it were certain that they would have repented, after they had been performed, in 
sackcloth and ashes? But as He does not do this, He undoubtedly abandons to 
destruction those whom the language of the Gospel shows not to have been of a 
wicked or mined nature, inasmuch as it declares they were capable of repentance. 
Again, in a certain parable of the Gospel, where the king enters in to see the 
guests reclining at the banquet, he beheld a certain individual not clothed with 
wedding raiment, and said. to him, "Friend, how camest thou in hither, not 
having a wedding garment?" and then ordered his servants, "Bind him hand and 
foot, and cast him into outer darkness; there will be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth." Let them tell us who is that king who entered in to see the guests, and 
finding one amongst them with unclean garments, commanded him to be bound by his 
servants, and thrust out into outer darkness. Is he the same whom they call 
just? How then had he commanded good and bad alike to be invited, without 
directing their merits to be inquired into by his servants? By such procedure 
would be indicated, not the character of a just God who rewards according to 
men's deserts, as they assert, but of one who displays undiscriminating goodness 
towards all. Now, if this must necessarily be understood of the good God, i.e., 
either of Christ or of the Father of Christ, what other objection can they bring 
against the justice of God's judgment? Nay, what else is there so unjust charged 
by them against the God of the law as to order him who had been invited by His 
servants, whom He had sent to call good and bad alike, to be bound hand and 
foot, and to be thrown into outer darkness, because he had on unclean garments? 
3. And now, what we have drawn from the authority of Scripture ought to be 
sufficient to refute the arguments of the heretics. It will not, however, appear 
improper if we discuss the matter with them shortly, on the grounds of reason 
itself. We ask them, then, if they know what is regarded among men as the ground 
of virtue and wickedness, and if it appears to follow that we can speak of 
virtues in God, or, as they think, in these two Gods. Let them give an answer 
also to the question, whether they consider goodness to be a virtue; and as they 
will undoubtedly admit it to be so, what will they say of injustice? They will 
never certainly, in my opinion, be so foolish as to deny that justice is a 
virtue. Accordingly, if virtue is a blessing, and justice is a virtue, then 
without doubt justice is goodness. But if they say that justice is not a 
blessing, it must either be an evil or an indifferent thing. Now I think it 
folly to return any answer to those who say that justice is an evil, for I shall 
have the appearance of replying either to senseless words, or to men out of 
their minds. How can that appear an evil which is able to reward the good with 
blessings, as they themselves also admit? But if they say that it is a thing of 
indifference, it follows that since justice is so, sobriety also, and prudence, 
and all the other virtues, are things of indifference. And what answer shall we 
make to Paul, when he says, "If there be any virtue, and, if there be any 
praise, think on these things, which ye have learned, and received, and heard, 
and seen in me?" Let them learn, therefore, by searching the holy Scriptures, 
what are the individual virtues, and not deceive themselves by saying that that 
God who rewards every one according to his merits, does, through hatred of evil, 
recompense the wicked with evil, and not because those who have sinned need to 
be treated with severer remedies, and because He applies to them those measures 
which, with the prospect of improvement, seem nevertheless, for the present, to 
produce a feeling of pain. They do not read what is written respecting the hope 
of those who were destroyed in the deluge; of which hope Peter himself thus 
speaks in his first Epistle: "That Christ, indeed, was put to death in the 
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, by which He went and preached to the spirits 
who were kept in prison, who once were unbelievers, when they awaited the 
long-suffering of God in the days of Noah, when the ark was preparing, in which 
a few, i.e., eight souls, were saved by water. Whereunto also baptism by a like 
figure now saves you." And with regard to Sodom and Gomorrah, let them tell us 
whether they believe the prophetic words to be those of the Creator God--of Him, 
viz., who is related to have rained upon them a shower of fire and brimstone. 
What does Ezekiel the prophet say of them? "Sodom," he says, "shall be restored 
to her former condition." But why, in afflicting those who are deserving of 
punishment, does He not afflict them for their good?--who also says to Chaldea, 
"Thou hast coals of fire, sit upon them; they will be a help to thee." And of 
those also who fell in the desert, let them hear what is related in the 
seventy-eighth Psalm, which bears the superscription of Asaph; for he says, 
"When He slew them, then they sought Him." He does not say that some sought Him 
after others had been slain, but he says that the destruction of those who were 
killed was of such a nature that, when put to death, they sought God. By all 
which it is established, that the God of the law and the Gospels is one and the 
same, a just and good God, and that He confers benefits justly, and punishes 
with kindness; since neither goodness without justice, nor justice without 
goodness, can display the (real) dignity of the divine nature. 
We shall add the following remarks, to which we are driven by their 
subtleties. If justice is a different thing from goodness, then, since evil is 
the opposite of good, and injustice of justice, injustice will doubtless be 
something else than an evil; and as, in your opinion, the just man is not good, 
so neither will the unjust man be wicked; and again, as the good man is not 
just, so the wicked man also will not be unjust. But who does not see the 
absurdity, that to a good God one should be opposed that is evil; while to a 
just God, whom they allege to be inferior to the good, no one should be opposed! 
For there is none who can be called unjust, as there is a Satan who is called 
wicked. What, then, are we to do? Let us give up the position which we defend, 
for they will not be able to maintain that a bad man is not also unjust, and an 
unjust man wicked. And if these qualities be indissolubly inherent in these 
opposites, viz., injustice in wickedness, or wickedness in injustice, then 
unquestionably the good man will be inseparable from the just man, and the just 
from the good; so that, as we speak of one and the same wickedness in malice and 
injustice, we may also hold the virtue of goodness and justice to be one and the 
same. 
4. They again recall us, however, to the words of Scripture, by bringing 
forward that celebrated question of theirs, affirming that it is written, "A bad 
tree cannot produce good fruits; for a tree is known by its fruit." What, then, 
is their position? What sort of tree the law is, is shown by its fruits, i.e., 
by the language of its precepts. For if the law be found to be good, then 
undoubtedly He who gave it is believed to be a good God. But if it be just 
rather than good, then God also will be considered a just legislator. The 
Apostle Paul makes use of no circumlocution, when he says, "The law is good; and 
the commandment is holy, and just, and good." From which it is clear that Paul 
had not learned the language of those who separate justice from goodness, but 
had been instructed by that God, and illuminated by His Spirit, who is at the 
same time both holy, and good, and just; and speaking by whose Spirit he 
declared that the commandment of the law was holy, and just, and good. And that 
he might show more clearly that goodness was in the commandment to a greater 
degree than justice and holiness, repeating his words, he used, instead of these 
three epithets, that of goodness alone, saying, "Was then that which is good 
made death unto me? God forbid." As he knew that goodness was the genus of the 
virtues, and that justice and holiness were species belonging to the genus, and 
having in the former verses named genus and species together, he fell back, when 
repeating his words, on the genus alone. But in those which follow he says, "Sin 
wrought death in me by that which is good," where he sums up generically what he 
had beforehand explained specifically. And in this way also is to be understood 
the declaration, "A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth 
forth good things; and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth 
evil things." For here also he assumed that there was a genus in good or evil, 
pointing out unquestionably that in a good man there were both justice, and 
temperance, and prudence, and piety, and everything that can be either called or 
understood to be good. In like manner also he said that a man was wicked who 
should without any doubt be unjust, and impure, and unholy, and everything which 
singly makes a bad man. For as no one considers a man to be wicked without these 
marks of wickedness (nor indeed can he be so), so also it is certain that 
without these virtues no one will be deemed to be good. There still remains to 
them, however, that saying of the Lord in the Gospel, which they think is given 
them in a special manner as a shield, viz., "There is none good but one, God the 
Father." This word they declare is peculiar to the Father of Christ, who, 
however, is different from the God who is Creator of all things, to which 
Creator he gave no appellation of goodness. Let us see now if, in the Old 
Testament, the God of the prophets and the Creator and 
Legislator of the word is not called good. What are the expressions which 
occur in the Psalms? "How good is God to Israel, to the upright in heart!" and, 
"Let Israel now say that He is good, that His mercy endureth for ever;" the 
language in the Lamentations of Jeremiah, "The Lord is good to them that wait 
for Him, to the soul that seeketh Him." As therefore God is frequently called 
good in the Old Testament, so also the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is styled 
just in the Gospels. Finally, in the Gospel according to John, our Lord Himself, 
when praying to the Father, says, "O just Father, the world hath not known 
Thee." And lest perhaps they should say that it was owing to His having assumed 
human flesh that He called the Creator of the world "Father," and styled Him 
"Just," they are excluded from such a refuge by the words that immediately 
follow, "The world hath not known Thee." But, according to them, the world is 
ignorant of the good God alone. For the word unquestionably recognises its 
Creator, the Lord Himself saying that the world loveth what is its own. Clearly, 
then, He whom they consider to be the good God, is called just in the Gospels. 
Any one may at leisure gather together a greater number of proofs, consisting of 
those passages, where in the New Testament the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 
is called just, and in the Old also, where the Creator of heaven and earth is 
called good; so that the heretics, being convicted by numerous testimonies, may 
perhaps some time be put to the blush. 
CHAP. VI.--ON THE INCARNATION OF CHRIST. 
1. It is now time, after this cursory notice of these points, to resume our 
investigation of the incarnation of our Lord and Saviour, viz., how or why He 
became man. Having therefore, to the best of our feeble ability, considered His 
divine nature from the contemplation of His own works rather than from our own 
feelings, and having nevertheless beheld (with the eye) His visible creation 
while the invisible creation is seen by faith, because human frailty can neither 
see all things with the bodily eye nor comprehend them by reason, seeing we men 
are weaker and frailer than any other rational beings (for those which are in 
heaven, or are supposed to exist above the heaven, are superior), it remains 
that we seek a being intermediate between all created things and God, i.e., a 
Mediator, whom the Apostle Paul styles the "first-born of every creature." 
Seeing, moreover, those declarations regarding His majesty which are contained 
in holy Scripture, that He is called the "image of the invisible God, and the 
first-born of every creature," and that "in Him were all things created, visible 
and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or 
powers, all things were created by Him, and in Him: and He is before all things, 
and by Him all things consist," who is the head of all things, alone having as 
head God the Father; for it is written, "The head of Christ is God; " seeing 
clearly also that it is written, "No one knoweth the Father, save the Son, nor 
doth any one know the Son, save the Father" (for who can know what wisdom is, 
save He who called it into being? or, who can understand clearly what truth is, 
save the Father of truth? who can investigate with certainty the universal 
nature of His Word, and of God Himself, which nature proceeds from God, except 
God alone, with whom the Word was), we ought to regard it as certain that this 
Word, or Reason (if it is to be so termed), this Wisdom, this Truth, is known to 
no other than the Father only; and of Him it is written, that "I do not think 
that the world itself could contain the books which might be written," 
regarding, viz., the glory and majesty of the Son of God. For it is impossible 
to commit to writing (all) those particulars which belong to the glory of the 
Saviour. After the consideration of questions of such importance concerning the 
being of the Son of God, we are lost in the deepest amazement that such a 
nature, pre-eminent above all others, should have divested itself of its 
condition of majesty and become man, and tabernacled amongst men, as the grace 
that was poured upon His lips testifies, and as His heavenly Father bore Him 
witness, and as is confessed by the various signs and wonders and miracles that 
were performed by Him; who also, before that appearance of His which He 
manifested in the body, sent the prophets as His forerunners, and the messengers 
of His advent; and after His ascension into heaven, made His holy apostles, men 
ignorant and unlearned, taken from the ranks of tax-gatherers or fishermen, but 
who were filled with the power of His divinity, to itinerate throughout the 
world, that they might gather together out of every race and every nation a 
multitude of devout believers in Himself. 
2. But of all the marvellous and mighty acts related of Him, this altogether 
surpasses human admiration, and is beyond the power of mortal frailness to 
understand or feel, how that mighty power of divine majesty, that very Word of 
the Father, and that very wisdom of God, in which were created all things, 
visible and invisible, can be believed to have existed within the limits of that 
man who appeared in Judea; nay, that the Wisdom of God can have entered the womb 
of a woman, and have been born an infant, and have uttered wailings like the 
cries of little children! And that afterwards it should be related that He was 
greatly troubled in death, saying, as He Himself; declared, "My soul is 
sorrowful even unto death; " and that at the last He was brought to that death 
which is accounted the most shameful among men, although He rose again on the 
third day. Since, then, we see in Him some things so human that they appear to 
differ in no respect from the common frailty of mortals, and some things so 
divine that they can appropriately belong to nothing else than to the primal and 
ineffable nature of Deity, the narrowness Of human understanding can find no 
outlet; but, overcome with the amazement of a mighty admiration, knows not 
whither to withdraw, or what to take hold of, or whither to turn. If it think of 
a God, it goes a mortal; if it think of a man; it beholds Him returning from the 
grave, after overthrowing the empire of death, laden with its spoils. And 
therefore the spectacle is to be contemplated with all fear and reverence, that 
the truth of both natures may be clearly shown to exist in one and the same 
Being; so that nothing unworthy or unbecoming may be perceived in that divine 
and ineffable substance nor yet those things which were done be supposed to be 
the illusions of imaginary appearances. To utter these things in human ears, and 
to explain them in words, far surpasses the powers either of our rank, or of our 
intellect and language. I think that it surpasses the power even of the holy 
apostles; nay, the explanation of that mystery may perhaps be beyond the grasp 
of the entire creation of celestial powers. 
Regarding Him, then, we shall state, in the fewest possible words, the 
contents of our creed rather than the assertions which human reason is wont to 
advance; and this from no spirit of rashness, but as called for by the nature of 
our arrangement, laying before you rather (what may be termed) our suspicions 
than any clear affirmations. 
3. The Only-begotten of God, therefore, through whom, as the previous course 
of the discussion has shown, all things were made, visible and invisible, 
according to the view of Scripture, both made all things, and loves what He 
made. For since He is Himself the invisible image of the invisible God, He 
conveyed invisibly a share in Himself to all His rational creatures, so that 
each one obtained a part of Him exactly proportioned to the amount of affection 
with which he regarded Him. But since, agreeably to the faculty of free-will, 
variety and diversity characterized the individual souls, so that one was 
attached with a warmer love to the Author of its being, and another with a 
feebler and weaker regard, that soul (anima) regarding which Jesus said, "No one 
shall take my life (animam) from me," inhering, from the beginning of the 
creation, and afterwards, inseparably and indissolubly in Him, as being the 
Wisdom and Word of God, and the Truth and the true Light, and receiving Him 
wholly, and passing into His light and splendour, was made with Him in a 
pre-eminent degree one spirit, according to the promise of the apostle to those 
who ought to imitate it, that "he who is joined in the Lord is one spirit." This 
substance of a soul, then, being intermediate between God and the flesh--it 
being impossible for the nature of God to intermingle with a body without an 
intermediate instrument--the God-man is born, as we have said, that substance 
being the intermediary to whose nature it was not contrary to assume a body. But 
neither, on the other hand, was it opposed to the nature of that soul, as a 
rational existence, to receive God, into whom, as stated above, as into the 
Word, and the Wisdom, and the Truth, it had already wholly entered. And 
therefore deservedly is it also called, along with the flesh which it had 
assumed, the Son of God, and the Power of God, the Christ, and the Wisdom of 
God, either because it was wholly in the Son of God, or because it received the 
Son of God wholly into itself. And again, the Son of God, through whom all 
things were created, is named Jesus Christ and the Son of man. For the Son of 
God also is said to have died--in reference, viz., to that nature which could 
admit of death; and He is called the Son of man, who is announced as about to 
come in the glory of God the Father, with the holy angels. And for this reason, 
throughout the whole of Scripture, not only is the divine nature spoken of in 
human words, but the human nature is adorned by appellations of divine dignity. 
More truly indeed of this than of any other can the statement be affirmed, "They 
shall both be in one flesh, and are no longer two, but one flesh." For the Word 
of God is to be considered as being more in one flesh with the soul than a man 
with his wife. But to whom is it more becoming to be also one spirit with God, 
than to this soul which has so joined itself to God by love as that it may 
justly be said to be one spirit with Him? 

4. That the perfection of his love and the sincerity of his deserved 
affection formed for it this inseparable union with God, so that the assumption 
of that soul was not accidental, or the result of a personal preference, but was 
conferred as the reward of its virtues, listen to the prophet addressing it 
thus: "Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated wickedness: therefore God, thy 
God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." As a reward 
for its love, then, it is anointed with the oil of gladness; i.e., the soul of 
Christ along with the Word of God is made Christ. Because to be anointed with 
the oil of gladness means nothing else than to be filled with the Holy Spirit. 
And when it is said "above thy fellows," it is meant that the grace of the 
Spirit was not given to it as to the prophets, but that the essential fulness of 
the Word of God Himself was in it, according to the saying of the apostle, "In 
whom dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." Finally, on this account he 
has not only said, "Thou hast loved righteousness;" but he adds, "and Thou hast 
hated wickedness." For to have hated wickedness is what the Scripture says of 
Him, that "He did no sin, neither was any guile found in His mouth," and that 
"He was tempted in all things like as we are, without sin." Nay, the Lord 
Himself also said, "Which of you will convince Me of sin?" And again He says 
with reference to Himself, " Behold, the prince of this world cometh, and 
findeth nothing in Me." All which (passages) show that in Him there was no sense 
of sin; and that the prophet might show more clearly that no sense of sin had 
ever entered into Him, he says, "Before the boy could have knowledge to call 
upon father or mother, He turned away from wickedness." 
5. Now, if our having shown above that Christ possessed a rational soul 
should cause a difficulty to any one, seeing we have frequently proved 
throughout all our discussions that the nature of souls is capable both of good 
and evil, the difficulty will be explained in the following way. That the 
nature, indeed, of His soul was the same as that of all others cannot be doubted 
otherwise it could not be called a soul were it not truly one. But since the 
power of choosing good and evil is within the reach of all, this soul which 
belonged to Christ elected to love righteousness, so that in proportion to the 
immensity of its love it clung to it unchangeably and inseparably, so that 
firmness of purpose, and immensity of affection, and an inextinguishable warmth 
of love, destroyed all susceptibility (sensum) for alteration and change; and 
that which formerly depended upon the will was changed by the power of long 
custom into nature; and so we must believe that there existed in Christ a human 
and rational soul, without supposing that it had any feeling or possibility of 
sin. 
6. To explain the matter more fully, it will not appear absurd to make use of 
an illustration, although on a subject of so much difficulty it is not easy to 
obtain suitable illustrations. However, if we may speak without offence, the 
metal iron is capable of cold and heat. If, then, a mass of iron be kept 
constantly in the fire, receiving the heat through all its pores and veins, and 
the fire being continuous and the iron never removed from it, it become wholly 
converted into the latter; could we at all say of this, which is by nature a 
mass of iron, that when placed in the fire, and incessantly burning, it was at 
any time capable of admitting cold? On the contrary, because it is more 
consistent with truth, do we not rather say, what we often see happening in 
furnaces, that it has become wholly fire, seeing nothing but fire is visible in 
it? And if any one were to attempt to touch or handle it, he would experience 
the action not of iron, but of fire. In this way, then, that soul which, like an 
iron in the fire, has been perpetually placed in the Word, and perpetually in 
the Wisdom, and perpetually in God, is God in all that it does, feels, and 
understands, and therefore can be called neither convertible nor mutable, 
inasmuch as, being incessantly heated, it possessed immutability from its union 
with the Word of God. To all the saints, finally, some warmth from the Word of 
God must be supposed to have passed; and in this soul the divine fire itself 
must be believed to have rested, from which some warmth may have passed to 
others. Lastly, the expression, "God, thy God, anointed thee with the oil of 
gladness above thy fellows," shows that that soul is anointed m one way with the 
oil of gladness, i.e., with the word of God and wisdom; and his fellows, i.e., 
the holy prophets and apostles, in another. For they are said to have "run in 
the odour of his ointments;" and that soul was the vessel which contained that 
very ointment of whose fragrance all the worthy prophets and apostles were made 
partakers. As, then, the substance of an ointment is one thing and its odour 
another, so also Christ is one thing and His fellows another. And as the vessel 
itself, which contains the substance of the ointment, can by no means admit any 
foul smell; whereas it is possible that those who enjoy its odour may, if they 
remove a little way from its fragrance, receive any foul odour which comes upon 
them: so, in the same way, was it impossible that Christ, being as it were the 
vessel itself, in which was the substance of the ointment, should receive an 
odour of an opposite kind, while they who are His "fellows" will be partakers 
and receivers of His odour, in proportion to their nearness to the vessel. 
7. I think, indeed, that Jeremiah the prophet, also, understanding what was 
the nature of the wisdom of God in him, which was the same also which he had 
assumed for the salvation of the world, said, "The breath of our countenance is 
Christ the Lord, to whom we said, that under His shadow we shall live among the 
nations." And inasmuch as the shadow of our body is inseparable from the body, 
and unavoidably performs and repeats its movements and gestures, I think that 
he, wishing to point out the work of Christ's soul, and the movements 
inseparably belonging to it, and which accomplished everything according to His 
movements and will, called this the shadow of Christ the Lord, under which 
shadow we were to live among the nations. For in the mystery of this assumption 
the nations live, who, imitating it through faith, come to salvation. David 
also, when saying, "Be mindful of my reproach, O Lord, with which they 
reproached me in exchange for Thy Christ,'' seems to me to indicate the same. 
And what else does Paul mean when he says, "Your life is hid with Christ in 
God;" and again in another passage, "Do you seek a proof of Christ, who speaketh 
in me?'' And now he says that Christ was hid in God. The meaning of which 
expression, unless it be shown to be something such as we have pointed out above 
as intended by the prophet in the words "shadow of Christ," exceeds, perhaps, 
the apprehension of the human mind. But we see also very many other statements 
in holy Scripture respecting the meaning of the word "shadow," as that 
well-known one in the Gospel according to Luke, where Gabriel says to Mary, "The 
Spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall 
overshadow thee." And the apostle says with reference to the law, that they who 
have circumcision in the flesh, "serve for the similitude and shadow of heavenly 
things." And elsewhere, "Is not our life upon the earth a shadow?" If, then, not 
only the law which is upon the earth is a shadow, but also all our life which is 
upon the earth is the same, and we live among the nations under the shadow of 
Christ, we must see whether the truth of all these shadows may not come to be 
known in that revelation, when no longer through a glass, and darkly, but face 
to face, all the saints shall deserve to behold the glory of God, and the causes 
and truth of things. And the pledge of this truth being already received through 
the Holy Spirit, the apostle said, "Yea, though we have known Christ after the 
flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no more.'' 
The above, meanwhile, are the thoughts which have occurred to us, when 
treating of subjects of such difficulty as the incarnation and deity of Christ. 
If there be any one, indeed, who can discover something better, and who can 
establish his assertions by clearer proofs from holy Scriptures, let his opinion 
be received in preference to mine. 
CHAP. VII.--ON THE HOLY SPIRIT. 
I. As, then, after those first discussions which, according to the 
requirements of the case, we held at the beginning regarding the Father, Son, 
and Holy Spirit, it seemed right that we should retrace our steps, and show that 
the same God was the creator and founder of the world, and the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, i.e., that the God of the law and of the prophets and of the 
Gospel was one and the same; and that, in the next place, it ought to be shown, 
with respect to Christ, in what manner He who had formerly been demonstrated to 
be the Word and Wisdom of God became man; it remains that we now return with all 
possible brevity to the subject of the Holy Spirit. 
It is time, then, that we say a few words to the best of our ability 
regarding the Holy Spirit, whom our Lord and Saviour in the Gospel according to 
John has named the Paraclete. For as it is the same God Himself, and the same 
Christ, so also is it the same Holy Spirit who was in the prophets and apostles, 
i.e., either in those who believed in God before the advent of Christ, or in 
those who by means of Christ have sought refuge in God. We have heard, indeed, 
that certain heretics have dared to say that there are two Gods and two Christs, 
but we have never known of the doctrine of two Holy Spirits being preached by 
any one. For how could they maintain this out of Scripture, or what distinction 
could they lay down between Holy Spirit and Holy Spirit, if indeed any 
definition or description of Holy Spirit can be discovered? For although we 
should concede to Marcion or to Valentinus that it is possible to draw 
distinctions in the question of Deity, and to describe the nature of the good 
God as one, and that of the just God as another, what will he devise, or what 
will he discover, to enable him to introduce a distinction in the Holy Spirit? I 
consider, then, that they are able to discover nothing which may indicate a 
distinction of any kind whatever. 
2. Now we are of opinion that every rational creature, without any 
distinction, receives a share of Him in the same way as of the Wisdom and of the 
Word of God. I observe, however, that the chief advent of the Holy Spirit is 
declared to men, after the ascension of Christ to heaven, rather than before His 
coming into the world. For, before that, it was upon the prophets alone, and 
upon a few individuals--if there happened to be any among the people deserving 
of it--that the gift of the Holy Spirit was conferred; but after the advent of 
the Saviour, it is written that the prediction of the prophet Joel was 
fulfilled, "In the last days it shall come to pass, and I will pour out my 
Spirit upon all flesh, and they shall prophesy," which is similar to the 
well-known statement, "All nations shall serve Him." By the grace, then, of the 
Holy Spirit, along with numerous other results, this most glorious consequence 
is clearly demonstrated, that with regard to those things which were written in 
the prophets or in the law of Moses, it was only a few persons at that time, 
viz., the prophets themselves, and scarcely another individual out of the whole 
nation, who were able to look beyond the mere corporeal meaning and discover 
something greater, i.e., something spiritual, in the law or in the prophets; but 
now there are countless multitudes of believers who, although unable to unfold 
methodically and clearly the results of their spiritual understanding, are 
nevertheless most firmly persuaded that neither ought circumcision to be 
understood literally, nor the rest of the Sabbath, nor the pouring out of the 
blood of an animal, nor that answers were given by God to Moses on these points. 
And this method of apprehension is undoubtedly suggested to the minds of all by 
the power of the Holy Spirit. 
3. And as there are many ways of apprehending Christ, who, although He is 
wisdom, does not act the part or possess the power of wisdom in all men, but 
only in those who give themselves to the study of wisdom in Him; and who, 
although called a physician, does not act as one towards all, but only towards 
those who understand their feeble and sickly condition, and flee to His 
compassion that they may obtain health; so also I think is it with the Holy 
Spirit, in whom is contained every kind of gifts, For on some is bestowed by the 
Spirit the word of wisdom, on others the word of knowledge, on others faith; and 
so to each individual of those who are capable of receiving Him, is the Spirit 
Himself made to be that quality, or understood to be that which is needed by the 
individual who has deserved to participate. These divisions and differences not 
being perceived by those who hear Him called Paraclete in the Gospel, and not 
duly considering in consequence of what work or act He is named the Paraclete, 
they have compared Him to some common spirits or other, and by this means have 
tried to disturb the Churches of Christ, and so excite dissensions of no small 
extent among brethren; whereas the Gospel shows Him to be of such power and 
majesty, that it says the apostles could not yet receive those things which the 
Saviour wished to teach them until the advent of the Holy Spirit, who, pouring 
Himself into their souls, might enlighten them regarding the nature and faith of 
the Trinity. But these persons, because of the ignorance of their 
understandings, are not only unable themselves logically to state the truth, but 
cannot even give their attention to what is advanced by us; and entertaining 
Unworthy ideas of His divinity, have delivered themselves over to errors and 
deceits, being depraved by a spirit of error, rather than instructed by the 
teaching of the Holy Spirit, according to the declaration of the apostle, 
"Following the doctrine of devils, forbidding to marry, to the destruction and 
ruin of many, and to abstain from meats, that by an ostentatious exhibition of 
stricter observance they may seduce the souls of the innocent." 
4. We must therefore know that the Paraclete is the Holy Spirit, who teaches 
truths which cannot be uttered in words, and which are, so to speak, 
unutterable, and "which it is not lawful for a man to utter," i.e., which cannot 
be indicated by human language. The phrase "it is not lawful" is, we think, used 
by the apostle instead of "it is not possible;" as also is the case in the 
passage where he says, "All things are lawful for me, but all things are not 
expedient: all things are lawful for me; but all things edify not." For those 
things which are in our power because we may have them, he says are lawful for 
us. But the Paraclete, who is called the Holy Spirit, is so called from His work 
of consolation, para clesis being termed in Latin consolatio. For if any one has 
deserved to participate in the Holy Spirit by the knowledge of His ineffable 
mysteries, he undoubtedly obtains comfort and joy of heart. For since he comes 
by the teaching of the Spirit to the knowledge of the reasons of all things 
which happen--how or why they occur--his soul can in no respect be troubled, or 
admit any feeling of sorrow; nor is he alarmed by anything, since, clinging to 
the Word of God and His wisdom, he through the Holy Spirit calls Jesus Lord. And 
since we have made mention of the Paraclete, and have explained as we were able 
what sentiments ought to be entertained regarding Him; and since our Saviour 
also is called the Paraclete in the Epistle of John, when he says, "If any of us 
sin, we have a Paraclete with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and He is 
the propitiation for our sins;" let us consider whether this term Paraclete 
should happen to have one meaning when applied to the Saviour, and another when 
applied to the Holy Spirit. Now Paraclete, when spoken of the Saviour, seems to 
mean intercessor. For in Greek, Paraclete has both significations--that of 
intercessor and comforter. On account, then, of the phrase which follows, when 
he says, "And He is the propitiation for our sins," the name Paraclete seems to 
be understood in the case of our Saviour as meaning intercessor; for He is said 
to intercede with the Father because of our sins. In the case of the Holy 
Spirit, the Paraclete must be understood in the sense of comforter, inasmuch as 
He bestows consolation upon the souls to whom He openly reveals the apprehension 
of spiritual knowledge. 
CHAP. VIII.--ON THE SOUL (ANIMA). 
1. The order of our arrangement now requires us, after the discussion of the 
preceding subjects, to institute a general inquiry regarding the soul; and, 
beginning with points of inferior importance, to ascend to those that are of 
greater. Now, that there are souls in all living things, even in those which 
live in the waters, is, I suppose, doubted by no one. For the general opinion of 
all men maintains this; and confirmation from the authority of holy Scripture is 
added, when it is said that "God made great whales, and every living creature 
that moveth which the waters brought forth after their kind." It is confirmed 
also from the common intelligence of reason, by those who lay down in certain 
words a definition of soul. For soul is defined as follows: a substance 
fantastikh and ormhtikh, which may be rendered into Latin, 
although not so appropriately, sensibilis et mobilis. This certainly may be said 
appropriately of all living beings, even of those which abide in the waters; and 
of winged creatures too, this same definition of anima may be shown to hold 
good. Scripture also has added its authority to a second opinion, when it says, 
"Ye shall not eat the blood, because the life of all flesh is its blood; and ye 
shall not eat the life with the flesh; " in which it intimates most clearly that 
the blood of every animal is its life. And if any one now were to ask how it can 
be said with respect to bees, wasps, and ants, and those other things which are 
in the waters, oysters and cockles, and all others which are without blood, and 
are most clearly shown to be living things, that the "life of all flesh is the 
blood," we must answer, that in living things of that sort the force which is 
exerted in other animals by the power of red blood is exerted in them by that 
liquid which is within them, although it be of a different colour; for colour is 
a thing of no importance, provided the substance be endowed with life. That 
beasts of burden or cattle of smaller size are endowed with souls, there is, by 
general assent, no doubt whatever. The opinion of holy Scripture, however, is 
manifest, when God says, "Let the earth bring forth the living creature after 
its kind, four-footed beasts, and creeping things, and beasts of the earth after 
their kind." And now with respect to man, although no one entertains any doubt, 
or needs to inquire, yet holy Scripture declares that "God breathed into his 
countenance the breath of life, and man became a living soul." It remains that 
we inquire respecting the angelic order whether they also have souls, or are 
souls; and also respecting the other divine and celestial powers, as well as 
those of an opposite kind. We nowhere, indeed, find any authority in holy 
Scripture for asserting that either the angels, or any other divine spirits that 
are ministers of God, either possess souls or are called souls, and yet they are 
felt by very many persons to be endowed with life. But with regard to God, we 
find it written as follows: "And I will put My soul upon that soul which has 
eaten blood, and I will root him out from among his people;" and also in another 
passage, "Your new moons, and sabbaths, and great days, I will not accept; your 
fasts, and holidays, and festal days, My soul hateth." And in the twenty-second 
Psalm, regarding Christ--for it is certain, as the Gospel bears witness, that 
this Psalm is spoken of Him--the following words occur: "O Lord, be not far from 
helping me; look to my defence: O God, deliver my soul from the sword, and my 
beloved one from the hand of the dog; " although there are also many other 
testimonies respecting the soul of Christ when He tabernacled in the flesh. 
2. But the nature of the incarnation will render unnecessary any inquiry into 
the soul of Christ. For as He truly possessed flesh, so also He truly possessed 
a soul. It is difficult indeed both to feel and to state how that which is 
called in Scripture the soul of God is to be understood; for we acknowledge that 
nature to be simple, and without any intermixture or addition. In whatever way, 
however, it is to be understood, it seems, meanwhile, to be named the soul of 
God; whereas regarding Christ there is no doubt. And therefore there seems to me 
no absurdity in either understanding or asserting some such thing regarding the 
holy angels and the other heavenly powers, since that definition of soul appears 
applicable also to them. For who can rationally deny that they are "sensible and 
moveable?" But if that definition appear to be correct, according to which a 
soul is said to be a substance rationally "sensible and moveable," the same 
definition would seem also to apply to angels. For what else is in them than 
rational feeling and motion? Now those beings who are comprehended under the 
same definition have undoubtedly the same substance. Paul indeed intimates that 
there is a kind of animal-man who, he says, cannot receive the things of the 
Spirit of God, but declares that the doctrine of the Holy Spirit seems to him 
foolish, and that he cannot understand what is to be spiritually discerned. In 
another passage he says it is sown an animal body, and arises a spiritual body, 
pointing out that in the resurrection of the just there will be nothing of an 
animal nature. And therefore we inquire whether there happen to be any substance 
which, in respect of its being anima, is imperfect. But whether it be imperfect 
because it falls away from perfection, or because it was so created by God, will 
form the subject of inquiry when each individual topic shall begin to be 
discussed in order. For if the animal man receive not the things of the Spirit 
of God, and because he is animal, is unable to admit the understanding of a 
better, i.e., of a divine nature, it is for this reason perhaps that Paul, 
wishing to teach us more plainly what that is by means of which we are able to 
comprehend those things which are of the Spirit, i.e., spiritual things, 
conjoins and associates with the Holy Spirit an understanding rather than a 
soul. For this, I think, he indicates when he says, "I will pray with the 
spirit, I will pray with the understanding also; I will sing with the spirit, I 
will sing with the understanding also.' And he does not say that "I will pray 
with the soul," but with the spirit and the understanding. Nor does he say, "I 
will sing with the soul," but with the spirit and the understanding. 
3. But perhaps this question is asked, If it be the understanding which prays 
and sings with the spirit, and if it be the same which receives both perfection 
and salvation, how is it that Peter says, "Receiving the end of your faith, even 
the salvation of your souls?" If the soul neither prays nor sings with the 
spirit, how shall it hope for salvation? or when it attains to blessedness, 
shall it be no longer called a soul?s Let us see if perhaps an answer may be 
given in this way, that as the Saviour came to save what was lost, that which 
formerly was said to be lost is not lost when it is saved; so also, perhaps, 
this which is saved is called a soul, and when it has been placed in a state of 
salvation will receive a name from the Word that denotes its more perfect 
condition. But it appears to some that this also may be added, that as the thing 
which was lost undoubtedly existed before it was lost, at which time it was 
something else than destroyed, so also will be the case when it is no longer in 
a ruined condition. In like manner also, the soul which is said to have perished 
will appear to have been something at one time, when as yet it had not perished, 
and on that account would be termed soul, and being again freed from 
destruction, it may become a second time what it was before it perished, and be 
called a soul. But from the very signification of the name soul which the Greek 
word conveys, it has appeared to a few curious inquirers that a meaning of no 
small importance may be suggested. For in sacred language God is called a fire, 
as when Scripture says," Our God is a consuming fire." Respecting the substance 
of the angels also it speaks as follows: "Who maketh His angels spirits, and His 
ministers a burning fire;" and in another place, "The angel of the Lord appeared 
in a flame of fire in the bush." We have, moreover, received a commandment to be 
"fervent in spirit; " by which expression undoubtedly the Word of God is shown 
to be hot and fiery. The prophet Jeremiah also hears from Him, who gave him his 
answers, "Behold, I have given My words into thy mouth a fire." As God, then, is 
a fire, and the angels a flame of fire, and all the saints are fervent in 
spirit, so, on the contrary, those who have fallen away from the love of God are 
undoubtedly said to have cooled in their affection for Him, and to have become 
cold. For the Lord also says, that, "because iniquity has abounded, the love of 
many will grow cold." Nay, all things, whatever they are, which in holy 
Scripture are compared with the hostile power, the devil is said to be 
perpetually finding cold; and what is found to be colder than he? In the sea 
also the dragon is said to reign. For the prophet intimates that the serpent and 
dragon, which certainly is referred to one of the wicked spirits, is also in the 
sea. And elsewhere the prophet says, "I will draw out my holy sword upon the 
dragon the flying serpent, upon the dragon the crooked serpent, and will slay 
him." And again he says: "Even though they hide from my eyes, and descend into 
the depths of the sea, there will I command the serpent, and it shall bite 
them." In the book of Job also, he is said to be the king of all things in the 
waters. The prophet threatens that evils will be kindled by the north wind upon 
all who inhabit the earth. Now the north wind is described in holy Scripture as 
cold, according to the statement in the book of Wisdom, "That cold north wind;" 
which same thing also must undoubtedly be understood of the devil. If, then, 
those things which are holy are named fire, and light, and fervent, while those 
which are of an opposite nature are said to be cold; and if the love of many is 
said to wax cold; we have to inquire whether perhaps the name soul, which in 
Greek is termed yukh, be so termed from growing cold out of a better and 
more divine condition, and be thence derived, because it seems to have cooled 
from that natural and divine warmth, and therefore has been placed in its 
present position, and called by its present name. Finally, see if you can easily 
find a place in holy Scripture where the soul is properly mentioned in terms of 
praise: it frequently occurs, on the contrary, accompanied with expressions of 
censure, as in the passage, "An evil soul ruins him who possesses it;" and, "The 
soul which sinneth, it shall die." For after it has been said, "All souls are 
Mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is Mine," it seemed 
to follow that He would say, "The soul that doeth righteousness, it shall be 
saved," and "The soul which sinneth, it shall die." But now we see that He has 
associated with the soul what is censurable, and has been silent as to that 
which was deserving of praise. We have therefore to see if, perchance, as we 
have said is declared by the name itself, it was called yukh, i.e., 
anima, because it has waxed cold from the fervour of just things, and from 
participation in the divine fire, and yet has not lost the power of restoring 
itself to that condition of fervour in which it was at the beginning. Whence the 
prophet also appears to point out some such state of things by the words, 
"Return, O my soul, unto thy rest." From all which this appears to be made out, 
that the understanding, falling away from its status and dignity, was made or 
named soul; and that, if repaired and corrected, it returns to the condition of 
the understanding. 
4. Now, if this be the case, it seems to me that this very decay and falling 
away of the understanding is not the same in all, but that this conversion into 
a soul is carried to a greater or less degree in different instances, and that 
certain understandings retain something even of their former vigour, and others 
again either nothing or a very small amount. Whence some are found from the very 
commencement of their lives to be of more active intellect, others again of a 
slower habit of mind, and some are born wholly obtuse, and altogether incapable 
of instruction. Our statement, however, that the understanding is converted into 
a soul, or whatever else seems to have such a meaning, the reader must carefully 
consider and settle for himself, as these views are not be regarded as advanced 
by us in a dogmatic manner, but simply as opinions, treated in the style of 
investigation and discussion. Let the reader take this also into consideration, 
that it is observed with regard to the soul of the Saviour, that of those things 
which are written in the Gospel, some are ascribed to it under the name of soul, 
and others under that of spirit. For when it wishes to indicate any suffering or 
perturbation affecting Him, it indicates it under the name of soul; as when it 
says, "Now is My soul troubled; " and, "My soul is sorrowful, even unto death; " 
and, "No man taketh My soul from Me, but I lay it down of Myself." Into the 
hands of His Father He commends not His soul, but His spirit; and when He says 
that the flesh is weak, He does not say that the soul is willing, but the 
spirit: whence it appears that the soul is something intermediate between the 
weak flesh and the willing spirit. 
5. But perhaps some one may meet us with one of those objections which we 
have ourselves warned you of in our statements, and say, "How then is there said 
to be also a soul of God?" To which we answer as follows: That as with respect 
to everything corporeal which is spoken of God, such as fingers, or hands, or 
arms, or eyes, or feet, or mouth, we say that these are not to be understood as 
human members, but that certain of His powers are indicated by these names of 
members of the body; so also we are to suppose that it is something else which 
is pointed out by this title--soul of God. And if it is allowable for us to 
venture to say anything more on such a subject, the soul of God may perhaps be 
understood to mean the only-begotten Son of God. For as the soul, when implanted 
in the body, moves all things in it, and exerts its force over everything on 
which it operates; so also the only-begotten Son of God, who is His Word and 
Wisdom, stretches and extends to every power of God, being implanted in it; and 
perhaps to indicate this mystery is God either called Or described in Scripture 
as a body. We must, indeed, take into consideration whether it is not perhaps on 
this account that the soul of God may be understood to mean His only-begotten 
Son, because He Himself came into this world of affliction, and descended into 
this valley of tears, and into this place of our humiliation; as He says in the 
Psalm, "Because Thou hast humiliated us in the place of affliction." Finally, I 
am aware that certain critics, in explaining the words used in the Gospel by the 
Saviour, "My soul is sorrowful, even unto death," have interpreted them of the 
apostles, whom He termed His soul, as being better than the rest of His body. 
For as the multitude of believers is called His body, they say that the 
apostles, as being better than the rest of the body, ought to be understood to 
mean His soul. 
We have brought forward as we best could these points regarding the rational 
soul, as topics of discussion for our readers, rather than as dogmatic and 
well-defined propositions. And with respect to the souls of animals and other 
dumb creatures, let that suffice which we have stated above in general terms. 
CHAP. IX.--ON THE WORLD AND THE MOVEMENTS OF RATIONAL CREATURES, WHETHER GOOD 
OR BAD; AND ON THE CAUSES OF THEM. 
1. But let us now return to the order of our proposed discussion, and behold 
the commencement of creation, so far as the understanding can behold the 
beginning of the creation of God. In that commencement, then, we are to suppose 
that God created so great a number of rational or intellectual creatures (or by 
whatever name they are to be called), which we have formerly termed 
understandings, as He foresaw would be sufficient. It is certain that He made 
them according to some definite number, predetermined by Himself: for it is not 
to be imagined, as some would have it, that creatures have not a limit, because 
where there is no limit there can neither be any comprehension nor any 
limitation. Now if this were the case, then certainly created things could 
neither be restrained nor administered by God. For, naturally, whatever is 
infinite will also be incomprehensible. Moreover, as Scripture says, "God has 
arranged all things in number and measure; " and therefore number will be 
correctly applied to rational creatures or understandings, that they may be so 
numerous as to admit of being arranged, governed, and controlled by God. But 
measure will be appropriately applied to a material body; and this measure, we 
are to believe, was created by God such as He knew would be sufficient for the 
adorning of the world. These, then, are the things which we are to believe were 
created by God in the beginning, i.e., before all things. And this, we think, is 
indicated even in that beginning which Moses has introduced in terms somewhat 
ambiguous, when he says, "In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth." 
For it is certain that the firmament is not spoken of, nor the dry land, but 
that heaven and earth from which this present heaven and earth which we now see 
afterwards borrowed their names. 
2. But since those rational natures, which we have said above were made in 
the beginning, were created when they did not previously exist, in consequence 
of this very fact of their nonexistence and commencement of being, are they 
necessarily changeable and mutable; since whatever power was in their substance 
was not in it by nature, but was the result of the goodness of their Maker. What 
they are, therefore, is neither their own nor endures for ever, but is bestowed 
by God. For it did not always exist; and everything which is a gift may also be 
taken away, and disappear. And a reason for removal will consist in the 
movements of souls not being conducted according to right and propriety. For the 
Creator gave, as an indulgence to the understandings created by Him, the power 
of free and voluntary action, by which the good that was in them might become 
their own, being preserved by the exertion of their own will; but slothfulness, 
and a dislike of labour in preserving what is good, and an aversion to and a 
neglect of better things, furnished the beginning of a departure from goodness. 
But to depart from good is nothing else than to be made bad. For it is certain 
that to want goodness is to be wicked. Whence it happens that, in proportion as 
one falls away from goodness, in the same proportion does he become involved in 
wickedness. In which condition, according to its actions, each understanding, 
neglecting goodness either to a greater or more limited extent, was dragged into 
the opposite of good, which undoubtedly is evil. From which it appears that the 
Creator of all things admitted certain seeds and causes of variety and 
diversity, that He might create variety and diversity in proportion to the 
diversity of understandings, i.e., of rational creatures, which diversity they 
must be supposed to have conceived from that cause which we have mentioned 
above. And what we mean by variety and diversity is what we now wish to explain. 

3. Now we term world everything which is above the heavens, or in the 
heavens, or upon the earth, or in those places which are called the lower 
regions, or all places whatever that anywhere exist, together with their 
inhabitants. This whole, then, is called world. In which world certain beings 
are said to be super-celestial, i.e., placed in happier abodes, and clothed with 
heavenly and resplendent bodies; and among these many distinctions are shown to 
exist, the apostle, e.g., saying, " That one is the glory of the sun, another 
the glory of the moon, another the glory of the stars; for one star differeth 
from another star in glory." Certain beings are called earthly, and among them, 
i.e., among men, there is no small difference; for some of them are Barbarians, 
others Greeks; and of the Barbarians some are savage and fierce, and others of a 
milder disposition. And certain of them live under laws that have been 
thoroughly approved; others, again, under laws of a more common or severe kind; 
while some, again, possess customs of an inhuman and savage character, rather 
than laws. And certain of them, from the hour of their birth, are reduced to 
humiliation and subjection, and brought up as slaves, being placed under the 
dominion either of masters, or princes, or tyrants. Others, again, are brought 
up in a manner more consonant with freedom and reason: some with sound bodies, 
some with bodies diseased from their early years; some defective in vision, 
others in hearing and speech; some born in that condition, others deprived of 
the use of their senses immediately after birth, or at least undergoing such 
misfortune on reaching manhood. And why should I repeat and enumerate all the 
horrors of human misery, from which some have been free, and in which others 
have been involved, when each one can weigh and consider them for himself? There 
are also certain invisible powers to which earthly things have been entrusted 
for administration; and amongst them no small difference must be believed to 
exist, as is also found to be the case among men. The Apostle Paul indeed 
intimates that there are certain lower powers, and that among them, in like 
manner, must undoubtedly be sought a ground of diversity. Regarding dumb 
animals, and birds, and those creatures which live in the waters, it seems 
superfluous to require; since it is certain that these ought to be regarded not 
as of primary, but of subordinate rank. 
4. Seeing, then, that all things which have been created are said to have 
been made through Christ, and in Christ, as the Apostle Paul most clearly 
indicates, when he says, "For in Him and by Him were all things created, whether 
things in heaven or things on earth, visible and invisible, whether they be 
thrones, or powers, or principalities, or dominions; all things were created by 
Him, and in Him;" and as in his 
Gospel John indicates the same thing, saying, "In the beginning was the Word, 
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God: the same was in the beginning 
with God: all things were made by Him; and without Him was not anything made;" 
and as in the Psalm also it is written," In wisdom hast Thou made them 
all;"--seeing, then, Christ is, as it were, the Word and Wisdom, and so also the 
Righteousness, it will undoubtedly follow that those things which were created 
in the Word and Wisdom are said to be created also in that righteousness which 
is Christ; that in created things there may appear to be nothing unrighteous or 
accidental, but that all things may be shown to be in conformity with the law of 
equity and righteousness. How, then, so great a variety of things, and so great 
a diversity, can be understood to be altogether just and righteous, I am sure no 
human power or language can explain, unless as prostrate suppliants we pray to 
the Word, and Wisdom, and Righteousness Himself, who is the only-begotten Son of 
God, and who, pouring Himself by His graces into our senses, may deign to 
illuminate what is dark, to lay open what is concealed, and to reveal what is 
secret; if, indeed, we should be found either to seek, or ask, or knock so 
worthily as to deserve to receive when we ask, or to find when we seek, or to 
have it opened to us when we knock. Not relying, then, on our own powers, but on 
the help of that Wisdom which made all things, and of that Righteousness which 
we believe to be in all His creatures, although we are in the meantime unable to 
declare it, yet, trusting in His mercy, we shall endeavour to examine and 
inquire how that great variety and diversity in the world may appear to be 
consistent with all righteousness and reason. I mean, of course, merely reason 
in general; for it would be a mark of ignorance either to seek, or of folly to 
give, a special reason for each individual case. 
5. Now, when we say that this world was established in the variety in which 
we have above explained that it was created by God, and when we say that this 
God is good, and righteous, and most just, there are numerous individuals, 
especially those who, coming from the school of Marcion, and Valentinus, and 
Basilides, have heard that there are souls of different natures, who object to 
us, that it cannot consist with the justice of God in creating the word to 
assign to some of His creatures an abode in the heavens, and not only to give 
such a better habitation, but also to grant them a higher and more honourable 
position; to favour others with the grant of principalities; to bestow powers 
upon some, dominions on others; to confer upon some the most honourable seats in 
the celestial tribunals; to enable some to shine with more resplendent glory, 
and to glitter with a starry splendour; to give to some the glory of the sun, to 
others the glory of the moon, to others the glory of the stars; to cause one 
star to differ from another star in glory. And, to speak once for all, and 
briefly, if the Creator God wants neither the will to undertake nor the power to 
complete a good and perfect work, what reason can there be that, in the creation 
of rational natures, i.e., of beings of whose existence He Himself is the cause, 
He should make some of higher rank, and others of second, or third, or of many 
lower and inferior degrees? In the next place, they object to us, with regard to 
terrestrial beings, that a happier lot by birth is the case with some rather 
than with others; as one man, e.g., is begotten of Abraham, and born of the 
promise; another, too, of Isaac and Rebekah, and who, while still in the womb, 
supplants his brother, and is said to be loved by God before he is born. Nay, 
this very circumstance,--especially that one man is born among the Hebrews, with 
whom he finds instruction in the divine law; another among the Greeks, 
themselves also wise, and men of no small learning; and then another amongst the 
Ethiopians, who are accustomed to feed on human flesh; or amongst the Scythians, 
with whom parricide is an act sanctioned by law; or amongst the people of 
Taurus, where strangers are offered in sacrifice,--is a ground of strong 
objection. Their argument accordingly is this: If there be this great diversity 
of circumstances, and this diverse and varying condition by birth, in which the 
faculty of free-will has no scope (for no one chooses for himself either where, 
or with whom, or in what condition he is born); if, then, this is not caused by 
the difference in the nature of souls, i.e., that a soul of an evil nature is 
destined for a wicked nation, and a good soul for a righteous nation, what other 
conclusion remains than that these things must be supposed to be regulated by 
accident and chance? And if that be admitted, then it will be no longer believed 
that the world was made by God, or administered by His providence; and as a 
consequence, a judgment of God upon the deeds of each individual will appear a 
thing not to be looked for. In which matter, indeed, what is dearly the truth of 
things is the privilege of Him alone to know who searches all things, even the 
deep things of God. 
6. We, however, although but men, not to nourish the insolence of the 
heretics by our silence, will return to their objections such answers as occur 
to us, so far as our abilities enable us. We have frequently shown, by those 
declarations which we were able to produce from the holy Scriptures, that God, 
the Creator of all things, is good, and just, and all-powerful. When He in the 
beginning created those beings which He desired to create, i.e., rational 
natures, He had no other reason for creating them than on account of Himself, 
i.e., His own goodness. As He Himself, then, was the cause of the existence of 
those things which were to be created, in whom there was neither any variation 
nor change, nor want of power, He created all whom He made equal and alike, 
because there was in Himself no reason for producing variety and diversity. But 
since those rational creatures themselves, as we have frequently shown, and will 
yet show in the proper place, were endowed with the power of free-will, this 
freedom of will incited each one either to progress by imitation of God, or 
reduced him to failure through negligence. And this, as we have already stated, 
is the cause of the diversity among rational creatures, deriving its origin not 
from the will or judgment of the Creator, but from the freedom of the individual 
will. Now God, who deemed it just to arrange His creatures according to their 
merit, brought down these different understandings into the harmony of one 
world, that He might adorn, as it were, one dwelling, in which there ought to be 
not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and clay (and some indeed 
to honour, and others to dishonour), with those different vessels, or souls, or 
understandings. And these are the causes, in my opinion, why that world presents 
the aspect of diversity, while Divine Providence continues to regulate each 
individual according to the variety of his movements, or of his feelings and 
purpose. On which account the Creator will neither appear to be unjust in 
distributing (for the causes already mentioned) to every one according to his 
merits; nor will the happiness or unhappiness of each one's birth, or whatever 
be the condition that falls to his lot, be deemed accidental; nor will different 
creators, or souls of different natures, be believed to exist. 
7. But even holy Scripture does not appear to me to be altogether silent on 
the nature of this secret, as when the Apostle Paul, in discussing the case of 
Jacob and Esau, says: "For the children being not yet born, neither having done 
any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not 
of works, but of Him who calleth, it was said, The elder shall serve the 
younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." And after 
that, he answers himself, and says, "What shall we say then? Is there 
unrighteousness with God?" And that he might furnish us with an opportunity of 
inquiring into these matters, and of ascertaining how these things do not happen 
without a reason, he answers himself, and says, "God forbid." For the same 
question, as it seems to me, which is raised concerning Jacob and Esau, may be 
raised regarding all celestial and terrestrial creatures, and even those of the 
lower world as well. And in like manner it seems to me, that as he there says, 
"The children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil," so it 
might also be said of all other things, "When they were not yet" created, 
"neither had yet done any good or evil, that the decree of God according to 
election may stand," that (as certain think) some things on the one hand were 
created heavenly, some on the other earthly, and others, again, beneath the 
earth, "not of works" (as they think), "but of Him who calleth," what shall we 
say then, if these things are so? "Is there unrighteousness with God? God 
forbid." As, therefore, when the Scriptures are carefully examined regarding 
Jacob and Esau, it is not found to be unrighteousness with God that it should be 
said, before they were born, or had done anything in this life, "the elder shall 
serve the younger;" and as it is found not to be unrighteousness that even in 
the womb Jacob supplanted his brother, if we feel that he was worthily beloved 
by God, according to the deserts of his previous life, so as to deserve to be 
preferred before his brother; so also is it with regard to heavenly creatures, 
if we notice that diversity was not the original condition of the creature, but 
that, owing to causes that have previously existed, a different office is 
prepared by the Creator for each one in proportion to the degree of his merit, 
on this ground, indeed, that each one, in respect of having been created by God 
an understanding, or a rational spirit, has, according to the movements of his 
mind and the feelings of his soul, gained for himself a greater or less amount 
of merit, and has become either an object of love to God, or else one of dislike 
to Him; while, nevertheless, some of those who are possessed of greater merit 
are ordained to suffer with others for the adorning of the state of the world, 
and for the discharge of duty to creatures of a lower grade, in order that by 
this means they themselves may be participators in the endurance of the Creator, 
according to the words of the apostle: "For the creature was made subject to 
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in 
hope." Keeping in view, then, the sentiment expressed by the apostle, when, 
speaking of the birth of Esau and Jacob, he says, "Is there unrighteousness with 
God? God forbid," I think it fight that this same sentiment should be carefully 
applied to the case of all other creatures, because, as we formerly remarked, 
the righteousness of the Creator ought to appear in everything. And this, it 
appears to me, will be seen more clearly at last, if each one, whether of 
celestial or terrestrial or infernal beings, be said to have the causes of his 
diversity in himself, and antecedent to his bodily birth. For all things were 
created by the Word of God, and by His Wisdom, and were set in order by His 
Justice. And by the grace of His compassion He provides for all men, and 
encourages all to the use of whatever remedies may lead to their cure, and 
incites them to salvation. 
8. As, then, there is no doubt that at the day of judgment the good will be 
separated from the bad, and the just from the unjust, and all by the sentence of 
God will be distributed according to their deserts throughout those places of 
which they are worthy, so I am of opinion some such state of things was formerly 
the case, as, God willing, we shall show in what follows. For God must be 
believed to do and order all things and at all times according to His judgment. 
For the words which the apostle uses when he says, "In a great house there are 
not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some to 
honour and some to dishonour;" and those which he adds, saying, "If a man purge 
himself, he will be a vessel unto honour, sanctified and meet for the Master's 
use, unto every good work," undoubtedly point out this, that he who shall purge 
himself when he is in this life, will be prepared for every good work in that 
which is to come; while he who does not purge himself will be, according to the 
amount of his impurity, a vessel unto dishonour, i.e., unworthy. It is therefore 
possible to understand that there have been also formerly rational vessels, 
whether purged or not, i.e., which either purged themselves or did not do so, 
and that consequently every vessel, according to the measure of its purity or 
impurity, received a place, or region, or condition by birth, or an office to 
discharge, in this world. All of which, down to the humblest, God providing for 
and distinguishing by the power of His wisdom, arranges all things by His 
controlling judgment, according to a most impartial retribution, so far as each 
one ought to be assisted or cared for in conformity with his deserts. In which 
certainly every principle of equity is shown, while the inequality of 
circumstances preserves the justice of a retribution according to merit. But the 
grounds of the merits in each individual case are only recognised truly and 
clearly by God Himself, along with His only-begotten Word, and His Wisdom, and 
the Holy Spirit. 
CHAP. X.--ON THE RESURRECTION, AND THE JUDGMENT, THE FIRE OF HELL, AND 
PUNISHMENTS. 
1. But since the discourse has reminded us of the subjects of a future 
judgment and of retribution, and of the punishments of sinners, according to the 
threatenings of holy Scripture and the contents of the Church's teaching--viz., 
that when the time of judgment comes, everlasting fire, and outer darkness, and 
a prison, and a furnace, and other punishments of like. nature, have been 
prepared for sinners--let us see what our opinions on these points ought to be. 
But that these subjects may be arrived at in proper order, it seems to me that 
we ought first to consider the nature of the resurrection, that we may know what 
that (body) is which shall come either to punishment, or to rest, or to 
happiness; which question in other treatises which we have composed regarding 
the resurrection we have discussed at greater length, and have shown what our 
opinions were regarding it. But now, also, for the sake of logical order in our 
treatise, there will be no absurdity in restating a few points from such works, 
especially since some take offence at the creed of the Church, as if our belief 
in the resurrection were foolish, and altogether devoid of sense; and these are 
principally heretics, who, I think, are to be answered in the following manner. 
If they also admit that there is a resurrection of the dead, let them answer us 
this, What is that which died? Was it not a body? It is of the body, then, that 
there will be a resurrection. Let them next tell us if they think that we are to 
make use of bodies or not. I think that when the Apostle Paul says, that "it is 
sown a natural body, it will arise a spiritual body," they cannot deny that it 
is a body which arises, or that in the resurrection we are to make use of 
bodies. 
What then? If it is certain that we are to make use of bodies, and if the 
bodies which have fallen are declared to rise again (for only that which before 
has fallen can be properly said to rise again), it can be a matter of doubt to 
no one that they rise again, in order that we may be clothed with them a second 
time at the resurrection. The one thing is closely connected with the other. For 
if bodies rise again, they undoubtedly rise to be coverings for us; and if it is 
necessary for us to be invested with bodies, as it is certainly necessary, we 
ought to be invested with no other than our own. 
But if it is true that these rise again, and that they arise "spiritual" 
bodies, there can be no doubt that they are said to rise from the dead, after 
casting away corruption and laying aside mortality; otherwise it will appear 
vain and superfluous for any one to arise from the dead in order to die a second 
time. And this, finally, may be more distinctly comprehended thus, if one 
carefully consider what are the qualities of an animal body, which, when sown 
into the earth, recovers the qualities of a spiritual body. For it is out of the 
animal body that the very power and grace of the resurrection educe the 
spiritual body, when it transmutes it from a condition of indignity to one of 
glory. 
2. Since the heretics, however, think themselves persons of great learning 
and wisdom, we shall ask them if every body has a form of some kind, i.e., is 
fashioned according to some shape. And if they shall say that a body is that 
which is fashioned according to no shape, they will show themselves to be the 
most ignorant and foolish of mankind. For no one will deny this, save him who is 
altogether without any learning. But if, as a matter of course, they say that 
every body is certainly fashioned according to some definite shape, we shall ask 
them if they can point out and describe to us the shape of a spiritual body; a 
thing which they can by no means do. We shall ask them, moreover, about the 
differences of those who rise again. How will they show that statement to be 
true, that there is "one flesh of birds, another of fishes; bodies celestial, 
and bodies terrestrial; that the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of 
the terrestrial another; that one is the glory of the sun, another the glory of 
the moon, another the glory of the stars; that one star differeth from another 
star in glory; and that so is the resurrection of the dead?" According to that 
gradation, then, which exists among heavenly bodies, let them show to us the 
differences in the glory of those who rise again; and if they have endeavoured 
by any means to devise a principle that may be in accordance with the 
differences in heavenly bodies, we shall ask them to assign the differences in 
the resurrection by a comparison of earthly bodies. Our understanding of the 
passage indeed is, that the apostle, wishing to describe the great difference 
among those who rise again in glory, i.e., of the saints, borrowed a comparison 
from the heavenly bodies, saying, "One is the glory of the sun, another the 
glory of the moon, another the glory of the stars." And wishing again to teach 
us the differences among those who shall come to the resurrection, without 
having purged themselves in this life, i.e., sinners, he borrowed an 
illustration from earthly things, saying, "There is one flesh of birds, another 
of fishes." For heavenly things are worthily compared to the saints, and earthly 
things to sinners. These statements are made in reply to those who deny the 
resurrection of the dead, i.e., the resurrection of bodies. 
3. We now turn our attention to some of our own (believers), who, either from 
feebleness of intellect or want of proper instruction, adopt a very low and 
abject view of the resurrection of the body. We ask these persons in what manner 
they understand that an animal body is to be changed by the grace of the 
resurrection, and to become a spiritual one; and how that which is sown in 
weakness will arise in power; how that which is planted in dishonour will arise 
in glory; and that which was sown in corruption, will be changed to a state of 
incorruption. Because if they believe the apostle, that a body which arises in 
glory, and power, and incorruptibility, has already become spiritual, it appears 
absurd and contrary to his meaning to say that it can again be entangled with 
the passions of flesh and blood, seeing the apostle manifestly declares that 
"flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God, nor shall corruption 
inherit incorruption." But how do they understand the declaration of the 
apostle, "We shall all be changed?" This transformation certainly is to be 
looked for, according to the order which we have taught above; and in it, 
undoubtedly, it becomes us to hope for something worthy of divine grace; and 
this we believe will take place in the order in which the apostle describes the 
sowing in the ground of a "bare grain of corn, or of any other fruit," to which 
"God gives a body as it pleases Him," as soon as the grain of corn is dead. For 
in the same way also our bodies are to be supposed to fall into the earth like a 
grain; and (that germ being implanted in them which contains the bodily 
substance) although the bodies die, and become corrupted, and are scattered 
abroad, yet by the word of God, that very germ which is always safe in the 
substance of the body, raises them from the earth, and restores and repairs 
them, as the power which is in the grain of wheat, after its corruption and 
death, repairs and restores the grain into a body having stalk and ear. And so 
also to those who shall deserve to obtain an inheritance in the kingdom of 
heaven, that germ of the body's restoration, which we have before mentioned, by 
God's command restores out of the earthly and animal body a spiritual one, 
capable of inhabiting the heavens; while to each one of those who may be of 
inferior merit, or of more abject condition, or even the lowest in the scale, 
and altogether thrust aside, there is yet given, in proportion to the dignity of 
his life and soul, a glory and dignity of body,--nevertheless in such a way, 
that even the body which rises again of those who are to be destined to 
everlasting fire or to severe punishments, is by the very change of the 
resurrection so incorruptible, that it cannot be corrupted and dissolved even by 
severe punishments. If, then, such be the qualities of that body which will 
arise from the dead, let us now see what is the meaning of the threatening of 
eternal fire. 
4. We find in the prophet Isaiah, that the fire with which each one is 
punished is described as his own; for he says, "Walk in the light of your own 
fire, and in the flame which ye have kindled.'' By these words it seems to be 
indicated that every sinner kindles for himself the flame of his own fire, and 
is not plunged into some fire which has been already kindled by another, or was 
in existence before himself. Of this fire the fuel and food are our sins, which 
are called by the Apostle Paul wood, and hay, and stubble.'' And I think that, 
as abundance of food, and provisions of a contrary kind and amount, breed fevers 
in the body, and fevers, too, of different sorts and duration, according to the 
proportion in which the collected poison supplies material and fuel for disease 
(the quality of this material, gathered together from different poisons, proving 
the causes either of a more acute or more lingering disease); so, when the soul 
has gathered together a multitude of evil works, and an abundance of sins 
against itself, at a suitable time all that assembly of evils boils up to 
punishment, and is set on fire to chastisements; when the mind itself, or 
conscience, receiving by divine power into the memory all those things of which 
it had stamped on itself certain signs and forms at the moment of sinning, will 
see a kind of history, as it were, of all the foul, and shameful, and unholy 
deeds which it has done, exposed before its eyes: then is the conscience itself 
harassed, and, pierced by its own goads, becomes an accuser and a witness 
against itself. And this, I think, was the opinion of the Apostle Paul himself, 
when he said, "Their thoughts mutually accusing or excusing them in the day when 
God will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel." From 
which it is understood that around the substance of the soul certain tortures 
are produced by the hurtful affections of sins themselves. 
5. And that the understanding of this matter may not appear very difficult, 
we may draw some considerations from the evil effects of those passions which 
are wont to befall some souls, as when a soul is consumed by the fire of love, 
or wasted away by zeal or envy, or when the passion of anger is kindled, or one 
is consumed by the greatness of his madness or his sorrow; on which occasions 
some, finding the excess of these evils unbearable, have deemed it more 
tolerable to submit to death than to endure perpetually torture of such a kind. 
You will ask indeed whether, in the case of those who have been entangled in the 
evils arising from those vices above enumerated, and who, while existing in this 
life, have been unable to procure any amelioration for themselves, and have in 
this condition departed from the world, it be sufficient in the way of 
punishment that they be tortured by the remaining in them of these hurtful 
affections, i.e., of the anger, or of the fury, or of the madness, or of the 
sorrow, whose fatal poison was in this life lessened by no healing medicine; or 
whether, these affections being changed, they will be subjected to the pains of 
a general punishment. Now I am of opinion that another species of punishment may 
be understood to exist; because, as we feel that when the limbs of the body are 
loosened and torn away from their mutual supports, there is produced pain of a 
most excruciating kind, so, when the soul shall be found to be beyond the order, 
and connection, and harmony in which it was created by God for the purposes of 
good and useful action and observation, and not to harmonize with itself in the 
connection of its rational movements, it must be deemed to bear the chastisement 
and torture of its own dissension, and to feel the punishments of its own 
disordered condition. And when this dissolution and rending asunder of soul 
shall have been tested by the application of fire, a solidification undoubtedly 
into a firmer structure will take place, and a restoration be effected. 
6. There are also many other things which escape our notice, and are known to 
Him alone who is the physician of our souls. For if, on account of those bad 
effects which we bring upon ourselves by eating and drinking, we deem it 
necessary for the health of the body to make use of some unpleasant and painful 
drug, sometimes even, if the nature of the disease demand, requiring the severe 
process of the amputating knife; and if the virulence of the disease shall 
transcend even these remedies, the evil has at last to be burned out by fire; 
how much more is it to be understood that God our Physician, desiring to remove 
the defects of our souls, which they had contracted from their different sins 
and crimes, should employ penal measures of this sort, and should apply even, in 
addition, the punishment of fire to those who have lost their soundness of mind! 
Pictures of this method of procedure are found also in the holy Scriptures. In 
the book of Deuteronomy, the divine word threatens sinners with the punishments 
of fevers, and colds, and jaundice, and with the pains of feebleness of vision, 
and alienation of mind and paralysis, and blindness, and weakness of the reins. 
If any one, then, at his leisure gather together out of the whole of Scripture 
all the enumerations of diseases which in the threatenings addressed to sinners 
are called by the names of bodily maladies, he will find that either the vices 
of souls, or their punishments, are figuratively indicated by them. To 
understand now, that in the same way in which physicians apply remedies to the 
sick, in order that by careful treatment they may recover their health, God so 
deals towards those who have lapsed and fallen into sin, is proved by this, that 
the cup of God's fury is ordered, through the agency of the prophet Jeremiah, to 
be offered to all nations, that they may drink it, and be in a state of madness, 
and vomit it forth. In doing which, He threatens them, saying, That if any one 
refuse to drink, he shall not be cleansed. By which certainly it is understood 
that the fury of God's vengeance is profitable for the purgation of souls. That 
the punishment, also, which is said to be applied by fire, is understood to be 
applied with the object of healing, is taught by Isaiah, who speaks thus of 
Israel: "The Lord will wash away the filth of the sons or daughters of Zion, and 
shall purge away the blood from the midst of them by the spirit of judgment, and 
the spirit of burning." Of the Chaldeans he thus speaks: "Thou hast the coals of 
fire; sit upon them: they will be to thee a help." And in other passages he 
says, "The Lord will sanctify in a burning fire" and in the prophecies of 
Malachi he says, "The Lord sitting will blow, and purify, and will pour forth 
the cleansed sons of Judah." 
7. But that fate also which is mentioned in the Gospels as overtaking 
unfaithful stewards who, it is said, are to be divided, and a portion of them 
placed along with unbelievers, as if that portion which is not their own were to 
be sent elsewhere, undoubtedly indicates some kind of punishment on those whose 
spirit, as it seems to me, is shown to be separated from the soul. For if this 
Spirit is of divine nature, i.e., is understood to be a Holy Spirit, we shall 
understand this to be said of the gift of the Holy Spirit: that when, whether by 
baptism, or by the grace of the Spirit, the word of wisdom, or the word of 
knowledge, or of any other gift, has been bestowed upon a man, and not rightly 
administered, i.e., either buried in the earth or tied up in a napkin, the gift 
of the Spirit will certainly be withdrawn from his soul, and the other portion 
which remains, that is, the substance of the soul, will be assigned its place 
with unbelievers, being divided and separated from that Spirit with whom, by 
joining itself to the Lord, it ought to have been one spirit. Now, if this is 
not to be understood of the Spirit of God, but of the nature of the soul itself, 
that will be called its better part which was made in the image and likeness of 
God; whereas the other part, that which afterwards, through its fall by the 
exercise of free-will, was assumed contrary to the nature of its original 
condition of purity,--this part, as being the friend and beloved of matter, is 
punished with the fate of unbelievers. There is also a third sense in which that 
separation may be understood, this viz., that as each believer, although the 
humblest in the Church, is said to be attended by an angel, who is declared by 
the Saviour always to behold the face of God the Father, and as this angel was 
certainly one with the object of his guardianship; so, if the latter is rendered 
unworthy by his want of obedience, the angel of God is said to be taken from 
him, and then that part of him--the part, viz., which belongs to his human 
nature--being rent away from the divine part, is assigned a place along with 
unbelievers, because it has not faithfully observed the admonitions of the angel 
allotted it by God. 
8. But the outer darkness, in nay judgment, is to be understood not so much 
of some dark atmosphere without any light, as of those persons who, being 
plunged in the darkness of profound ignorance, have been placed beyond the reach 
of any light of the understanding. We must see, also, lest this perhaps should 
be the meaning of the expression, that as the saints will receive those bodies 
in which they have lived in holiness and purity in the habitations of this life, 
bright and glorious after the resurrection, so the wicked also, who in this life 
have loved the darkness of error and the night of ignorance, may be clothed with 
dark and black bodies after the resurrection, that the very mist of ignorance 
which had in this life taken possession of their minds within them, may appear 
in the future as the external covering of the body. Similar is the view to be 
entertained regarding the prison. Let these remarks, which have been made as 
brief as possible, that the order of our discourse in the meantime might be 
preserved, suffice for the present occasion. 
CHAP. XI.--ON COUNTER PROMISES. 
1. Let us now briefly see what views we are to form regarding promises. 
It is certain that there is no living thing which can be altogether inactive 
and immoveable, but delights in motion of every kind, and in perpetual activity 
and volition; and this nature, I 
think it evident, is in all living things. Much more, then, must a rational 
animal, i.e., the nature of man, be in perpetual movement and activity. If, 
indeed, he is forgetful of himself, and ignorant of what becomes him, all his 
efforts are directed to serve the uses of the body, and in all his movements he 
is occupied with his own pleasures and bodily lusts; but if he be one who 
studies to care or provide for the general good, then, either by consulting for 
the benefit of the state or by obeying the magistrates, he exerts himself for 
that, whatever it is, which may seem certainly to promote the public advantage. 
And if now any one be of such a nature as to understand that there is something 
better than those things which seem to be corporeal, and so bestow his labour 
upon wisdom and science, then he will undoubtedly direct all his attention 
towards pursuits of that kind, that he may, by inquiring into the truth, 
ascertain the causes and reason of things. As therefore, in this life, one man 
deems it the highest good to enjoy bodily pleasures, another to consult for the 
benefit of the community, a third to devote attention to study and learning; so 
let us inquire whether in that life which is the true one (which is said to be 
hidden with Christ in God, i.e., in that eternal life), there will be for us 
some such order and condition of existence. 
2. Certain persons, then, refusing the labour of thinking, and adopting a 
superficial view of the letter of the law, and yielding rather in some measure 
to the indulgence of their own desires and lusts, being disciples of the letter 
alone, are of opinion that the fulfilment of the promises of the future are to 
be looked for in bodily pleasure and luxury; and therefore they especially 
desire to have again, after the resurrection, such bodily structures as may 
never be without the power of eating, and drinking, and performing all the 
functions of flesh and blood, not following the opinion of the Apostle Paul 
regarding the resurrection of a spiritual body. And consequently they say, that 
after the resurrection there will be marriages, and the begetting of children, 
imagining to themselves that the earthly city of Jerusalem is to be rebuilt, its 
foundations laid in precious stones, and its walls constructed of jasper, and 
its battlements of crystal; that it is to have a wall composed of many precious 
stones, as jasper, and sapphire, and chalcedony, and emerald, and sardonyx, and 
onyx, and chrysolite, and chrysoprase, and jacinth, and amethyst. Moreover, they 
think that the natives of other countries are to be given them as the ministers 
of their pleasures, whom they are to employ either as tillers of the field or 
builders of walls, and by whom their ruined and fallen city is again to be 
raised up; and they think that they are to receive the wealth of the nations to 
live on, and that they will have control over their riches; that even the camels 
of Midian and Kedar will come, and bring to them gold, and incense, and precious 
stones. And these views they think to establish on the authority of the prophets 
by those promises which are written regarding Jerusalem; and by those passages 
also where it is said, that they who serve the Lord shall eat and drink, but 
that sinners shall hunger and thirst; that the righteous shall be joyful, but 
that sorrow shall possess the wicked. And from the New Testament also they quote 
the saying of the Saviour, in which He makes a promise to His disciples 
concerning the joy of wine, saying, "Henceforth I shall not drink of this cup, 
until I drink it with you new in My Father's kingdom." They add, moreover, that 
declaration, in which the Saviour calls those blessed who now hunger and thirst, 
promising them that they shall be satisfied; and many other scriptural 
illustrations are adduced by them, the meaning of which they do not perceive is 
to be taken figuratively. Then, again, agreeably to the form of things in this 
life, and according to the gradations of the dignities or ranks in this world, 
or the greatness of their powers, they think they are to be kings and princes, 
like those earthly monarchs who now exist; chiefly, as it appears, on account of 
that expression in the Gospel: "Have thou power over five cities." And to speak 
shortly, according to the manner of things in this life in all similar matters, 
do they desire the fulfilment of all things looked for in the promises, viz., 
that what now is should exist again. Such are the views of those who, while 
believing in Christ, understand the divine Scriptures in a sort of Jewish sense, 
drawing from them nothing worthy of the divine promises. 
3. Those, however, who receive the representations of Scripture according to 
the understanding of the apostles, entertain the hope that the saints will eat 
indeed, but that it will be the bread of life, which may nourish the soul with 
the food of truth and wisdom, and enlighten the mind, and cause it to drink from 
the cup of divine wisdom, according to the declaration of holy Scripture: 
"Wisdom has prepared her table, she has killed her beasts, she has mingled her 
wine in her cup, and she cries with a loud voice, Come to me, eat the bread 
which I have prepared for you, and drink the wine which I have mingled." By this 
food of wisdom, the understanding, being nourished to an entire and perfect 
condition like that in which man was made at the beginning, is restored to the 
image and likeness of God; so that, although an individual may depart from this 
life less perfectly instructed, but who has done works that are approved of, he 
will be capable of receiving instruction in that Jerusalem, the city of the 
saints, i.e., he will be educated and moulded, and made a living stone, a stone 
elect and precious, because he has undergone with firmness and constancy the 
struggles of life and the trials of piety; and will there come to a truer and 
clearer knowledge of that which here has been already predicted, viz., that "man 
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word which proceedeth from the mouth 
of God." And they also are to be understood to be the princes and rulers who 
both govern those of lower rank, and instruct them, and teach them, and train 
them to divine things. 
4. But if these views should not appear to fill the minds of those who hope 
for such results with a becoming desire, let us go back a little, and, 
irrespective of the natural and innate longing of the mind for the thing itself, 
let us make inquiry so that we may be able at last to describe, as it were, the 
very forms of the bread of life, and the quality of that wine, and the peculiar 
nature of the principalities, all in conformity with the spiritual view of 
things. Now, as in those arts which are usually performed by means of manual 
labour, the reason why a thing is done, or why it is of a special quality, or 
for a special purpose, is an object of investigation to the mind, while the 
actual work itself is unfolded to view by the agency of the hands; so, in those 
works of God which were created by Him, it is to be observed that the reason and 
understanding of those things which we see done by Him remains undisclosed. And 
as, when our eye beholds the products of an artist's labour, the mind, 
immediately on perceiving anything of unusual artistic excellence, burns to know 
of what nature it is, or how it was formed, or to what purposes it was 
fashioned; so, in a much greater degree, and in one that is beyond all 
comparison, does the mind burn with an inexpressible desire to know the reason 
of those things which we see done by God. This desire, this longing, we believe 
to be unquestionably implanted within us by God; and as the eye naturally seeks 
the light and vision, and our body naturally desires food and drink, so our mind 
is possessed with a becoming and natural desire to become acquainted with the 
truth of God and the causes of things. Now we have received this desire from 
God, not in order that it should never be gratified or be capable of 
gratification; otherwise the love of truth would appear to have been implanted 
by God into our minds to no purpose, if it were never to have an opportunity of 
satisfaction. Whence also, even in this life, those who devote themselves with 
great labour to the pursuits of piety and religion, although obtaining only some 
small fragments from the numerous and immense treasures of divine knowledge, 
yet, by the very circumstance that their mind and soul is engaged in these 
pursuits, and that in the eagerness of their desire they outstrip themselves, do 
they derive much advantage; and, because their minds are directed to the study 
and love of the investigation of truth, are they made fitter for receiving the 
instruction that is to come; as if, when one would paint an image, he were first 
with a light pencil to trace out the outlines of the coming picture, and prepare 
marks for the reception of the features that are to be afterwards added, this 
preliminary sketch in outline is found to prepare the way for the laying on of 
the true colours of the painting; so, in a measure, an outline and sketch may be 
traced on the tablets of our heart by the pencil of our Lord Jesus Christ. And 
therefore perhaps is it said, "Unto every one that hath shall be given, and be 
added." By which it is established, that to those who possess in this life a 
kind of outline of truth and knowledge, shall be added the beauty of a perfect 
image in the future. 
5. Some such desire, I apprehend, was indicated by him who said, "I am in a 
strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is 
far better; " knowing that when he should have returned to Christ he would then 
know more clearly the reasons of all things which are done on earth, either 
respecting man, or the soul of man, or the mind; or regarding any other subject, 
such as, for instance, what is the Spirit that operates, what also is the vital 
spirit, or what is the grace of the Holy Spirit that is given to believers. Then 
also will he understand what Israel appears to be, or what is meant by the 
diversity of nations; what the twelve tribes of Israel mean, and what the 
individual people of each tribe. Then, too, will he understand the reason of the 
priests and Levites, and of the different priestly orders, the type of which was 
in Moses, and also what is the true meaning of the jubilees, and of the weeks of 
years with God. He will see also the reasons for the festival days, and holy 
days, and for all the sacrifices and purifications. He will perceive also the 
reason of the purgation from leprosy, and what the different kinds of leprosy 
are, and the reason of the purgation of those who lose their seed. He will come 
to know, moreover, what are the good influences, and their greatness, and their 
qualities; and those too which are of a contrary kind, and what the affection of 
the former, and what the strife-causing emulation of the latter is towards men. 
He will behold also the nature of the soul, and the diversity of animals 
(whether of those which live in the water, or of birds, or of wild beasts), and 
why each of the genera is subdivided into so many species; and what intention of 
the Creator, or what purpose of His wisdom, is concealed in each individual 
thing. He will become acquainted, too, with the reason why certain properties 
are found associated with certain roots or herbs, and why, on the other hand, 
evil effects are averted by other herbs and roots. He will know, moreover, the 
nature of the apostate angels, and the reason why they have power to flatter in 
some things those who do not despise them with the whole power of faith, and why 
they exist for the purpose of deceiving and leading men astray. He will learn, 
too, the judgment of Divine Providence on each individual thing; and that, of 
those events which happen to men, none occur by accident or chance, but in 
accordance with a plan so carefully considered, and so stupendous, that it does 
not overlook even the number of the hairs of the heads, not merely of the 
saints, but perhaps of all human beings, and the plan of which providential 
government extends even to caring for the sale of two sparrows for a denarius, 
whether sparrows there be understood figuratively or literally. Now indeed this 
providential government is still a subject of investigation, but then it will be 
fully manifested. From all which we are to suppose, that meanwhile not a little 
time may pass by until the reason of those things only which are upon the earth 
be pointed out to the worthy and deserving after their departure from life, that 
by the knowledge of all these things, and by the grace of full knowledge, they 
may enjoy an unspeakable joy. Then, if that atmosphere which is between heaven 
and earth is not devoid of inhabitants, and those of a rational kind, as the 
apostle says, "Wherein in times past ye walked according to the course of this 
world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit who now 
worketh in the children of disobedience." And again he says, "We shall be caught 
up in the clouds to meet Christ in the air, and so shall we ever be with the 
Lord." 
6. We are therefore to suppose that the saints will remain there until they 
recognise the twofold mode of government in those things which are performed in 
the air. And when I say "twofold mode," I mean this: When we were upon earth, we 
saw either animals or trees, and beheld the differences among them, and also the 
very great diversity among men; but although we saw these things, we did not 
understand the reason of them; and this only was suggested to us from the 
visible diversity, that we should examine and inquire upon what principle these 
things were either created or diversely arranged. And a zeal or desire for 
knowledge of this kind being conceived by us on earth, the full understanding 
and comprehension of it will be granted after death, if indeed the result should 
follow according to our expectations. When, therefore, we shall have fury 
comprehended its nature, we shall understand in a twofold manner what we saw on 
earth. Some such view, then, must we hold regarding this abode in the air. I 
think, therefore, that all the saints who depart from this life will remain in 
some place situated on the earth, which holy Scripture calls paradise, as in 
some place of instruction, and, so to speak, class-room or school of souls, in 
which they are to be instructed regarding all the things which they had seen on 
earth, and are to receive also some information respecting things that are to 
follow in the future, as even when in this life they had obtained in some degree 
indications of future events, although "through a glass darkly," all of which 
are revealed more clearly and distinctly to the saints in their proper time and 
place. If any one indeed be pure in heart, and holy in mind, and more practised 
in perception, he will, by making more rapid progress, quickly ascend to a place 
in the air, and reach the kingdom of heaven, through those mansions, so to 
speak, in the various places which the Greeks have termed spheres, i.e., globes, 
but which holy Scripture has called heavens; in each of which he will first see 
clearly what is done there, and in the second place, will discover the reason 
why things are so done: and thus he will in order pass through all gradations, 
following Him who hath passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, who said, 
"I will that where I am, these may be also." And of this diversity of places He 
speaks, when He says, "In My Father's house are many mansions." He Himself is 
everywhere, and passes swiftly through all things; nor are we any longer to 
understand Him as existing in those narrow Limits in which He was once confined 
for our sakes, i.e., not in that circumscribed body which He occupied on earth, 
when dwelling among men, according to which He might be considered as enclosed 
in some one place. 
7. When, then, the saints shall have reached the celestial abodes, they will 
clearly see the nature of the stars one by one, and will under stand whether 
they are endued with life, or their condition, whatever it is. 
And they will comprehend also the other reasons for the works of God, which 
He Himself will reveal to them. For He will show to them, as to children, the 
causes of things and the power of His creation, and will explain why that star 
was placed in that particular quarter of the sky, and why it was separated from 
another by so great an intervening space; what, e.g., would have been the 
consequence if it had been nearer or more remote; or if that star had been 
larger than this, how the totality of things would not have remained the same, 
but all would have been transformed into a different condition of being. And so, 
when they have finished all those matters which are connected with the stars, 
and with the heavenly revolutions, they will come to those which are not seen, 
or to those whose names only we have heard, and to things which are invisible, 
which the Apostle Paul has informed us are numerous, although what they are, or 
what difference may exist among them, we cannot even conjecture by our feeble 
intellect. And thus the rational nature, growing by each individual step, not as 
it grew in this life in flesh, and body, and soul, but enlarged in understanding 
and in power of perception, is raised as a mind already perfect to perfect 
knowledge, no longer at all impeded by those carnal senses, but increased in 
intellectual growth; and ever gazing purely, and, so to speak, face to face, on 
the causes of things, it attains perfection, firstly, viz., that by which it 
ascends to (the truth), and secondly, that by which it abides in it, having 
problems and the understanding of things, and the causes of events, as the food 
on which it may feast. For as in this life our bodies grow physically to what 
they are, through a sufficiency of food in early life supplying the means of 
increase, but after the due height has been attained we use food no longer to 
grow, but to live, and to be preserved in life by it; so also I think that the 
mind, when it has attained perfection, eats and avails itself of suitable and 
appropriate food in such a degree, that nothing ought to be either deficient or 
superfluous. And in all things this food is to be understood as the 
contemplation and understanding of God, which is of a measure appropriate and 
suitable to this nature, which was made and created; and this measure it is 
proper should be observed by every one of those who are beginning to see God, 
i.e., to understand Him through purity of heart. 

