
Origen












Origen. Contra Celsus
BOOK II. 
CHAP. I. 
THE first book of our answer to the treatise of Celsus, entitled A True 
Discourse, which con-eluded with the representation of the Jew addressing Jesus, 
having now extended to a sufficient length, we intend the present part as a 
reply to the charges brought by him against those who have been converted from 
Judaism to Christianity. And we call attention, in the first place, to this 
special question, viz., why Celsus, when he had once resolved upon the 
introduction of individuals upon the stage of his book, did not represent the 
Jew as addressing the converts from heathenism rather than those from Judaism, 
seeing that his discourse, if directed to us, would have appeared more likely to 
produce an impression. But probably this claimant to universal knowledge does 
not know what is appropriate in the matter of such representations; and 
therefore let us proceed to consider what he has to say to the converts from 
Judaism. He asserts that "they have forsaken the law of their fathers, in 
consequence of their minds being led captive by Jesus; that they have been most 
ridiculously deceived, and that they have become deserters to another name and 
to another mode of life." Here he has not observed that the Jewish converts have 
not deserted the law of their fathers, inasmuch as they live according to its 
prescriptions, receiving their very name from the poverty of the law, according 
to the literal acceptation of the word; for Ebion signifies "poor" among the 
Jews, and those Jews who have received Jesus as Christ are called by the name of 
Ebionites. Nay, Peter himself seems to have observed for a considerable time the 
Jewish observances enjoined by the law of Moses, not having yet learned from 
Jesus to ascend from the law that is regulated according to the letter, to that 
which is interpreted according to the spirit,--a fact which we learn from the 
Acts of the Apostles. For on the day after the angel of God appeared to 
Cornelius, suggesting to him "to send to Joppa, to Simon surnamed Peter," Peter 
"went up into the upper room to pray about the sixth hour. And he became very 
hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made ready he fell into a trance, 
and saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had been 
a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth; wherein were 
all manner of four-footed beasts, and creeping things of the earth, and fowls of 
the air. And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter; kill, and eat. But Peter 
said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean. 
And the voice spake unto him again the second time, What God hath cleansed, that 
call thou not common." Now observe how, by this instance, Peter is represented 
as still observing the Jewish customs respecting clean and unclean animals. And 
from the narrative that follows, it is manifest that he, as being yet a Jew, and 
living according to their traditions, and despising those who were beyond the 
pale of Judaism, stood in need of a vision to lead him to communicate to 
Cornelius (who was not an Israelite according to the flesh), and to those who 
were with him, the word of faith. Moreover, in the Epistle to the Galatians, 
Paul states that Peter, still from fear of the Jews, ceased upon the arrival of 
James to eat with the Gentiles, and "separated himself from them, fearing them 
that were of the circumcision;" and the rest of the Jews, and Barnabas also, 
followed the same course. And certainly it was quite consistent that those 
should not abstain from the observance of Jewish usages who were sent to 
minister to the circumcision, when they who "seemed to be pillars" gave the 
right hand of fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, in order that, while devoting 
themselves to the circumcision, the latter might preach to the Gentiles. And why 
do I mention that they who preached to the circumcision withdrew and separated 
themselves from the heathen, when even Paul himself "became as a Jew to the 
Jews, that he might gain the Jews?" Wherefore also in the Acts of the Apostles 
it is related that he even brought an offering to the altar, that he might 
satisfy the Jews that he was no apostate from their law. Now, if Celsus had been 
acquainted with all these circumstances, he would not have represented the Jew 
holding such language as this to the converts from Judaism: "What induced you, 
my fellow-citizens, to abandon the law of your fathers, and to allow your minds 
to be led captive by him with whom we have just conversed, and thus be most 
ridiculously deluded, so as to become deserters from us to another name, and to 
the practices of another life?" 
CHAP. II. 
Now, since we are upon the subject of Peter, and of the teachers of 
Christianity to the circumcision, I do not deem it out of place to quote a 
certain declaration of Jesus taken from the Gospel according to John, and to 
give the explanation of the same. For it is there related that Jesus said: "I 
have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when 
He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide you into all the truth: for He 
shall not speak of Himself; but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He speak." 
And when we inquire what were the "many things" referred to in the passage which 
Jesus had to say to His disciples, but which they were not then able to bear, I 
have to observe that, probably because the apostles were Jews, and had been 
trained up according to the letter of the Mosaic law, He was unable to tell them 
what was the true law, and how the Jewish worship consisted in the pattern and 
shadow of certain heavenly things, and how future blessings were foreshadowed by 
the injunctions regarding meats and drinks, and festivals, and new moons, and 
sabbaths. These were many of the subjects which He had to explain to them; but 
as He saw that it was a work of exceeding difficulty to root out of the mind 
opinions that have been almost born with a man, and amid which he has been 
brought up till he reached the period of maturity, and which have produced in 
those who have adopted them the belief that they are divine, and that it is an 
act of impiety to overthrow them; and to demonstrate by the superiority of 
Christian doctrine, that is, by the truth, in a manner to convince the hearers, 
that such opinions were but "loss and dung," He postponed such a task to a 
future season--to that, namely, which followed His passion and resurrection. For 
the bringing of aid unseasonably to those who were not yet capable of receiving 
it, might have overturned the idea which they had already formed of Jesus, as 
the Christ, and the Son of the living God. And see if there is not some 
well-grounded reason for such a statement as this, "I have many things to say 
unto you, but ye cannot hear them now;" seeing there are many points in the law 
which require to be explained and cleared up in a spiritual sense, and these the 
disciples were in a manner unable to bear, having been born and brought up 
amongst Jews. I am of opinion, moreover, that since these rites were typical, 
and the truth was that which was to be taught them by the Holy Spirit, these 
words were added, "When He is come who is the Spirit of truth, He will lead you 
into all the truth;" as if He had said, into all the truth about those things 
which, being to you but types, ye believed to constitute a true worship which ye 
rendered unto God. And so, according to the promise of Jesus, the Spirit of 
truth came to Peter, saying to him, with regard to the four-footed beasts, and 
creeping things of the earth, and fowls of the air: "Arise, Peter; kill, and 
eat." And the Spirit came to him while he was still in a state of superstitious 
ignorance; for he said, in answer to the divine command, "Not so Lord; for I 
have never yet eaten anything common or unclean." He instructed him, however, in 
the true and spiritual meaning of meats, by saying, "What God hath cleansed, 
that call not thou common." And so, after that vision, the Spirit of truth, 
which conducted Peter into all the truth, told him the many things which he was 
unable to bear when Jesus was still with him in the flesh. But I shall have 
another opportunity of explaining those matters, which are connected with the 
literal acceptation of the Mosaic law. 
CHAP. III. 
Our present object, however, is to expose the ignorance of Celsus, who makes 
this Jew of his address his fellow-citizen and the Israelitish converts in the 
following manner: "What induced you to abandon the law of your fathers?" etc. 
Now, how should they have abandoned the law of their fathers, who are in the 
habit of rebuking those who do not listen to its commands, saying, "Tell me, ye 
who read the law, do ye not hear the law? For it is written, that Abraham had 
two sons;" and so on, down to the place, "which things are an allegory," etc.? 
And how have they abandoned the law of their fathers, who are ever speaking of 
the usages of their fathers in such words as these: "Or does not the law say 
these things also? For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle 
the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God care for oxen? or saith 
He it altogether for our sakes? for for our sakes it was written," and so on? 
Now, how confused is the reasoning of the Jew in regard to these matters 
(although he had it in his power to speak with greater effect) when he says: 
"Certain among you have abandoned the usages of our fathers under a pretence of 
explanations and allegories; and some of you, although, as ye pretend, 
interpreting them in a spiritual manner, nevertheless do observe the customs of 
our fathers; and some of you, without any such interpretation, are willing to 
accept Jesus as the subject of prophecy, and to keep the law of Moses according 
to the customs of the fathers, as having in the words the whole mind of the 
Spirit." Now how was Celsus able to see these things so clearly in this place, 
when in the subsequent parts of his work he makes mention of certain godless 
heresies altogether alien from the doctrine of Jesus, and even of others which 
leave the Creator out of account altogether, and does not appear to know that 
there are Israelites who are converts to Christianity, and who have not 
abandoned the law of their fathers? It was not his object to investigate 
everything here in the spirit of truth, and to accept whatever he might find to 
be useful; but he composed these statements in the spirit of an enemy, and with 
a desire to overthrow everything as soon as he heard it. 
CHAP. IV. 
The Jew, then, continues his address to converts from his own nation thus: 
"Yesterday and the day before, when we visited with punishment the man who 
deluded you, ye became apostates from the law of your fathers;" showing by such 
statements (as we have just demonstrated) anything but an exact knowledge of the 
truth. But what he advances afterwards seems to have some force, when he says: 
"How is it that you take the beginning of your system from our worship, and when 
you have made some progress you treat it with disrespect, although you have no 
other foundation to show for your doctrines than our law?" Now, certainly the 
introduction to Christianity is through the Mosaic worship and the prophetic 
writings; and after the introduction, it is in the interpretation and 
explanation of these that progress takes place, while those who are introduced 
prosecute their investigations into "the mystery according to revelation, which 
was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest in the 
Scriptures of the prophets," and by the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. But 
they who advance in the knowledge of Christianity do not, as ye allege, treat 
the things written in the law with disrespect. On the contrary, they bestow upon 
them greater honour, showing what a depth of wise and mysterious reasons is 
contained in these writings, which are not fully comprehended by the Jews, who 
treat them superficially, and as if they were in some degree even fabulous. And 
what absurdity should there be in our system--that is, the Gospel--having the 
law for its foundation, when even the Lord Jesus Himself said to those who would 
not believe upon Him: "If ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed Me, for 
he wrote of Me. But if ye do not believe his writings, how shall ye believe My 
words?" Nay, even one of the evangelists--Mark--says: "The beginning of the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is written in the prophet Isaiah, Behold, I send 
My messenger before Thy face, who shall prepare Thy way before Thee," which 
shows that the beginning of the Gospel is connected with the Jewish writings. 
What force, then, is there in the objection of the Jew of Celsus, that "if any 
one predicted to us that the Son of God was to visit mankind, he was one of our 
prophets, and the prophet of our God?" Or how is it a charge against 
Christianity, that John, who baptized Jesus, was a Jew? For although He was a 
Jew, it does not follow that every believer, whether a convert from heathenism 
or from Judaism, must yield a literal obedience to the law of Moses. 
CHAP. V. 
After these matters, although Celsus becomes tautological in his statements 
about Jesus, repeating for the second time that "he was punished by the Jews for 
his crimes," we shall not again take up the defence, being satisfied with what 
we have already said. But, in the next place, as this Jew of his disparages the 
doctrine regarding the resurrection of the dead, and the divine judgment, and of 
the rewards to be bestowed upon the just, and of the fire which is to devour the 
wicked, as being stale opinions, and thinks that he will overthrow Christianity 
by asserting that there is nothing new in its teaching upon these points, we 
have to say to him, that our Lord, seeing the conduct of the Jews not to be at 
all in keeping with the teaching of the prophets, inculcated by a parable that 
the kingdom of God would be taken from them, and given to the converts from 
heathenism. For which reason, now, we may also see of a truth that all the 
doctrines of the Jews of the present day are mere trifles and fables, since they 
have not the light that proceeds from the knowledge of the Scriptures; whereas 
those of the Christians are the truth, having power to raise and elevate the 
soul and understanding of man, and to persuade him to seek a citizenship, not 
like the earthly Jews here below, but in heaven. And this result shows itself 
among those who are able to see the grandeur of the ideas contained in the law 
and the prophets, and who are able to commend them to others. 
CHAP. VI. 
But let it be granted that Jesus observed all the JewiSh usages, including 
even their sacrificial observances, what does that avail to prevent our 
recognising Him as the Son of God? Jesus, then, is the Son of God, who gave the 
law and the prophets; and we, who belong to the Church, do not transgress the 
law, but have escaped the mythologizings of the Jews, and have our minds 
chastened and educated by the mystical contemplation of the law and the 
prophets. For the prophets themselves, as not resting the sense of these Words 
in the plain history which they relate, nor in the legal enactments taken 
according to the word and letter, express themselves somewhere, when about to 
relate histories, in words like this, "I will open my mouth in parables, I will 
utter hard sayings of old;" and in another place, when offering up a prayer 
regarding the law as being obscure, and needing divine help for its 
comprehension, they offer up this prayer, "Open Thou mine eyes, that I may 
behold wondrous things out of Thy law." 
CHAP. VII. 
Moreover, let them show where there is to be found even the appearance of 
language dictated by arrogance and proceeding from Jesus. For how could an 
arrogant man thus express himself "Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of 
heart, and you shall find rest for your souls?" or how can He be styled 
arrogant, who after supper laid aside His garments in the presence of His 
disciples, and, after girding Himself with a towel, and pouring water into a 
basin, proceeded to wash the feet of each disciple, and rebuked him who was 
unwilling to allow them to be washed, with the words, "Except I wash thee, thou 
hast no part with Me? Or how could He be called such who said, "I was amongst 
you, not as he that sitteth at meat, but as he that serveth?" And let any one 
show what were the falsehoods which He uttered, and let him point out what are 
great and what are small falsehoods, that he may prove Jesus to have been guilty 
of the former. And there is yet another way in which we may confute him. For as 
one falsehood is not less or more false than another, so one truth is not less 
or more true than another. And what charges of impiety he has to bring against 
Jesus, let the Jew of Celsus especially bring forward. Was it impious to abstain 
from corporeal circumcision, and from a literal Sabbath, and literal festivals, 
and literal new moons, and from clean and unclean meats, and to turn the mind to 
the good and true and spiritual law of God, while at the same time he who was an 
ambassador for Christ knew how to become to the Jews as a Jew, that he might 
gain the Jews, and to those who are under the law, as under the law, that he 
might gain those who are under the law? 
CHAP. VIII. 
He says, further, that "many other persons would appear such as Jesus was, to 
those who were willing to be deceived." Let this Jew of Celsus then show us, not 
many persons, nor even a few, but a single individual, such as Jesus was, 
introducing among the human race, with the power that was manifested in Him, a 
system of doctrine and opinions beneficial to human life, and which converts men 
from the practice of wickedness. He says, moreover, that this charge is brought 
against the Jews by the Christian converts, that they have not believed in Jesus 
as in God. Now on this point we have, in the preceding pages, offered a 
preliminary defence, showing at the same time in what respects we understand Him 
to be God, and in what we take Him to be man. "How should we," he continues, 
"who have made known to all men that there is to come from God one who is to 
punish the wicked, treat him with disregard when he came?" And to this, as an 
exceedingly silly argument, it does not seem to me reasonable to offer any 
answer. It is as if some one were to say, "How could we, who teach temperance, 
commit any act of licentiousness? or we, who are ambassadors for righteousness, 
be guilty of any wickedness?" For as these inconsistencies are found among men, 
so, to say that they believed the prophets when speaking of the future advent of 
Christ, and yet refused their belief to Him when He came, agreeably to prophetic 
statement, was quite in keeping with human nature. And since we must add another 
reason, we shall remark that this very result was foretold by the prophets. 
Isaiah distinctly declares: "Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; 
and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive: for the heart of this people 
has become fat," etc. And let them explain why it was predicted to the Jews, 
that although they both heard and saw, they would not understand what was said, 
nor perceive what was seen as they ought. For it is indeed manifest, that when 
they beheld Jesus they did not see who He was; and when they heard Him, they did 
not understand from His words the divinity that was in Him, and which 
transferred God's providential care, hitherto exercised over the Jews, to His 
converts from the heathen. Therefore we may see, that after the advent of Jesus 
the Jews were altogether abandoned, and possess now none of what were considered 
their ancient glories, so that there is no indication of any Divinity abiding 
amongst them. For they have no longer prophets nor miracles, traces of which to 
a considerable extent are still found among Christians, and some of them more 
remarkable than any that existed among the Jews; and these we ourselves have 
witnessed, if our testimony may be received? But the Jew of Celsus exclaims: 
"Why did we treat him, whom we announced beforehand, with dishonour? Was it that 
we might be chastised more than others?" To which we have to answer, that on 
account of their unbelief, and the other insults which they heaped upon Jesus, 
the Jews will not only suffer more than others in that judgment which is 
believed to impend over the world, but have even already endured such 
sufferings. For what nation is an exile from their own metropolis, and from the 
place sacred to the worship of their fathers, save the Jews alone? And these 
calamities they have suffered, because they were a most wicked nation, which, 
although guilty of many other sins, yet has been punished so severely for none, 
as for those that were committed against our Jesus. 
CHAP. IX. 
The Jew continues his discourse thus: "How should we deem him to be a God, 
who not only in other respects, as was currently reported, performed none of his 
promises, but who also, after we had convicted him, and condemned him as. 
deserving of punishment, was found attempting to conceal himself, and 
endeavouring to escape in a most disgraceful manner, and who was betrayed by 
those whom he called disciples? And yet," he continues, "he who was a God could 
neither flee nor be led away a prisoner; and least of all could he be deserted 
and delivered up by those who had been his associates, and had shared all things 
in common, and had had him for their teacher, who was deemed to be a Saviour, 
and a son of the greatest God, and an angel." To which we reply, that even we do 
not suppose the body of Jesus, which was then an object of sight and perception, 
to have been God. And why do I say His body? Nay, not even His soul, of which it 
is related, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." But as, according 
to the Jewish manner of speaking, "I am the Lord, the God of all flesh," and, 
"Before Me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after Me," God is 
believed to be He who employs the soul and body of the prophet as an instrument; 
and as, according to the Greeks, he who says, "I know both the number of the 
sand, and the measures of the sea, And I understand a dumb man, and hear him who 
does not speak," is considered to be a god when speaking, and making himself 
heard through the Pythian priestess; so, according to our view, it was the Logos 
God, and Son of the God of all things, who spake in Jesus these words, "I am the 
way, and the truth, and the life;" and these, "I am the door;" and these, "I am 
the living bread that came down from heaven;" and other expressions similar to 
these. We therefore charge the Jews with not acknowledging Him to be God, to 
whom testimony was borne in many passages by the prophets, to the effect that He 
was a mighty power, and a God next to the God and Father of all things. For we 
assert that it was to Him the Father gave the command, when in the Mosaic 
account of the creation He uttered the words, "Let there be light," and "Let 
there be a firmament," and gave the injunctions with regard to those other 
creative acts which were performed; and that to Him also were addressed the 
words, "Let Us make man in Our own image and likeness;" and that the Logos, when 
commanded, obeyed all the Father's will. And we make these statements not from 
our own conjectures, but because we believe the prophecies circulated among the 
Jews, in which it is said of God, and of the works of creation, in express 
words, as follows: "He spake, and they were made; He commanded, and they were 
created." Now if God gave the command, and the creatures were formed, who, 
according to the view of the spirit of prophecy, could He be that was able to 
carry out such commands of the Father, save Him who, so to speak, is the living 
Logos and the Truth? And that the Gospels do not consider him who in Jesus said 
these words, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life," to have been of so 
circumscribed a nature? as to have an existence nowhere out of the soul and body 
of Jesus, is evident both from many considerations, and from a few instances of 
the following kind which we shall quote. John the Baptist, when predicting that 
the Son of God was to appear immediately, not in that body and soul, but as 
manifesting Himself everywhere, says regarding Him: "There stands in the midst 
of you One whom ye know not, who cometh after me." For if he had thought that 
the Son of God was only there, where was the visible body of Jesus, how could he 
have said, "There stands in the midst of you One whom ye know not?" And Jesus 
Himself, in raising the minds of His disciples to higher thoughts of the Son of 
God, says: "Where two or three are gathered together in My name, there am I in 
the midst of you." And of the same nature is His promise to His disciples: "Lo, 
I am with you alway, even to the end of the world." And we quote these passages, 
making no distinction between the Son of God and Jesus. For the soul and body of 
Jesus formed, after the oikonomia, one being with the Logos of God. Now 
if, according to Paul's teaching, "he that is joined unto the Lord is one 
spirit," every one who understands what being joined to the Lord is, and who has 
been actually joined to Him, is one spirit with the Lord; how should not that 
being be one in a far greater and more divine degree, which was once united with 
the Logos of God? He, indeed, manifested Himself among the Jews as the power of 
God, by the miracles which He performed, which Celsus suspected were 
accomplished by sorcery, but which by the Jews of that time were attributed I 
know not why, to Beelzebub, in the words "He casteth out devils through 
Beelzebub, the prince of the devils." But these our Saviour convicted of 
uttering the greatest absurdities, from the fact that the kingdom of evil was 
not yet come to an end. And this will be evident to all intelligent readers of 
the Gospel narrative, which it is not now the time to explain. 
CHAP. X. 
But what promise did Jesus make which He did not perform? Let Celsus produce 
any instance of such, and make good his charge. But he will be unable to do so, 
especially since it is from mistakes, arising either from misapprehension of the 
Gospel narratives, or from Jewish stories, that he thinks to derive the charges 
which he brings against Jesus or against ourselves. Moreover, again, when the 
Jew says, "We both found him guilty, and condemned him as deserving of death," 
let them show how they who sought to concoct false witness against Him proved 
Him to be guilty. Was not the great charge against Jesus, which His accusers 
brought forward, this, that He said, "I am able to destroy the temple of God, 
and after three days to raise it up again?" But in so saying, He spake of the 
temple of His body; while they thought, not being able to understand the meaning 
of the speaker, that His reference was to the temple of stone, which was treated 
by the Jews with greater respect than He was who ought to have been honoured as 
the true Temple of God--the Word, and the Wisdom, and the Truth. And who can say 
that "Jesus attempted to make His escape by disgracefully concealing Himself?" 
Let any one point to an act deserving to be called disgraceful. And when he 
adds, "he was taken prisoner," I would say that, if to be taken prisoner implies 
an act done against one's will, then Jesus was not taken prisoner; for at the 
fitting time He did not prevent Himself falling into the hands of men, as the 
Lamb of God, that He might take away the sin of the world. For, knowing all 
things that were to come upon Him, He went forth, and said to them, "Whom seek 
ye?" and they answered, "Jesus of Nazareth;" and He said unto them, "I am He." 
And Judas also, who betrayed Him, was standing with them. When, therefore, He 
had said to them, "I am He," they went backwards and fell to the ground. Again 
He asked them, "Whom seek ye?" and they said again, "Jesus of Nazareth." Jesus 
said to them, "I told you I am He; if then ye seek Me, let these go away." 
Nay, even to Him who wished to help Him, and who smote the high priest's 
servant, and cut off his ear, He said: "Put up thy sword into its sheath: for 
all they who draw the sword shall perish by the sword. Thinkest thou that I 
cannot even now pray to My Father, and He will presently give Me more than 
twelve legions of angels? But how then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, that 
thus it must be?" And if any one imagines these statements to be inventions of 
the writers of the Gospels, why should not those statements rather be regarded 
as inventions which proceeded from a spirit of hatred and hostility against 
Jesus and the Christians? and these the truth, which proceed from those who 
manifest the sincerity of their feelings towards Jesus, by enduring everything, 
whatever it may be, for the sake of His words? For the reception by the 
disciples of such power of endurance and resolution continued even to death, 
with a disposition of mind that would not invent regarding their Teacher what 
was not true, is a very evident proof to all candid judges that they were fully 
persuaded of the truth of what they wrote, seeing they submitted to trials so 
numerous and so severe, for the sake of Him whom they believed to be the Son of 
God. 
CHAP. XI. 
In the next place, that He was betrayed by those whom He called His 
disciples, is a circumstance which the Jew of Celsus learned from the Gospels; 
calling the one Judas, however, "many disciples," that he might seem to add 
force to the accusation. Nor did he trouble himself to take note of all that is 
related concerning Judas; how this Judas, having come to entertain opposite and 
conflicting opinions regarding his Master neither opposed Him with his whole 
soul, nor yet with his whole soul preserved the respect due by a pupil to his 
teacher. For be that betrayed Him gave to the multitude that came to apprehend 
Jesus, a sign, saying, "Whomsoever I shall kiss, it is he; seize ye 
him,"--retaining still some element of respect for his Master: for unless he had 
done so, he would have betrayed Him, even publicly, without any pretence of 
affection. This circumstance, therefore, will satisfy all with regard to the 
purpose of Judas, that along with his covetous disposition, and his wicked 
design to betray his Master, he had still a feeling of a mixed character in his 
mind, produced in him by the words of Jesus, which had the appearance (so to 
speak) of some remnant of good. For it is related that, "when Judas, who 
betrayed Him, knew that He was condemned, he repented, and brought back the 
thirty pieces of silver to the high priest and elders, saying, I have sinned, in 
that I have betrayed the innocent blood. But they said, What is that to us? see 
thou to that;"--and that, having thrown the money down in the temple, he 
departed, and went and hanged himself. But if this covetous Judas, who also 
stole the money placed in the bag for the relief of the poor, repented, and 
brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, it is 
clear that the instructions of Jesus had been able to produce some feeling of 
repentance in his mind, and were not altogether despised and loathed by this 
traitor. Nay, the declaration, "I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the 
innocent blood," was a public acknowledgment of his crime. Observe, also, how 
exceedingly passionate was the sorrow for his sins that proceeded from that 
repentance, and which would not suffer him any longer to live; and how, after he 
had cast the money down in the temple, he withdrew, and went away and hanged 
himself: for he passed sentence upon himself, showing what a power the teaching 
of Jesus had over this sinner Judas, this thief and traitor, who could not 
always treat with contempt what he had learned from Jesus. Will Celsus and his 
friends now say that those proofs which show that the apostasy of Judas was not 
a complete apostasy, even after his attempts against his Master, are inventions, 
and that this alone is true, viz., that one of His disciples betrayed Him; and 
will they add to the Scriptural account that he betrayed Him also with his whole 
heart? To act in this spirit of hostility with the same writings, both as to 
what we are to believe and what we are not to believe, is absurd. And if we must 
make a statement regarding Judas which may overwhelm our opponents with shame, 
we would say that, in the book of Psalms, the whole of the 108th contains a 
prophecy about Judas, the beginning of which is this: "O God, hold not Thy peace 
before my praise; for the mouth of the sinner, and the mouth of the crafty man, 
are opened against me." And it is predicted in this psalm, both that Judas 
separated himself from the number of the apostles on account of his sins, and 
that another was selected in his place; and this is shown by the words: "And his 
bishopric let another take." But suppose now that He had been betrayed by some 
one of His disciples, who was possessed by a worse spirit than Judas, and who 
had completely poured out, as it were, all the words which he had heard from 
Jesus, what would this contribute to an accusation against Jesus or the 
Christian religion? And how will this demonstrate its doctrine to be false? We 
have replied in the preceding chapter to the statements which follow this, 
showing that Jesus was not taken prisoner when attempting to flee, but that He 
gave Himself up voluntarily for the sake of us all. Whence it follows, that even 
if He were bound, He was bound agreeably to His own will; thus teaching us the 
lesson that we should undertake similar things for the sake of religion in no 
spirit of unwillingness. 

CHAP. XII. 
And the following appear to me to be childish assertions, viz., that "no good 
general and leader of great multitudes was ever betrayed; nor even a wicked 
captain of robbers and commander of very wicked men, who seemed to be of any use 
to his associates; but Jesus, having been betrayed by his subordinates, neither 
governed like a good general, nor, after deceiving his disciples, produced in 
the minds of the victims of his deceit that feeling of good-will which, so to 
speak, would be manifested towards a brigand chief." Now one might find many 
accounts of generals who were betrayed by their own soldiers, and of robber 
chiefs who were captured through the instrumentality of those who did not keep 
their bargains with them. But grant that no general or robber chief was ever 
betrayed, what does that contribute to the establishment of the fact as a charge 
against Jesus, that one of His disciples became His betrayer? And since Celsus 
makes an ostentatious exhibition of philosophy, I would ask of him, If, then, it 
was a charge against Plato, that Aristotle, after being his pupil for twenty 
years, went away and assailed his doctrine of the immortality of the soul, and 
styled the ideas of Plato the merest trifling? And if I were still in doubt, I 
would continue thus: Was Plato no longer mighty in dialectics, nor able to 
defend his views, after Aristotle had taken his departure; and, on that account, 
are the opinions of Plato false? Or may it not be, that while Plato is true, as 
the pupils of his philosophy would maintain, Aristotle was guilty of wickedness 
and ingratitude towards his teacher? Nay, Chrysippus also, in many places of his 
writings, appears to assail Cleanthes, introducing novel opinions opposed to his 
views, although the latter had been his teacher when he was a young man, and 
began the study of philosophy. Aristotle, indeed, is said to have been Plato's 
pupil for twenty years, and no inconsiderable period was spent by Chrysippus in 
the school of Cleanthes; while Judas did not remain so much as three years with 
Jesus. But from the narratives of the lives of philosophers we might take many 
instances similar to those on which Celsus founds a charge against Jesus on 
account of Judas. Even the Pythagoreans erected cenotaphs to those who, after 
betaking themselves to philosophy, fell back again into their ignorant mode of 
life; and yet neither was Pythagoras nor his followers, on that account, weak in 
argument and demonstration. 
CHAP. XIII. 
This Jew of Celsus continues, after the above, in the following fashion: 
"Although he could state many things regarding the events of the life of Jesus 
which are true, and not like those which are recorded by the disciples, he 
willingly omits them." What, then, are those true statements, unlike the 
accounts in the Gospels, which the Jew of Celsus passes by without mention? Or 
is he only employing what appears to be a figure of speech, in pretending to 
have something to say, while in reality he had nothing to produce beyond the 
Gospel narrative which could impress the hearer with a feeling of its truth, and 
furnish a clear ground of accusation against Jesus and His doctrine? And he 
charges the disciples with having invented the statement that Jesus foreknew and 
foretold all that happened to Him; but the truth of this statement we shall 
establish, although Celsus may not like it, by means of many other predictions 
uttered by the Saviour, in which He foretold what would befall the Christians in 
after generations. And who is there who would not be astonished at this 
prediction: "Ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake, for a 
testimony against them and the Gentiles;" and at any others which He may have 
delivered respecting the future persecution of His disciples? For what system of 
opinions ever existed among men on account of which others are punished, so that 
any one of the accusers of Jesus could say that, foreseeing the impiety or 
falsity of his opinions to be the ground of an accusation against them he 
thought that this would redound to his credit, that he had so predicted 
regarding it long before? Now if any deserve to be brought, on account of their 
opinions, before governors and kings, what others are they, save the Epicureans, 
who altogether deny the existence of providence? And also the Peripatetics, who 
say that prayers are of no avail, and sacrifices offered as to the Divinity? But 
some one will say that the Samaritans suffer persecution because of their 
religion. In answer to whom we shall state that the Sicarians, on account of the 
practice of circumcision, as mutilating themselves contrary to the established 
laws and the customs permitted to the Jews alone, are put to death. And you 
never hear a judge inquiring whether a Sicarian who strives to live according to 
this established religion of his will be released from punishment if he 
apostatizes, but will be led away to death if he con tinues firm; for the 
evidence of the circumcision is sufficient to ensure the death of him who has 
undergone it. But Christians alone, according to the prediction of their 
Saviour, "Ye shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake," are urged 
up to their last breath by their judges to deny Christianity, and to sacrifice 
according to the public customs; and after the oath of abjuration, to return to 
their homes, and to live in safety. And observe whether it is not with great 
authority that this declaration is uttered: "Whosoever therefore shall confess 
Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father who is in heaven. And 
whosoever shall deny Me before men," etc. And go back with me in thought to 
Jesus when He uttered these words, and see His predictions not yet accomplished. 
Perhaps you will say, in a spirit of incredulity, that he is talking folly, and 
speaking to no purpose, for his words will have no fulfilment; or, being in 
doubt about assenting to his words, you will say, that if these predictions be 
fulfilled, and the doctrine of Jesus be established, so that governors and kings 
think of destroying those who acknowledge Jesus, then we shall believe that he 
utters these prophecies as one who has received great power from God to implant 
this doctrine among the human race, and as believing that it will prevail. And 
who will not be filled with wonder, when he goes back in thought to Him who then 
taught and said, "This Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, for 
a testimony against them and the Gentiles," and beholds, agreeably to His words, 
the Gospel of Jesus Christ preached in the whole world under heaven to Greeks 
and Barbarians, wise and foolish alike? For the word, spoken with power, has 
gained the mastery over men of all sorts of nature, and it is impossible to see 
any race of men which has escaped accepting the teaching of Jesus. But let this 
Jew of Celsus, who does not believe that He foreknew all that happened to Him, 
consider how, while Jerusalem was still standing, and the whole Jewish worship 
celebrated in it, Jesus foretold what would befall it from the hand of the 
Romans. For they will not maintain that the acquaintances and pupils of Jesus 
Himself handed down His teaching contained in the Gospels without committing it 
to writing, and left His disciples without the memoirs of Jesus contained in 
their works. Now in these it is recorded, that "when ye shall see Jerusalem 
compassed about with armies, then shall ye know that the desolation thereof is 
nigh." But at that time there were no armies around Jerusalem, encompassing and 
enclosing and besieging it; for the siege began in the reign of Nero, and lasted 
till the government of Vespasian, whose son Titus destroyed Jerusalem, on 
account, as Josephus says, of James the Just, the brother of Jesus who was 
called Christ, but in reality, as the truth makes dear, on account of Jesus 
Christ the Son of God. 
CHAP. XIV. 
Celsus, however, accepting or granting that Jesus foreknew what would befall 
Him, might think to make light of the admission, as he did in the case of the 
miracles, when he alleged that they were wrought by means of sorcery; for he 
might say that many persons by means of divination, either by auspices, or 
auguries, or sacrifices, or nativities, have come to the knowledge of what was 
to happen. But this concession he would not make, as being too great a one; and 
although he somehow granted that Jesus worked miracles, he thought to weaken the 
force of this by the charge of sorcery. Now Phlegon, in the thirteenth or 
fourteenth book, I think, of his Chronicles, not only ascribed to Jesus a 
knowledge of future events (although falling into confusion about some things 
which refer to Peter, as if they referred to Jesus), but also testified that the 
result corresponded to His predictions. So that he also, by these very 
admissions regarding foreknowledge, as if against his will, expressed his 
opinion that the doctrines taught by the fathers of our system were not devoid 
of divine power. 
CHAP. XV. 
Celsus continues: "The disciples of Jesus, having no undoubted fact on which 
to rely, devised the fiction that he foreknew everything before it happened;" 
not observing, or not wishing to observe, the love of truth which actuated the 
writers, who acknowledged that Jesus had told His disciples beforehand, "All ye 
shall be offended because of Me this night,"--a statement which was fulfilled by 
their all being offended; and that He predicted to Peter, "Before the cock crow, 
thou shall deny Me thrice," which was followed by Peter's threefold denial. Now 
if they had not been lovers of truth, but, as Celsus supposes, inventors of 
fictions, they would not have represented Peter as denying, nor His disciples as 
being offended. For although these events actually happened, who could have 
proved that they turned out in that manner? 
And yet, according to all probability, these were matters which ought to have 
been passed over in silence by men who wished to teach the readers of the 
Gospels to despise death for the sake of confessing Christianity. But now, 
seeing that the word, by its power, will gain the mastery over men, they related 
those facts which they have done, and which, I know not how, were neither to do 
any harm to their readers, nor to afford any pretext for denial. 
CHAP. XVI. 
Exceedingly weak is his assertion, that "the disciples of Jesus wrote such 
accounts regarding him, by way of extenuating the charges that told against him: 
as if," he says, "any one were to say that a certain person was a just man, and 
yet were to show that he was guilty of injustice; or that he was pious, and yet 
had committed murder; or that he was immortal, and yet was dead; subjoining to 
all these statements the remark that he had foretold all these things." Now his 
illustrations are at once seen to be inappropriate; for there is no absurdity in 
Him who had resolved that He would become a living pattern to men, as to the 
manner in which they were to regulate their lives, showing also how they ought 
to die for the sake of their religion, apart altogether from the fact that His 
death on behalf of men was a benefit to the whole world, as we proved in the 
preceding book. He imagines, moreover, that the whole of the confession of the 
Saviour's sufferings confirms his objection instead of weakening it. For he is 
not acquainted either with the philosophical remarks of Paul, or the statements 
of the prophets, on this subject. And it escaped him that certain heretics have 
declared that Jesus underwent His sufferings in appearance, not in reality. For 
had he known, he would not have said: "For ye do not even allege this, that he 
seemed to wicked men to suffer this punishment, though not undergoing it in 
reality; but, on the contrary, ye acknowledge that he openly suffered." But we 
do not view His sufferings as having been merely in appearance, in order that 
His resurrection also may not be a false, but a real event. For he who really 
died, actually arose, if he did arise; whereas he who appeared only to have 
died, did not in reality arise. But since the resurrection of Jesus Christ is a 
subject of mockery to unbelievers, we shall quote the words of Plato, that Erus 
the son of Armenius rose from the funeral pile twelve days after he had been 
laid upon it, and gave an account of what he had seen in Hades; and as we are 
replying to unbelievers, it will not be altogether useless to refer in this 
place to what Heraclides relates respecting the woman who was deprived of life. 
And many persons are recorded to have risen from their tombs, not only on the 
day of their burial, but also on the day following. What wonder is it, then, if 
in the case of One who performed many marvellous things, both beyond the power 
of man and with such fulness of evidence, that he who could not deny their 
performance, endeavoured to calumniate them by comparing them to acts of 
sorcery, should have manifested also in His death some greater display of divine 
power, so that His soul, if it pleased, might leave its body, and having 
performed certain offices out of it, might return again at pleasure? And such a 
declaration is Jesus said to have made in the Gospel of John, when He said: "No 
man taketh My life from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have power to lay it 
down, and I have power to take it again." And perhaps it was on this account 
that He hastened His departure from the body, that He might preserve it, and 
that His legs might not be broken, as were those of the robbers who were 
crucified with Him. "For the soldiers brake the legs of the first, and of the 
other who was crucified with Him; but when they came to Jesus, and saw that He 
was dead, they brake not His legs." We have accordingly answered the question," 
How is it credible that Jesus could have predicted these things?" And with 
respect to this, "How could the dead man be immortal?" let him who wishes to 
understand know, that it is not the dead man who is immortal, but He who rose 
from the dead. So far, indeed, was the dead man from being immortal, that even 
the Jesus before His decease--the compound being, who was to suffer death--was 
not immortal. For no one is immortal who is destined to die; but he is immortal 
when he shall no longer be subject to death. But "Christ, being raised from the 
dead, dieth no more: death hath no more dominion over Him;" although those may 
be unwilling to admit this who cannot understand how such things should be said. 

CHAP. XVII. 
Extremely foolish also is his remark, "What god, or spirit, or prudent man 
would not, on foreseeing that such events were to befall him, avoid them if he 
could; whereas he threw himself headlong into those things which he knew 
beforehand were to happen?" And yet Socrates knew that he would die after 
drinking the hemlock, and it was in his power, if he had allowed himself to be 
persuaded by Crito, by escaping from prison, to avoid these calamities; but 
nevertheless he decided, as it appeared to him consistent with fight reason, 
that it was better for him to die as became a philosopher, than to retain his 
life in a manner unbecoming one. Leonidas also, the Lacedaemonian general, 
knowing that he was on the point of dying with his followers at Thermopylae, did 
not make any effort to preserve his life by disgraceful means but said to his 
companions, "Let us go to breakfast, as we shall sup in Hades." And those who 
are interested in collecting stories of this kind will find numbers of them. 
Now, where is the wonder if Jesus, knowing all things that were to happen, did 
not avoid them, but encountered what He foreknew; when Paul, His own disciple, 
having heard what would befall him when he went up to Jerusalem, proceeded to 
face the danger, reproaching those who were weeping around him, and endeavouring 
to prevent him from going up to Jerusalem? Many also of our contemporaries, 
knowing well that if they made a confession of Christianity they would be put to 
death, but that if they denied it they would be liberated, and their property 
restored, despised life, and voluntarily selected death for the sake of their 
religion. 
CHAP. XVIII. 
After this the Jew makes another silly remark, saying, "How is it that, if 
Jesus pointed out beforehand both the traitor and the perjurer, they did not 
fear him as a God, and cease, the one from his intended treason, and the other 
from his perjury?" Here the learned Celsus did not see the contradiction in his 
statement: for if Jesus foreknew events as a God, then it was impossible for His 
foreknowledge to prove untrue; and therefore it was impossible for him who was 
known to Him as going to betray Him not to execute his purpose, nor for him who 
was rebuked as going to deny Him not to have been guilty of that crime. For if 
it had been possible for the one to abstain from the act of betrayal, and the 
other from that of denial, as having been warned of the consequences of these 
actions beforehand, then His words were no longer true, who predicted that the 
one would betray Him and the other deny Him. For if He had foreknowledge of the 
traitor, He knew the wickedness in which the treason originated, and this 
wickedness was by no means taken away by the foreknowledge. And, again, if He 
had ascertained that one would deny Him, He made that prediction from seeing the 
weakness out of which that act of denial would arise, and yet this weakness was 
not to be taken away thus at once, by the foreknowledge. But whence he derived 
the statement, "that these persons betrayed and denied him without manifesting 
any concern about him," I know not; for it was proved, with respect to the 
traitor, that it is false to say that he betrayed his master without an 
exhibition of anxiety regarding Him. 
And this was shown to be equally true of him who denied Him; for he went out, 
after the denial, and wept bitterly. 
CHAP. XIX. 
Superficial also is his objection, that "it is always the case when a man 
against whom a plot is formed, and who comes to the knowledge of it, makes known 
to the conspirators that he is acquainted with their design, that the latter are 
turned from their purpose, and keep upon their guard." For many have continued 
to plot even against those who were acquainted with their plans. And then, as if 
bringing his argument to a conclusion, he says: "Not because these things were 
predicted did they come to pass, for that is impossible; but since they have 
come to pass, their being predicted is shown to be a falsehood: for it is 
altogether impossible that those who heard beforehand of the discovery of their 
designs, should carry out their plans of betrayal and denial!" But if his 
premises are overthrown, then his conclusion also falls to the ground, viz., 
"that we are not to believe, because these things were predicted, that they have 
come to pass." Now we maintain that they not only came to pass as being 
possible, but also that, because they came to pass, the fact of their being 
predicted is shown to be true; for the truth regarding future events is judged 
of by results. It is false, therefore, as asserted by him, that the prediction 
of these events is proved to be untrue; and it is to no purpose that he says, 
"It is altogether impossible for those who heard beforehand that their designs 
were discovered, to carry out their plans of betrayal and denial." 
CHAP. XX. 
Let us see how he continues after this: "These events," he says, "he 
predicted as being a God, and the prediction must by all means come to pass. 
God, therefore, who above all others ought to do good to men, and especially to 
those of his own household, led on his own disciples and prophets, with whom he 
was in the habit of eating and drinking, to such a degree of wickedness, that 
they became impious and unholy men. Now, of a truth, he who shared a man's table 
would not be guilty of conspiring against him; but after banqueting with God, he 
became a conspirator. And, what is still more absurd, God himself plotted 
against the members of his own table, by converting them into traitors and 
villains!" Now, since you wish me to answer even those charges of Celsus which 
seem to me frivolous, the following is our reply to such statements. Celsus 
imagines that an event, predicted through foreknowledge, comes to pass because 
it was predicted; but we do not grant this, maintaining that he who foretold it 
was not the cause of its happening, because he foretold it would happen; but the 
future event itself, which would have taken place though not predicted, afforded 
the occasion to him, who was endowed with foreknowledge, of foretelling its 
occurrence. Now, certainly this result is present to the foreknowledge of him 
who predicts an event, when it is possible that it may or may not happen, viz., 
that one or other of these things will take place. For we do not assert that he 
who foreknows an event, by secretly taking away the possibility of its happening 
or not, makes any such declaration as this: "This shall infallibly happen, and 
it is impossible that it can be otherwise." And this remark applies to all the 
foreknowledge of events dependent upon ourselves, whether contained in the 
sacred Scriptures or in the histories of the Greeks. Now, what is called by 
logicians an" idle argument," which is a sophism, will be no sophism as far as 
Celsus can help, but according to sound reasoning it is a sophism. And that this 
may be seen, I shall take from the Scriptures the predictions regarding Judas, 
or the foreknowledge of our Saviour regarding him as the traitor; and from the 
Greek histories the oracle that was given to Laius, conceding for the present 
its truth, since it does not affect the argument. Now, in Ps. cviii., Judas is 
spoken of by the mouth of the Saviour, in words beginning thus: "Hold not Thy 
peace, O God of my praise; for the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the 
deceitful are opened against me." 
Now, if you carefully observe the contents of the psalm, you will find that, 
as it was foreknown that he would betray the Saviour, so also was he considered 
to be himself the cause of the betrayal, and deserving, on account of his 
wickedness, of the imprecations contained in the prophecy. For let him suffer 
these things," because," says the psalmist, "he remembered not to show mercy, 
but persecuted the poor and needy man." Wherefore it was possible for him to 
show mercy, and not to persecute him whom he did persecute. But although he 
might have done these things, he did not do them, but carried out the act of 
treason, so as to merit the curses pronounced against him in the prophecy. 
And in answer to the Greeks we shall quote the following oracular response to 
Laius, as recorded by the tragic poet, either in the exact words of the oracle 
or in equivalent terms. Future events are thus made known to him by the oracle: 
"Do not try to beget children against the will of the gods. For if you beget a 
son, your son shall murder you; and all your household shall wade in blood." Now 
from this it is clear that it was within the power of Laius not to try to beget 
children, for the oracle would not have commanded an impossibility; and it was 
also in his power to do the opposite, so that neither of these courses was 
compulsory. And the consequence of his not guarding against the begetting of 
children was, that he suffered from so doing the calamities described in the 
tragedies relating to (Edipus and Jocasta and their sons. Now that which is 
called the "idle argument," being a quibble, is such as might be applied, say in 
the case of a sick man, with the view of sophistically preventing him from 
employing a physician to promote his recovery; and it is something like this: 
"If it is decreed that you should recover from your disease, you will recover 
whether you call in a physician or not; but if it is decreed that you should not 
recover, you will not recover whether you call in a physician or no. But it is 
certainly decreed either that you should recover, or that you should not 
recover; and therefore it is in vain that you call in a physician." Now with 
this argument the following may be wittily compared: "If it is decreed that you 
should beget children, you will beget them, whether you have intercourse with a 
woman or not. But if it is decreed that you should not beget children, you will 
not do so, whether you have intercourse with a woman or no. Now, certainly, it 
is decreed either that you should beget children or not; therefore it is in vain 
that you have intercourse with a woman." For, as in the latter instance, 
intercourse with a woman is not employed in vain, seeing it is an utter 
impossibility for him who does not use it to beget children; so, in the former, 
if recovery from disease is to be accomplished by means of the healing art, of 
necessity the physician is summoned, and it is therefore false to say that "in 
vain do you call in a physician." We have brought forward all these 
illustrations on account of the assertion of this learned Celsus, that "being a 
God He predicted these things, and the predictions must by all means come to 
pass." Now, if by "by all means" he means "necessarily," we cannot admit this. 
For it was quite possible, also, that they might not come to pass. But if he 
uses "by all means" in the sense of "simple futurity," which nothing hinders 
from being true (although it was possible that they might not happen), he does 
not at all touch my argument; nor did it follow, from Jesus having predicted the 
acts of the traitor or the perjurer, that it was the same thing with His being 
the cause of such impious and unholy proceedings. For He who was amongst us, and 
knew what was in man, seeing his evil disposition, and foreseeing what he would 
attempt from his spirit of covetousness, and from his want of stable ideas of 
duty towards his Master, along with many other declarations, gave utterance to 
this also: "He that dippeth his hand with Me in the dish, the same shall betray 
Me." 
CHAP. XXI. 
Observe also the superficiality and manifest falsity of such a statement of 
Celsus, when he asserts "that he who was partaker of a man's table would not 
conspire against him; and if he would not conspire against a man, much less 
would he plot against a God after banqueting with him." For who does not know 
that many persons, after partaking of the salt on the table, have entered into a 
conspiracy against their entertainers? The whole of Greek and Barbarian history 
is full of such instances. And the Iambic poet of Paros, when upbraiding 
Lycambes with having violated covenants confirmed by the salt of the table, says 
to him:- "But thou hast broken a mighty oath--that, viz., by the salt of the 
table." 
And they who are interested in historical learning, and who give themselves 
wholly to it, to the neglect of other branches of knowledge more necessary for 
the conduct of life, can quote numerous instances, showing that they who shared 
in the hospitality of others entered into conspiracies against them. 
CHAP. XXII. 
He adds to this, as if he had brought together an argument with conclusive 
demonstrations and consequences, the following: "And, which is still more 
absurd, God himself conspired against those who sat at his table, by converting 
them into traitors and impious men." But how Jesus could either conspire or 
convert His disciples into traitors or impious men, it would be impossible for 
him to prove, save by means of such a deduction as any one could refute with the 
greatest ease. 
CHAP. XXIII. 
He continues in this strain: "If he had determined upon these things, and 
underwent chastisement in obedience to his Father, it is manifest that, being a 
God, and submitting voluntarily, those things that were done agreeably to his 
own decision were neither painful nor distressing." But he did not observe that 
here he was at once contradicting himself. For if he granted that He was 
chastised because He had determined upon these things, and had submitted Himself 
to His Father, it is clear that He actually suffered punishment, and it was 
impossible that what was inflicted on Him by His chastisers should not be 
painful, because pain is an involuntary thing. But if, because He was willing to 
suffer, His inflictions were neither painful nor distressing, how did He grant 
that "He was chastised?" He did not perceive that when Jesus had once, by His 
birth, assumed a body, He assumed one which was capable both of suffering pains, 
and those distresses incidental to humanity, if we are to understand by 
distresses what no one voluntarily chooses. Since, therefore, He voluntarily 
assumed a body, not wholly of a different nature from that of human flesh, so 
along with His body He assumed also its sufferings and distresses, which it was 
not in His power to avoid enduring, it being in the power of those who inflicted 
them to send upon Him things distressing and painful. And in the preceding pages 
we have already shown, that He would not have come into the hands of men had He 
not so willed. But He did come, because He was willing to come, and because it 
was manifest beforehand that His dying upon behalf of men would be of advantage 
to the whole human race. 
CHAP. XXIV. 
After this, wishing to prove that the occurrences which befell Him were 
painful and distressing, and that it was impossible for Him, had He wished, to 
render them otherwise, he proceeds: "Why does he mourn, and lament, and pray to 
escape the fear of death, expressing himself in terms like these: 'O 
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me?'" Now in these words 
observe the malignity of Celsus, how not accepting the love of truth which 
actuates the writers of the Gospels (who might have passed over in silence those 
points which, as Celsus thinks, are censurable, but who did not omit them for 
many reasons, which any one, in expounding the Gospel, can give in their proper 
place), he brings an accusation against the Gospel statement, grossly 
exaggerating the facts, and quoting what is not written in the Gospels, seeing 
it is nowhere found that Jesus lamented. And he changes the words in the 
expression, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me," and does not 
give what follows immediately after, which manifests at once the ready obedience 
of Jesus to His Father, and His greatness of mind, and which runs thus: 
"Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt." Nay, even the cheerful 
obedience of Jesus to the will of His Father in those things which He was 
condemned to suffer, exhibited in the declaration, "If this cup cannot pass from 
Me except I drink it, Thy will be done," he pretends not to have observed, 
acting here like those wicked individuals who listen to the Holy Scriptures in a 
malignant spirit, and "who talk wickedness with lofty head." For they appear to 
have heard the declaration, "I kill," and they often make it to us a subject of 
reproach; but the words, "I will make alive," they do not remember,--the whole 
sentence showing that those who live amid public wickedness, and who work 
wickedly, are put to death by God, and that a better life is infused into them 
instead, even one which God will give to those who have died to sin. And so also 
these men have heard the words, "I will smite;" but they do not see these, "and 
I will heal," which are like the words of a physician, who cuts bodies asunder, 
and inflicts severe wounds, in order to extract from them substances that are 
injurious and prejudicial to health, and who does not terminate his work with 
pains and lacerations, but by his treatment restores the body to that state of 
soundness which he has in view. Moreover, they have not heard the whole of the 
announcement, "For He maketh sore, and again bindeth up;" but only this part, 
"He maketh sore." So in like manner acts this Jew of Celsus who quotes the 
words, "O Father, would that this cup might pass from Me;" but who does not add 
what follows, and which exhibits the firmness of Jesus, and His preparedness for 
suffering. But these matters, which afford great room for explanation from the 
wisdom of God, and which may reasonably be pondered over by those whom Paul 
calls "perfect" when he said, "We speak wisdom among them who are perfect," we 
pass by for the present, and shall speak for a little of those matters which are 
useful for our present purpose. 
CHAP. XXV. 
We have mentioned in the preceding pages that there are some of the 
declarations of Jesus which refer to that Being in Him which was the "first-born 
of every creature," such as, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life," and 
such like; and others, again, which belong to that in Him which is understood to 
be man, such as, "But now ye seek to kill Me, a man that hath told you the truth 
which I have heard of the Father." And here, accordingly, he describes the 
element of weakness belonging to human flesh, and that of readiness of spirit 
which existed in His humanity: the element of weakness in the expression, 
"Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me;" the readiness of the 
spirit in this, "Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt." And since it is 
proper to observe the order of our quotations, observe that, in the first place, 
there is mentioned only the single instance, as one would say, indicating the 
weakness of the flesh; and afterwards those other instances, greater in number, 
manifesting the willingness of the spirit. For the expression, "Father, if it be 
possible, let this cup pass from Me," is only one: whereas more numerous are 
those others, viz., "Not as I will, but as Thou wilt;" and, "O My Father, if 
this cup cannot pass from Me except I drink it, Thy will be done." It is to be 
noted also, that the words are not, "let this cup depart from Me;" but that the 
whole expression is marked by a tone of piety and reverence, "Father, if it be 
possible, let this cup pass from Me." I know, indeed, that there is another 
explanation of this passage to the following effect:--The Saviour, foreseeing 
the sufferings which the Jewish people and the city of Jerusalem were to undergo 
in requital of the wicked deeds which the Jews had dared to perpetrate upon Him, 
from no other motive than that of the purest philanthropy towards them, and from 
a desire that they might escape the impending calamities, gave utterance to the 
prayer, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me." It is as if He 
had said, "Because of My drinking this cup of punishment, the whole nation will 
be forsaken by Thee, I pray, if it be possible, that this cup may pass from Me, 
in order that Thy portion, which was guilty of such crimes against Me, may not 
be altogether deserted by Thee." But if, as Celsus would allege, "nothing at 
that time was done to Jesus which was either painful or distressing," how could 
men afterwards quote the example of Jesus as enduring sufferings for the sake of 
religion, if He did not suffer what are human sufferings, but only had the 
appearance of so doing? 
CHAP. XXVI. 
This Jew of Celsus still accuses the disciples of Jesus of having invented 
these statements. saying to them: "Even although guilty of falsehood, ye have 
not been able to give a colour of credibility to your inventions." In answer to 
which we have to say, that there was an easy method of concealing these 
occurrences,--that, viz., of not recording them at all. For if the Gospels had 
not contained the accounts of these things, who could have reproached us with 
Jesus having spoken such words during His stay upon the earth? Celsus, indeed, 
did not see that it was an inconsistency for the same persons both to be 
deceived regarding Jesus, believing Him to be God, and the subject of prophecy, 
and to invent fictions about Him, knowing manifestly that these statements were 
false. Of a truth, therefore, they were not guilty of inventing untruths, but 
such were their real impressions, and they recorded them truly; or else they 
were guilty of falsifying the histories, and did not entertain these views, and 
were not deceived when they acknowledged Him to be God. 
CHAP. XXVII. 
After this he says, that certain of the Christian believers, like persons who 
in a fit of drunkenness lay violent hands upon themselves, have corrupted the 
Gospel from its original integrity, to a threefold, and fourfold, and many-fold 
degree, and have remodelled it, so that they might be able to answer objections. 
Now I know of no others who have altered the Gospel, save the. followers of 
Marcion, and those of Valentinus, and, I think, also those of Lucian. But such 
an allegation is no charge against the Christian system, but against those who 
dared so to trifle with the Gospels. And as it is no ground of accusation 
against philosophy, that there exist Sophists, or Epicureans, or Peripatetics, 
or any others, whoever they may be, who hold false opinions; so neither is it 
against genuine Christianity that there are some who corrupt the Gospel 
histories, and who introduce heresies opposed to the meaning of the doctrine of 
Jesus. 
CHAP. XXVIII. 
And since this Jew of Celsus makes it a subject of reproach that Christians 
should make use of the prophets, who predicted the events of Christ's life, we 
have to say, in addition to what we have already advanced upon this head, that 
it became him to spare individuals, as he says, and to expound the prophecies 
themselves, and after admitting the probability of the Christian interpretation 
of them, to show how the use which they make of them may be overturned. For in 
this way he would not appear hastily to assume so important a position on small 
grounds, and particularly when he asserts that the "prophecies agree with ten 
thousand other things more credibly than with Jesus." And he ought to have 
carefully met this powerful argument of the Christians, as being the strongest 
which they adduce, and to have demonstrated with regard to each particular 
prophecy, that it can apply to other events with greater probability than to 
Jesus. He did not, however, perceive that this was a plausible argument to be 
advanced against the Christians only by one who was an opponent of the prophetic 
writings; but Celsus has here put l in the mouth of a Jew an objection which a 
Jew would not have made. For a Jew will not admit that the prophecies may be 
applied to countless other things with greater probability than to Jesus; but he 
will endeavour, after giving what appears to him the meaning of each, to oppose 
the Christian interpretation, not indeed by any means adducing convincing 
reasons, but only attempting to do so. 
CHAP. XXIX. 
In the preceding pages we have already spoken of this point, viz., the 
prediction that there were to be two advents of Christ to the human race, so 
that it is not necessary for us to reply to the objection, supposed to be urged 
by a Jew, that "the prophets declare the coming one to be a mighty potentate, 
Lord of all nations and armies." But it is in the spirit of a Jew, I think, and 
in keeping with their bitter animosity, and baseless and even improbable 
calumnies against Jesus, that he adds: "Nor did the prophets predict such a 
pestilence." For neither Jews, nor Celsus, nor any other, can bring any argument 
to prove that a pestilence converts men from the practice of evil to a life 
which is according to nature, and distinguished by temperance and other virtues. 

CHAP. XXX. 
This objection also is cast in our teeth by Celsus: "From such signs and 
misinterpretations, and from proofs so mean, no one could prove him to be God, 
and the Son of God." Now it was his duty to enumerate the alleged 
misinterpretations, and to prove them to be such, and to show by reasoning the 
meanness of the evidence, in order that the Christian, if any of his objections 
should seem to be plausible, might be able to answer and confute his arguments. 
What he said, however, regarding Jesus, did indeed come to pass, because He was 
a mighty potentate, although Celsus refuses to see that it so happened, 
notwithstanding that the clearest evidence proves it true of Jesus. "For as the 
sun," he says, "which enlightens all other objects, first makes himself visible, 
so ought the Son of God to have done." We would say in reply, that so He did; 
for righteousness has arisen in His days, and there is abundance of peace, which 
took its commencement at His birth, God preparing the nations for His teaching, 
that they might be under one prince, the king of the Romans, and that it might 
not, owing to the want of union among the nations, caused by the existence of 
many kingdoms, be more difficult for the apostles of Jesus to accomplish the 
task enjoined upon them by their Master, when He said, "Go and teach all 
nations." Moreover it is certain that Jesus was born in the reign of Augustus, 
who, so to speak, fused together into one monarchy the many populations of the 
earth. Now the existence of many kingdoms would have been a hindrance to the 
spread of the doctrine of Jesus throughout the entire world; not only for the 
reasons mentioned, but also on account of the necessity of men everywhere 
engaging in war, and fighting on behalf of their native country, which was the 
case before the times of Augustus, and in periods still more remote, when 
necessity arose, as when the Peloponnesians and Athenians warred against each 
other, and other nations in like manner. How, then, was it possible for the 
Gospel doctrine of peace, which does not permit men to take vengeance even upon 
enemies, to prevail throughout the world, unless at the advent of Jesus a milder 
spirit had been everywhere introduced into the conduct of things? 
CHAP. XXXI. 
He next charges the Christians with being "guilty of sophistical reasoning, 
in saying that the Son of God is the Logos Himself." And he thinks that he 
strengthens the accusation, because "when we declare the Logos to be the Son of 
God, we do not present to view a pure and holy Logos, but a most degraded man, 
who was punished by scourging and crucifixion." Now, on this head we have 
briefly replied to the charges of Celsus in the preceding pages, where Christ 
was shown to be the first-born of all creation, who assumed a body and a human 
soul; and that God gave commandment respecting the creation of such mighty 
things in the world, and they were created; and that He who received the command 
was God the Logos. And seeing it is a Jew who makes these statements in the work 
of Celsus, it will not be out of place to quote the declaration, "He sent His 
word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destruction,"--a passage of 
which we spoke a little ago. Now, although I have conferred with many Jews who 
professed to be learned men, I never heard any one expressing his approval of 
the statement that the Logos is the Son of God, as Celsus declares they do, in 
putting into the mouth of the Jew such a declaration as this: "If your Logos is 
the Son of God, we also give out assent to the same." 
CHAP. XXXII. 
We have already shown that Jesus can be regarded neither as an arrogant man, 
nor a sorcerer; and therefore it is unnecessary to repeat our former arguments, 
lest, in replying to the tautologies of Celsus, we ourselves should be guilty of 
needless repetition. And now, in finding fault with our Lord's genealogy, there 
are certain points which occasion some difficulty even to Christians, and which, 
owing to the discrepancy between the genealogies, are advanced by some as 
arguments against their correctness, but which Celsus has not even mentioned. 
For Celsus, who is truly a braggart, and who professes to be acquainted with all 
matters relating to Christianity, does not know how to raise doubts in a skilful 
manner against the credibility of Scripture. But he asserts that the "framers of 
the genealogies, from a feeling of pride, made Jesus to be descended from the 
first man, and from the kings of the Jews." And he thinks that he makes a 
notable charge when he adds, that "the carpenters wife could not have been 
ignorant of the fact, had she been of such illustrious descent." But what has 
this to do with the question? Granted that she was not ignorant of her descent, 
how does that affect the result? Suppose that she were ignorant, how could her 
ignorance prove that she was not descended from the first man, or could not 
derive her origin from the Jewish kings? Does Celsus imagine that the poor must 
always be descended from ancestors who are poor, or that kings are always born 
of kings? But it appears folly to waste time upon such an argument as this, 
seeing it is well known that, even in our own days, some who are poorer than 
Mary are descended from ancestors of wealth and distinction, and that rulers of 
nations and kings have sprung from persons of no reputation. 
CHAP. XXXIII. 
"But," continues Celsus, "what great deeds did Jesus perform as being a God? 
Did he put his enemies to shame, or bring to a ridiculous conclusion what was 
designed against him?" Now to this question, although we are able to show the 
striking and miraculous character of the events which befell Him, yet from what 
other source can we furnish an answer than from the Gospel narratives, which 
state that "there was an earthquake, and that the rocks were split asunder, and 
the tombs opened, and the veil of the temple rent in twain from top to bottom, 
and that darkness prevailed in the day-time, the sun failing to give light?" But 
if Celsus believe the Gospel accounts when he thinks that he can find in them 
matter of charge against the Christians, and refuse to believe them when they 
establish the divinity of Jesus, our answer to him is: "Sir, either disbelieve 
all the Gospel narratives, and then no longer imagine that you can found charges 
upon them; or, in yielding your belief to their statements, look in admiration 
on the Logos of God, who became incarnate, and who desired to confer benefits 
upon the whole human race. And this feature evinces the nobility of the work of 
Jesus, that, down to the present time, those whom God wills are healed by His 
name. And with regard to the eclipse in the time of Tiberius Caesar, in whose 
reign Jesus appears to have been crucified, and the great earthquakes which then 
took place, Phlegon too, I think, has written in the thirteenth or fourteenth 
book of his Chronicles." 
CHAP. XXXIV. 
This Jew of Celsus, ridiculing Jesus, as he imagines, is described as being 
acquainted with the Bacchae of Euripides, in which Dionysus says:- "The divinity 
himself will liberate me whenever I wish." 
NOW the Jews are not much acquainted with Greek literature; but suppose that 
there was a Jew so well versed in it (as to make such a quotation on his part 
appropriate), how (does it follow) that Jesus could not liberate Himself, 
because He did not do so? For let him believe from our own Scriptures that Peter 
obtained his freedom after having been bound in prison, an angel having loosed 
his chains; and that Paul, having been bound in the stocks along with Silas in 
Philippi of Macedonia, was liberated by divine power, when the gates of the 
prison were opened. But it is probable that Celsus treats these accounts with 
ridicule, or that he never read them; for he would probably say in reply, that 
there are certain sorcerers who are able by incantations to unloose chains and 
to open doors, so that he would liken the events related in our histories to the 
doings of sorcerers. "But," he continues, "no calamity happened even to him who 
condemned him, as there did to Pentheus, viz., madness or discerption." And yet 
he does not know that it was not so much Pilate that condemned Him (who knew 
that "for envy the Jews had delivered Him"), as the Jewish nation, which has 
been condemned by God, and rent in pieces, and dispersed over the whole earth, 
in a degree far beyond what happened to Pentheus. Moreover, why did he 
intentionally omit what is related of Pilate's wife, who beheld a vision, and 
who was so moved by it as to send a message to her husband, saying: "Have thou 
nothing to do with that just man; for I have suffered many things this day in a 
dream because of Him?" And again, passing by in silence the proofs of the 
divinity of Jesus, Celsus endeavours to cast reproach upon Him from the 
narratives in the Gospel, referring to those who mocked Jesus, and put on Him 
the purple robe, and the crown of thorns, and placed the reed in His hand. From 
what source now, Celsus, did you derive these statements, save from the Gospel 
narratives? And did you, accordingly, see that they were fit matters for 
reproach; while they who recorded them did not think that you, and such as you, 
would turn them into ridicule; but that others would receive from them an 
example how to despise those who ridiculed and mocked Him on account of His 
religion, who appropriately laid down His life for its sake? Admire rather their 
love of truth, and that of the Being who bore these things voluntarily for the 
sake of men, and who endured them with all constancy and long-suffering. For it 
is not recorded that He uttered any lamentation, or that after His condemnation 
He either did or uttered anything unbecoming. 
CHAP. XXXV. 
But in answer to this objection, "If not before, yet why now, at least, does 
he not give some manifestation of his divinity, and free himself from this 
reproach, and take vengeance upon those who insult both him and his Father?" We 
have to reply, that it would be the same thing as if we were to say to those 
among the Greeks who accept the doctrine of providence, and who believe in 
portents, Why does God not punish those who insult the Divinity, and subvert the 
doctrine of providence? For as the Greeks would answer such objections, so would 
we, in the same, or a more effective manner. There was not only a portent from 
heaven--the eclipse of the sun--but also the other miracles, which show that the 
crucified One possessed something that was divine, and greater than was 
possessed by the majority of men. 
CHAP. XXXVI. 
Celsus next says: "What is the nature of the ichor in the body of the 
crucified Jesus? Is it 'such as flows in the bodies of the immortal gods?'" He 
puts this question in a spirit of mockery; but we shall show from the serious 
narratives of the Gospels, although Celsus may not like it, that it was no 
mythic and Homeric ichor which flowed from the body of Jesus, but that, after 
His death, "one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His side, and there came 
there-out blood and water. And he that saw it bare record, and his record is 
true, and he knoweth that he saith the truth." Now, in other dead bodies the 
blood congeals, and pure water does not flow forth; but the miraculous feature 
in the case of the dead body of Jesus was, that around the dead body blood and 
water flowed forth from the side. But if this Celsus, who, in order to find 
matter of accusation against Jesus and the Christians, extracts from the Gospel 
even passages which are incorrectly interpreted, but passes over in silence the 
evidences of the divinity of Jesus, would listen to divine portents, let him 
read the Gospel, and see that even the centurion, and they who with him kept 
watch over Jesus, on seeing the earthquake, and the events that occurred, were 
greatly afraid, saying, "This man was the Son of God." 
CHAP. XXXVII. 
After this, he who extracts from the Gospel narrative those statements on 
which he thinks he can found an accusation, makes the vinegar and the gall a 
subject of reproach to Jesus, saying that "he rushed with open mouth to drink of 
them, and could not endure his thirst as any ordinary man frequently endures 
it." Now this matter admits of an explanation of a peculiar and figurative kind; 
but on the present occasion, the statement that the prophets predicted this very 
incident may be accepted as the more common answer to the objection. For in the 
sixty-ninth Psalm there is written, with reference to Christ: "And they gave me 
gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink," Now, let the 
Jews say who it is that the prophetic writing represents as uttering these 
words; and let them adduce from history one who received gall for his food, and 
to whom vinegar was given as drink. Would they venture to assert that the Christ 
whom they expect still to come might be placed in such circumstances? Then we 
would say, What prevents the prediction from having been already accomplished? 
For this very prediction was uttered many ages before, and is sufficient, along 
with the other prophetic utterances, to lead him who fairly examines the whole 
matter to the conclusion that Jesus is He who was prophesied of as Christ, and 
as the Son of God. 
CHAP. XXXVIII. 
The few next remarks: "You, O sincere believers, find fault with us, because 
we do not recognise this individual as God, nor agree with you that he endured 
these (sufferings) for the benefit of mankind, in order that we also might 
despise punishment." Now, in answer to this, we say that we blame the Jews, who 
have been brought up under the training of the law and the prophets (which 
foretell the coming of Christ), because they neither refute the arguments which 
we lay before them to prove that He is the Messiah, adducing such refutation as 
a defence of their unbelief; nor yet, while not offering any refutation, do they 
believe in Him who was the subject of prophecy, and who clearly manifested 
through His disciples, even after the period of His appearance in the flesh, 
that He underwent these things for the benefit of mankind; having, as the object 
of His first advent, not to condemn men and their actions before He had 
instructed them, and pointed out to them their duty, nor to chastise the wicked 
and save the good, but to disseminate His doctrine in an extraordinary manner, 
and with the evidence of divine power, among the whole human race, as the 
prophets also have represented these things. And we blame them, moreover, 
because they did not believe in Him who gave evidence of the power that was in 
Him, but asserted that He cast out demons from the souls of men through 
Beelzebub the prince of the demons; and we blame them because they slander the 
philanthropic character of Him, who overlooked not only no city, but not even a 
single village in Judea, that He might everywhere announce the kingdom of God, 
accusing Him of leading the wandering life of a vagabond, and passing an anxious 
existence in a disgraceful body. But there is no disgrace in enduring such 
labours for the benefit of all those who may be able to understand Him. 
CHAP. XXXIX. 
And how can the following assertion of this Jew of Celsus appear anything 
else than a manifest falsehood, viz., that Jesus, "having gained over no one 
during his life, not even his own disciples, underwent these punishments and 
sufferings?" For from what other source sprang the envy which was aroused 
against Him by the Jewish high priests, and elders, and scribes, save from the 
fact that multitudes obeyed and followed Him, and were led into the deserts not 
only by the persuasive language of Him whose words were always appropriate to 
His hearers, but who also by His miracles made an impression on those who were 
not moved to belief by His words? And is it not a manifest falsehood to say that 
"he did not gain over even his own disciples," who exhibited, indeed, at that 
time some symptoms of human weakness arising from cowardly fear--for they had 
not yet been disciplined to the exhibition of full courage--but who by no means 
abandoned the judgments which they had formed regarding Him as the Christ? For 
Peter, after his denial, perceiving to what a depth of wickedness he had fallen, 
"went out and wept bitterly;" while the others, although stricken with dismay on 
account of what had happened to Jesus (for they still continued to admire Him), 
had, by His glorious appearance, their belief more firmly established than 
before that He was the Son of God. 
CHAP. XL. 
It is, moreover, in a very unphilosophical spirit that Celsus imagines our 
Lord's pre-eminence among men to consist, not in the preaching of salvation and 
in a pure morality, but in acting contrary to the character of that personality 
which He had taken upon Him, and in not dying, although He had assumed 
mortality; or, if dying, yet at least not such a death as might serve as a 
pattern to those who were to learn by that very act how to die for the sake of 
religion, and to comport themselves boldly through its help, before those who 
hold erroneous views on the subject of religion and irreligion, and who regard 
religious men as altogether irreligious, but imagine those to be most religious 
who err regarding God, and who apply to everything rather than to God the 
ineradicable idea of Him (which is implanted in the human mind), and especially 
when they eagerly rush to destroy those who have yielded themselves up with 
their whole soul (even unto death), to the clear evidence of one God who is over 
all things. 
CHAP. XLI. 
In the person of the Jew, Celsus continues to find fault with Jesus, alleging 
that "he did not show himself to be pure from all evil." Let Celsus state from 
what "evil" our Lord did not, show Himself to be pure. If he means that, He was 
not pure from what is properly termed "evil," let him clearly prove the 
existence of any wicked work in Him. But if he deems poverty and the cross to be 
evils, and conspiracy on the part of wicked men, then it is clear that he would 
say that evil had happened also to Socrates, who was unable to show himself pure 
from evils. And how great also the other band of poor men is among the Greeks, 
who have given themselves to philosophical pursuits, and have voluntarily 
accepted a life of poverty, is known to many among the Greeks from what is 
recorded of Democritus, who allowed his property to become pasture for sheep; 
and of Crates, who obtained his freedom by bestowing upon the Thebans the price 
received for the sale of his possessions. Nay, even Diogenes himself, from 
excessive poverty, came to live in a tub; and yet, in the opinion of no one 
possessed of moderate understanding, was Diogenes on that account considered to 
be in an evil (sinful) condition. 
CHAP. XLII. 
But further, since Celsus will have it that "Jesus was not irreproachable," 
let him instance any one of those who adhere to His doctrine, who has recorded 
anything that could truly furnish ground of reproach against Jesus; or if it be 
not from these that he derives his matter of accusation against Him, let him say 
from what quarter he has learned that which has induced him to say that He is 
not free from reproach. Jesus, however, performed all that He promised to do, 
and by which He conferred benefits upon his adherents. And we, continually 
seeing fulfilled all that was predicted by Him before it happened, viz., that 
this Gospel of His should be preached throughout the whole world, and that His 
disciples should go among all nations and announce His doctrine; and, moreover, 
that they should be brought before governors and kings on no other account than 
because of His teaching; we are lost in wonder at Him, and have our faith in Him 
daily confirmed. And I know not by what greater or more convincing proofs Celsus 
would have Him confirm His predictions; unless, indeed, as seems to be the case, 
not understanding that the Logos had become the man Jesus, he would have Him to 
be subject to no human weakness, nor to become an illustrious pattern to men of 
the manner in which they ought to bear the calamities of life, although these 
appear to Celsus to be most lamentable and disgraceful occurrences, seeing that 
he regards labour to be the greatest of evils, and pleasure the perfect good,--a 
view accepted by none of those philosophers who admit the doctrine of 
providence, and who allow that courage, and fortitude, and magnanimity are 
virtues. Jesus, therefore, by His sufferings cast no discredit upon the faith of 
which He was the object; but rather confirmed the same among those who would 
approve of manly courage, and among those who were taught by Him that what was 
truly and properly the happy life was not here below, but was to be found in 
that which was called, according to His own words, the "coming world;" whereas 
in what is called the "present world" life is a calamity, or at least the first 
and greatest struggle of the soul. 
CHAP. XLIII. 
Celsus next addresses to us the following remark: "You will not, I suppose, 
say of him, that, after failing to gain over those who were in this world, he 
went to Hades to gain over those who were there." But whether he like it or not, 
we assert that not only while Jesus was in the body did He win over not a few 
persons merely, but so great a number, that a conspiracy was formed against Him 
on account of the multitude of His followers; but also, that when He became a 
soul, without the covering of the body, He dwelt among those souls which were 
without bodily covering, converting such of them as were willing to Himself, or 
those whom He saw, for reasons known to Him alone, to be better adapted to such 
a course. 
CHAP. XLIV. 
Celsus in the next place says, with indescribable silliness: "If, after 
inventing defences which are absurd, and by which ye were ridiculously deluded, 
ye imagine that you really make a good defence, what prevents you from regarding 
those other individuals who have been condemned, and have died a miserable 
death, as greater and more divine messengers of heaven (than Jesus)?" Now, that 
manifestly and clearly there is no similarity between Jesus, who suffered what 
is described, and those who have died a wretched death on account of their 
sorcery, or whatever else be the charge against them, is patent to every one. 
For no one can point to any acts of a sorcerer which turned away souls from the 
practice of the many sins which prevail among men, and from the flood of 
wickedness (in the world). But since this Jew of Celsus compares Him to robbers, 
and says that "any similarly shameless fellow might be able to say regarding 
even a robber and murderer whom punishment had overtaken, that such an one was 
not a robber, but a god, because he predicted to his fellow-robbers that he 
would suffer such punishment as he actually did suffer," it might, in the first 
place, be answered, that it is not because He predicted that He would suffer 
such things that we entertain those opinions regarding Jesus which lead us to 
have confidence in Him, as one who has come down to us from God. And, in the 
second place, we assert that this very comparison has been somehow foretold in 
the Gospels; since God was numbered with the transgressors by wicked men, who 
desired rather a "murderer" (one who for sedition and murder had been cast into 
prison) to be released unto them, and Jesus to be crucified, and who crucified 
Him between two robbers. Jesus, indeed, is ever crucified with robbers among His 
genuine disciples and witnesses to the truth, and suffers the same condemnation 
which they do among men. And we say, that if those persons have any resemblance 
to robbers, who on account of their piety towards God suffer all kinds of injury 
and death, that they may keep it pure and unstained, according to the teaching 
of Jesus, then it is clear also that Jesus, the author of such teaching, is with 
good reason compared by Celsus to the captain of a band of robbers. But neither 
was He who died for the common good of mankind, nor they who suffered because of 
their religion, and alone of all men were persecuted because of what appeared to 
them the right way of honouring God, put to death in accordance with justice, 
nor was Jesus persecuted without the charge of impiety being incurred by His 
persecutors. 
CHAP. XLV. 
But observe the superficial nature of his argument respecting the former 
disciples of Jesus, in which he says: "In the next place, those who were his 
associates while alive, and who listened to his voice, and enjoyed his 
instructions as their teacher, on seeing him subjected to punishment and death, 
neither died with him, nor for him, nor were even induced to regard punishment 
with contempt, but denied even that they were his disciples, whereas now ye die 
along with him." And here he believes the sin which was committed by the 
disciples while they were yet beginners and imperfect, and which is recorded in 
the Gospels, to have been actually committed, in order that he may have matter 
of accusation against the Gospel; but their upright conduct after their 
transgression, when they behaved with courage before the Jews, and suffered 
countless cruelties at their hands, and at last suffered death for the doctrine 
of Jesus, he passes by in silence. For he would neither hear the words of Jesus, 
when He predicted to Peter, "When thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth 
thy hands," etc., to which the Scripture adds, "This spake He, signifying by 
what death he should glorify God;" nor how James the brother of John--an 
apostle, the brother of an apostle--was slain with the sword by Herod for the 
doctrine of Christ; nor even the many instances of boldness displayed by Peter 
and the other apostles because of the Gospel, and "how they went forth from the 
presence of the Sanhedrim after being scourged, rejoicing that they were counted 
worthy to suffer shame for His name," and so surpassing many of the instances 
related by the Greeks of the fortitude and courage of their philosophers. From 
the very beginning, then, this was inculcated as a precept of Jesus among His 
hearers, which taught men to despise the life which is eagerly sought after by 
the multitude, but to be earnest in living the life which resembles that of God. 

CHAP. XLVI. 
But how can this Jew of Celsus escape the charge of falsehood, when he says 
that Jesus, "when on earth, gained over to himself only ten sailors and 
tax-gatherers of the most worthless character, and not even the whole of these?" 
Now it is certain that the Jews themselves would admit that He drew over not ten 
persons merely, nor a hundred, nor a thousand, but on one occasion five thousand 
at once, and on another four thousand; and that He attracted them to such a 
degree that they followed Him even into the deserts, which alone could contain 
the assembled multitude of those who believed in God through Jesus, and where He 
not only addressed to them discourses, but also manifested to them His works. 
And now, through his tautology, he compels us also to be tautological, since we 
are careful to guard against being supposed to pass over any of the charges 
advanced by him; and therefore, in reference to the matter before us following 
the order of his treatise as we have it, be says: "Is it not the height of 
absurdity to maintain, that if, while he himself was alive, he won over not a 
single person to his views, after his death any who wish are able to gain over 
such a multitude of individuals?" 
Whereas he ought to have said, in consistency with truth, that if, after His 
death, not simply those who will, but they who have the will and the power, can 
gain over so many proselytes, how much more consonant to reason is it, that 
while He was alive He should, through the greater power of His words and deeds, 
have won over to Himself manifold greater numbers of adherents? 
CHAP. XLVII. 
He represents, moreover, a statement of his own as if it were an answer to 
one of his questions, in which be asks: "By what train of argument were you led 
to regard him as the Son of God?" For he makes us answer that "we were won over 
to him, because we know that his punishment was undergone to bring about the 
destruction Of the father of evil." Now we were won over to His doctrine by 
innumerable other considerations, of which we have stated only the smallest part 
in the preceding pages; but, if God permit, we shall continue to enumerate them, 
not only while dealing with the so-called True Discourse of Celsus, but also on 
many other occasions. And, as if we said that we consider Him to be the Son of 
God because He suffered punishment, he asks: "What then? have not many others, 
too, been punished, and that not less disgracefully?" And here Celsus acts like 
the most contemptible enemies of the Gospel, and like those who imagine that it 
follows as a consequence from our history of the crucified Jesus, that we should 
worship those who have undergone crucifixion! 
CHAP. XLVIII. 
Celsus, moreover, unable to resist the miracles which Jesus is recorded to 
have performed, has already on several occasions spoken of them slanderously as 
works of sorcery; and we also on several occasions have, to the best of our 
ability, replied to his statements. And now he represents us as saying that "we 
deemed Jesus to be the Son of God, because he healed the lame and the blind." 
And he adds: "Moreover, as you assert, he raised the dead." That He healed the 
lame and the blind, and that therefore we hold Him to be the Christ and the Son 
of God, is manifest to us from what is contained in the prophecies: "Then the 
eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear; then 
shall the lame man leap as an hart." And that He also raised the dead, and that 
it is no fiction of those who composed the Gospels, is shown by this, that if it 
had been a fiction, many individuals would have been represented as having risen 
from the dead, and these, too, such as had been many years in their graves. But 
as it is no fiction, they are very easily counted of whom this is related to 
have happened; viz., the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue (of whom I know 
not why He said, "She is not dead, but sleepeth," stating regarding her 
something which does not apply to all who die); and the only son of the widow, 
on whom He took compassion and raised him up, making the bearers of the corpse 
to stand still; and the third instance, that of Lazarus, who had been four days 
in the grave. Now, regarding these cases we would say to all persons of candid 
mind, and especially to the Jew, that as there were many lepers in the days of 
Elisha the prophet, and none of them was healed save Naaman the Syrian, and many 
widows in the days of Elijah the prophet, to none of whom was Elijah sent save 
to Sarepta in Sidonia (for the widow there had been deemed worthy by a divine 
decree of the miracle which was wrought by the prophet in the matter of the 
bread); so also there were many dead in the days of Jesus, but those only rose 
from the grave whom the Logos knew to be fitted for a resurrection, in order 
that the works done by the Lord might not be merely symbols of certain things, 
but that by the very acts themselves He might gain over many to the marvellous 
doctrine of the Gospel. I would say, moreover, that, agreeably to the promise of 
Jesus, His disciples performed even greater works than these miracles of Jesus, 
which were perceptible only to the senses. For the eyes of those who are blind 
in soul are ever opened; and the ears of those who were deaf to virtuous words, 
listen readily to the doctrine of God, and of the blessed life with Him; and 
many, too, who were lame in the feet of the "inner man," as Scripture calls it, 
having now been healed by the word, do not simply leap, but leap as the hart, 
which is an animal hostile to serpents, and stronger than all the poison of 
vipers. And these lame who have been healed, receive from Jesus power to 
trample, with those feet in which they were formerly lame, upon the serpents and 
scorpions of wickedness, and generally upon all the power of the enemy; and 
though they tread upon it, they sustain no injury, for they also have become 
stronger than the poison of all evil and of demons. 
CHAP. XLIX. 
Jesus, accordingly, in turning away the minds of His disciples, not merely 
from giving heed to sorcerers in general, and those who profess in any other 
manner to work miracles--for His disciples did not need to be so warned--but 
from such as gave themselves out as the Christ of God, and who tried by certain 
apparent miracles to gain over to them the disciples of Jesus, said in a certain 
passage: "Then, if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; 
believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and 
shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they 
shall deceive the very elect. Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore, if they 
shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth; behold, he is in 
the secret chambers, believe it not. For as the lightning cometh out of the 
east, and shineth even to the west, so also shall the coming of the Son of man 
be." And in another passage: "Many will say unto Me in that day, Lord, Lord, 
have we not eaten and drunk in Thy name, and by Thy name have cast out demons, 
and done many wonderful works? And then will I say unto them, Depart from Me, 
because ye are workers of iniquity." But Celsus, wishing to assimilate the 
miracles of Jesus to the works of human sorcery, says in express terms as 
follows: "O light and truth! he distinctly declares, with his own voice, as ye 
yourselves have recorded, that there will come to you even others, employing 
miracles of a similar kind, who are wicked men, and sorcerers; and he calls him 
who makes use of such devices, one Satan. So that Jesus himself does not deny 
that these works at least are not at all divine, but are the acts of wicked men; 
and being compelled by the force of truth, he at the same time not only laid 
open the doings of others, but convicted himself of the same acts. Is it not, 
then, a miserable inference, to conclude from the same works that the one is God 
and the other sorcerers? Why ought the others, because of these acts, to be 
accounted wicked rather than this man, seeing they have him as their witness 
against himself? For he has himself acknowledged that these are not the works of 
a divine nature, but the inventions of certain deceivers, and of thoroughly 
wicked men." Observe, now, whether Celsus is not clearly convicted of slandering 
the Gospel by such statements, since what Jesus says regarding those who are to 
work signs and wonders is different from what this Jew of Celsus alleges it to 
be. For if Jesus had simply told His disciples to be on their guard against 
those who professed to work miracles, without declaring what they would give 
themselves out to be, then perhaps there would have been some ground for his 
suspicion. 
But since those against whom Jesus would have us to be on our guard give 
themselves out as the Christ--which is not a claim put forth by sorcerers--and 
since He says that even some who lead wicked lives will perform miracles in the 
name of Jesus, and expel demons out of men, sorcery in the case of these 
individuals, or any suspicion of such, is rather, if we may so speak, altogether 
banished, and the divinity of Christ established, as well as the divine missions 
of His disciples; seeing that it is possible that one who makes use of His name, 
and who is wrought upon by some power, in some way unknown, to make the pretence 
that he is the Christ, should seem to perform miracles like those of Jesus, 
while others through His name should do works resembling those of His genuine 
disciples. 
Paul, moreover, in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, shows in what 
manner there will one day be revealed "the man of sin, the son of perdition, who 
opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is 
wor-shipped; so that he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is 
God." And again he says to the Thessalonians: "And now ye know what withholdeth 
that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already 
work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way: and 
then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the spirit 
of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming: even him, 
whose cunning is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and 
lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that 
perish." And in assigning the reason why the man of sin is permitted to continue 
in existence, he says: "Because they received not the love of the truth, that 
they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, 
that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believed not 
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." Let any one now say whether any 
of the statements in the Gospel, or in the writings of the apostle, could give 
occasion for the suspicion that there is therein contained any prediction of 
sorcery. Any one, moreover, who likes may find the prophecy in Daniel respecting 
antichrist. But Celsus falsities the words of Jesus, since He did not say that 
others would come working similar miracles to Himself, but who are wicked men 
and sorcerers, although Celsus asserts that He uttered such words. For as the 
power of the Egyptian magicians was not similar to the divinely-bestowed grace 
of Moses, but the issue clearly proved that the acts of the former were the 
effect of magic, while those of Moses were wrought by divine power; so the 
proceedings of the antichrists, and of those who feign that they can work 
miracles as being the disciples of Christ, are said to be lying signs and 
wonders, prevailing with all deceivableness of unrighteousness among them that 
perish; whereas the works of Christ and His disciples had for their fruit, not 
deceit, but the salvation of human souls. And who would rationally maintain that 
an improved moral life, which daily lessened the number of a man's offences, 
could proceed from a system of deceit? 
CHAP. LI. 
Celsus, indeed, evinced a slight knowledge of Scripture when he made Jesus 
say, that it is "a certain Satan who contrives such devices;" although he begs 
the question s when he asserts that "Jesus did not deny that these works have in 
them nothing of divinity, but proceed from wicked men," for he makes things 
which differ in kind to be the same. Now, as a wolf is not of the same species 
as a dog, although it may appear to have some resemblance in the figure of its 
body and in its voice, nor a common wood-pigeon the same as a dove, so there is 
no resemblance between what is done by the power of God and what is the effect 
of sorcery. And we might further say, in answer to the calumnies of Celsus, Are 
those to be regarded as miracles which are wrought through sorcery by wicked 
demons, but those not which are performed by a nature that is holy and divine? 
and does human life endure the worse, but never receive the better? Now it 
appears to me that we must lay it down as a general principle, that as, wherever 
anything that is evil would make itself to be of the same nature with the good, 
there must by all means be something that is good opposed to the evil; so also, 
in opposition to those things which are brought about by sorcery, there must 
also of necessity be some things in human life which are the result of divine 
power. And it follows from the same, that we must either annihilate both, and 
assert that neither exists, or, assuming the one, and particularly the evil, 
admit also the reality of the good. Now, if one were to lay it down that works 
are wrought by means of sorcery, but would not grant that there are also works 
which are the product of divine power, he would seem to me to resemble him who 
should admit the existence of sophisms and plausible arguments, which have the 
appearance of establishing the truth, although really undermining it, while 
denying that truth had anywhere a home among men, or a dialectic which differed 
from sophistry. But if we once admit that it is consistent with the existence of 
magic and sorcery (which derive their power from evil demons, who are 
spell-bound by elaborate incantations, and become subject to sorcerers) that 
some works must be found among men which proceed from a power that is divine, 
why shall we not test those who profess to perform them by their lives and 
morals, and the consequences of their miracles, viz., whether they tend to the 
injury of men or to the reformation of conduct? What minister of evil demons, 
e.g., can do such things? and by means of what incantations and magic arts? And 
who, on the other hand, is it that, having his soul and his spirit, and I 
imagine also his body, in a pure and holy state, receives a divine spirit, and 
performs such works in order to benefit men, and to lead them to believe on the 
true God? But if we must once investigate (without being carded away by the 
miracles themselves) who it is that performs them by help of a good, and who by 
help of an evil power, so that we may neither slander all without 
discrimination, nor yet admire and accept all as divine, will it not be 
manifest, from what occurred in the times of Moses and Jesus, when entire 
nations were established in consequence of their miracles, that these men 
wrought by means of divine power what they are recorded to have performed? For 
wickedness and sorcery would not have led a whole nation to rise not only above 
idols and images erected by men, but also above all created things, and to 
ascend to the uncreated origin of the God of the universe. 
CHAP. LII. 
But since it is a Jew who makes these assertions in the treatise of Celsus, 
we would say to him: Pray, friend, why do you believe the works which are 
recorded in your writings as having been performed by God through the 
instrumentality of Moses to be really divine, and endeavour to refute those who 
slanderously assert that they were wrought by sorcery, like those of the 
Egyptian magicians; while, in imitation of your Egyptian opponents, you charge 
those which were done by Jesus, and which, you admit, were actually performed, 
with not being divine? For if the final result, and the founding of an entire 
nation by the miracles of Moses, manifestly demonstrate that it was God who 
brought these things to pass in the time of Moses the Hebrew lawgiver, why 
should not such rather be shown to be the case with Jesus, who accomplished far 
greater works than those of Moses? For the former took those of his own nation, 
the descendants of Abraham, who had observed the rite of circumcision 
transmitted by tradition, and who were careful observers of the Abrahamic 
usages, and led them out of Egypt, enacting for them those laws which you 
believe to be divine; whereas the latter ventured upon a greater undertaking, 
and superinduced upon the pre-existing constitution, and upon ancestral customs 
and modes of life agreeable to the existing laws, a constitution in conformity 
with the Gospel. And as it was necessary, in order that Moses should find credit 
not only among the elders, but the common people, that there should be performed 
those miracles which he is recorded to have performed, why should not Jesus 
also, in order that He may be believed on by those of the people who had learned 
to ask for signs and wonders, need to work such miracles as, on account of their 
greater grandeur and divinity (in comparison with those of Moses), were able to 
convert men from Jewish fables, and from the human traditions which prevailed 
among them, and make them admit that He who taught and did such things was 
greater than the: prophets? For how was not He greater than the prophets, who 
was proclaimed by them to be the Christ, and the Saviour of the human race? 
CHAP. LIII. 
All the arguments, indeed, which this Jew of Celsus advances against those 
who believe on Jesus, may, by parity of reasoning, be urged as ground of 
accusation against Moses: so that there is no difference in asserting that the 
sorcery practised by Jesus and that by Moses were similar to each other,--both 
of them, so far as the language of this Jew of Celsus is concerned, being liable 
to the same charge; as, e.g., when this Jew says of Christ, "But, O light and 
truth! Jesus with his own voice expressly declares, as you yourselves have 
recorded, that there will appear among you others also, who will perform 
miracles like mine, but who are wicked men and sorcerers," some one, either 
Greek or Egyptian, or any other party who disbelieved the Jew, might say 
respecting Moses, "But, O light and truth! Moses with his own voice expressly 
declares, as ye also have recorded, that there will appear among you others 
also, who will perform miracles like mine, but who are wicked men and sorcerers. 
For it is written in your law, 'If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer 
of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come to 
pass whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods which thou 
hast not known, and let us serve them; thou shall not hearken to the words of 
that prophet, or dreamer of dreams,'" etc. Again, perverting the words of Jesus, 
he says, "And he terms him who devises such things, one Satan;" while one, 
applying this to Moses, might say, "And he terms him who devises such things, a 
prophet who dreams." And as this Jew asserts regarding Jesus, that "even he 
himself does not deny that these works have in them nothing of divinity, but are 
the acts of wicked men;" so any one who disbelieves the writings of Moses might 
say, quoting what has been already said, the same thing, viz., that, "even Moses 
does not deny that these works have in them nothing of divinity, but are the 
acts of wicked men." And he will do the same thing also with respect to this: 
"Being compelled by the force of truth, Moses at the same time both exposed the 
doings of others, and convicted himself of the same." And when the Jew says, "Is 
it not a wretched inference from the same acts, to con clude that the one is a 
God, and the others sorcerers?" one might object to him, on the ground of those 
words of Moses already quoted, "Is it not then a wretched inference from the 
same acts, to conclude that the one is a prophet and servant of God, and the 
others sorcerers?" But when, in addition to those comparisons which I have 
already mentioned, Celsus, dwelling upon the subject, adduces this also: "Why 
from these works should the others be accounted wicked, rather than this man, 
seeing they have him as a witness against himself?"--we, too, shall adduce the 
following, in addition to what has been already said: "Why, from those passages 
in which Moses forbids us to believe those who exhibit signs and wonders, ought 
we to consider such persons as wicked, rather than Moses, because he calumniates 
some of them in respect of their signs and wonders?" And urging more to the same 
effect, that he may appear to strengthen his attempt, he says: "He himself 
acknowledged that these were not the works of a divine nature, but were the 
inventions of certain deceivers, and of very wicked men." Who, then, is 
"himself?" You O Jew, say that it is Jesus; but he who accuses you as liable to 
the same charges, will transfer this "himself" to the person of Moses. 
CHAP. LIV. 
After this, forsooth, the Jew of Celsus, to keep up the character assigned to 
the Jew from the beginning, in his address to those of his countrymen who had 
become believers, says: "By what, then, were you induced (to become his 
followers)? Was it because he foretold that after his death he would rise 
again?" Now this question, like the others, can be retorted upon Moses. For we 
might say to the Jew "By what, then, were you induced (to become the follower of 
Moses)? Was it because he put on record the following statement about his own 
death: 'And Moses, the servant of the LORD died there, in the land of Moab, 
according to the word of the Loud; and they buried him in Moab, near the house 
of Phogor: and no one knoweth his sepulchre until this day?'" For as the Jew 
casts discredit upon the statement, that "Jesus foretold that after His death He 
would rise again," another person might make a similar assertion about Moses, 
and would say in reply, that Moses also put on record (for the book of 
Deuteronomy is his composition) the statement, that "no one knoweth his 
sepulchre until this day," in order to magnify and enhance the importance of his 
place of burial, as being unknown to mankind. 
CHAP. LV. 
The Jew continues his address to those of his countrymen who are converts, as 
follows: "Come now, let us grant to you that the prediction was actually 
uttered. Yet how many others are there who practise such juggling tricks, in 
order to deceive their simple hearers, and who make gain by their deception?--as 
was the case, they say, with Zamolxis in Scythia, the slave of Pythagoras; and 
with Pythagoras himself in Italy; and with Rhampsinitus in Egypt (the latter of 
whom, they say, played at dice with Demeter in Hades, and returned to the upper 
world with a golden napkin which he had received from her as a gift); and also 
with Orpheus among the Odrysians, and Protesilaus in Thessaly, and Hercules at 
Cape Taenarus, and Theseus. But the question is, whether any one who was really 
dead ever rose with a veritable body. Or do you imagine the statements of others 
not only to be myths, but to have the appearance of such, while you have 
discovered a becoming and credible termination to your drama in the voice from 
the cross, when he breathed his last, and in the earthquake and the darkness? 
That while alive he was of no assistance to himself, but that when dead he rose 
again, and showed the marks of his punishment, and how his hands were pierced 
with nails: who beheld this? A half-frantic woman, as you state, and some other 
one, perhaps, of those who were engaged in the same system of delusion, who had 
either dreamed so, owing to a peculiar state of mind, or under the influence of 
a wandering imagination bad formed to himself an appearance according to his own 
wishes, which has been the case with numberless individuals; or, which is most 
probable, one who desired to impress others with this portent, and by such a 
falsehood to furnish an occasion to impostors like himself." 
Now, since it is a Jew who makes these statements, we shall conduct the 
defence of our Jesus as if we were replying to a Jew, still continuing the 
comparison derived from the accounts regarding Moses, and saying to him: "How 
many others are there who practise similar juggling tricks to those of Moses, in 
order to deceive their silly hearers, and who make gain by their deception?" Now 
this objection would be more appropriate in the mouth of one who did not believe 
in Moses (as we might quote the instances of Zamolxis and Pythagoras, who were 
engaged in such juggling tricks) than in that of a Jew, who is not very learned 
in the histories of the Greeks. An Egyptian, moreover, who did not believe the 
miracles of Moses, might credibly adduce the instance of Rhampsinitus, saying 
that it was far more credible that he had descended to Hades, and had played at 
dice with Demeter, and that after stealing from her a golden napkin he exhibited 
it as a sign of his having been in Hades, and of his having returned thence, 
than that Moses should have recorded that he entered into the darkness, where 
God was, and that he alone, above all others, drew near to God. For the 
following is his statement: "Moses alone shall come near the LORD; but the rest 
shall not come nigh." We, then, who are the disciples of Jesus, say to the Jew 
who urges these objections: "While assailing our belief in Jesus, defend 
yourself, and answer the Egyptian and the Greek objectors: what will you say to 
those charges which you brought against our Jesus, but which also might be 
brought against Moses first? And if you should make a vigorous effort to defend 
Moses, as indeed his history does admit of a clear and powerful defence, you 
will unconsciously, in your support of Moses, be an unwilling assistant in 
establishing the greater divinity of Jesus." 
CHAP. LVI. 
But since the Jew says that these histories of the alleged descent of heroes 
to Hades, and of their return thence, are juggling impositions, maintaining that 
these heroes disappeared for a certain time, and secretly withdrew themselves 
from the sight of all men, and gave themselves out afterwards as having returned 
from Hades,--for such is the meaning which his words seem to convey respecting 
the Odrysian Orpheus, and the Thessalian Protesilaus, and the Taenarian 
Hercules, and Theseus also,--let us endeavour to show that the account of Jesus 
being raised from the dead cannot possibly be compared to these. For each one of 
the heroes respectively mentioned might, had he wished, have secretly withdrawn 
himself from the sight of men, and returned again, if so determined, to those 
whom he had left; but seeing that Jesus was crucified before all the Jews, and 
His body slain in the presence of His nation, how can they bring themselves to 
say that He practised a similar deception with those heroes who are related to 
have gone down to Hades, and to have returned thence? But we say that the 
following consideration might be adduced, perhaps, as a defence of the public 
crucifixion of Jesus, especially in connection with the existence of those 
stories of heroes who are supposed to have been compelled to descend to Hades: 
that if we were to suppose Jesus to have died an obscure death, so that the fact 
of His decease was not patent to the whole nation of the Jews, and afterwards to 
have actually risen from the dead, there would, in such a case, have been ground 
for the same suspicion entertained regarding the heroes being also entertained 
regarding Himself. Probably, then, in addition to other causes for the 
crucifixion of Jesus, this also may have contributed to His dying a conspicuous 
death upon the cross, that no one might have it in his power to say that He 
voluntarily withdrew from the sight of men, and seemed only to die, without 
really doing so; but, appearing again, made a juggler's trick s of the 
resurrection from the dead. But a clear and unmistakeable proof of the fact I 
hold to be the undertaking of His disciples, who devoted themselves to the 
teaching of a doctrine which was attended with danger to human life,--a doctrine 
which they would not have taught with such courage had they invented the 
resurrection of Jesus from the dead; and who also, at the same time, not only 
prepared others to despise death, but were themselves the first to manifest 
their disregard for its terrors. 
CHAP. LVII. 
But observe whether this Jew of Celsus does not talk very blindly, in saying 
that it is impossible for any one to rise from the dead with a veritable body, 
his language being: "But this is the question, whether any one who was really 
dead ever rose again with a veritable body?" Now a Jew would not have uttered 
these words, who believed what is recorded in the third and fourth books of 
Kings regarding little children, of whom the one was raised up by Elijah, and 
the other by Elisha. And on this account, too, I think it was that Jesus 
appeared to no other nation than the Jews, who had become accustomed to 
miraculous occurrences; so that, by comparing what they themselves believed with 
the works which were done by Him, and with what was related of Him, they might 
confess that He, in regard to whom greater things were done, and by whom 
mightier marvels were performed, was greater than all those who preceded Him. 
CHAP. LVIII. 
Further, after these Greek stories which the Jew adduced respecting those who 
were guilty of juggling practices, and who pretended to have risen from the 
dead, he says to those Jews who are converts to Christianity: "Do you imagine 
the statements of others not only to be myths, but to have the appearance of 
such, while you have discovered a becoming and credible termination to your 
drama in the voice from the cross, when he breathed his last?" We reply to the 
Jew: "What you adduce as myths, we regard also as such; but the statements of 
the Scriptures which are common to us both, in which not you only, but we also, 
take pride, we do not at all regard as myths. And therefore we accord our belief 
to those who have therein related that some rose from the dead, as not being 
guilty of imposition; and to Him especially there mentioned as having risen, who 
both predicted the event Himself, and was the subject of prediction by others. 
And His resurrection is more miraculous than that of the others in this respect, 
that they were raised by the prophets Elijah and Elisha, while He was raised by 
none of the prophets, but by His Father in heaven. And therefore His 
resurrection also produced greater results than theirs. For what great good has 
accrued to the world from the resurrection of the children through the 
instrumentality of Elijah and Elisha, such as has re-suited from the preaching 
of the resurrection of Jesus, accepted as an article of belief, and as effected 
through the agency of divine power?" 
CHAP. LIX. 
He imagines also that both the earthquake and the darkness were an invention; 
but regarding these, we have in the preceding pages, made our defence, according 
to our ability, adducing the testimony of Phlegon, who relates that these events 
took place at the time when our Saviour suffered. And he goes on to say, that 
"Jesus, while alive, was of no assistance to himself, but that he arose after 
death, and exhibited the marks of his punishment, and showed how his hands had 
been pierced by nails." We ask him what he means by the expression, "was of no 
assistance to himself?" For if he means it to refer to want of virtue, we reply 
that He was of very great assistance. For He neither uttered nor committed 
anything that was improper, but was truly "led as a sheep to the slaughter, and 
was dumb as a lamb before the shearer;" and the Gospel testifies that He opened 
not His mouth. But if Celsus applies the expression to things indifferent and 
corporeal, (meaning that in such Jesus could render no help to Himself,) we say 
that we have proved from the Gospels that He went voluntarily to encounter His 
sufferings. Speaking next of the statements in the Gospels, that after His 
resurrection He showed the marks of His punishment, and how His hands had been 
pierced, he asks, "Who beheld this?" And discrediting the narrative of Mary 
Magdalene, who is related to have seen Him, he replies, "A half-frantic woman, 
as ye state." And because she is not the only one who is recorded to have seen 
the Saviour after His resurrection, but others also are mentioned, this Jew of 
Celsus calumniates these statements also in adding, "And some one else of those 
engaged in the same system of deception!" 
CHAP. LX. 
In the next place, as if this were possible, viz., that the image of a man 
who was dead could appear to another as if he were still living, he adopts this 
opinion as an Epicurean, and says, "That some one having so dreamed owing to a 
peculiar state of mind, or having, under the influence of a perverted 
imagination, formed such an appearance as he himself desired, reported that such 
had been seen; and this," he continues, "has been the case with numberless 
individuals." But even if this statement of his seems to have a considerable 
degree of force, it is nevertheless only fitted to confirm a necessary doctrine, 
that the soul of the dead exists in a separate state (from the body); and he who 
adopts such an opinion does not believe without good reason in the immortality, 
or at least continued existence, of the soul, as even Plato says in his treatise 
on the Soul that shadowy phantoms of persons already dead have appeared to some 
around their sepulchres. Now the phantoms which exist about the soul of the dead 
are produced by some substance, and this substance is in the soul, which exists 
apart in a body said to be of splendid appearance. But Celsus, unwilling to 
admit any such view, will have it that some dreamed a waking dream, and, under 
the influence of a perverted imagination, formed to themselves such an image as 
they desired. Now it is not irrational to believe that a dream may take place 
while one is asleep; but to suppose a waking vision in the case of those who are 
not altogether out of their senses, and under the influence of delirium or 
hypochondria, is incredible. And Celsus, seeing this, called the woman 
"half-mad,"- a statement which is not made by the history recording the fact, 
but from which he took occasion to charge the occurrences with being untrue. 

CHAP. LXI. 
Jesus accordingly, as Celsus imagines, exhibited after His death only the 
appearance of wounds received on the cross, and was not in reality so wounded as 
He is described to have been; whereas, according to the teaching of the 
Gospel--some portions of which Celsus arbitrarily accepts, in order to find 
ground of accusation, and other parts of which he rejects-Jesus called to Him 
one of His disciples who was sceptical, and who deemed the miracle an 
impossibility. That individual had, indeed, expressed his belief in the 
statement of the woman who said that she had seen Him, because he did not think 
it impossible that the soul of a dead man could be seen; but he did not yet 
consider the report to be true that He had been raised in a body, which was the 
antitype of the former. And therefore he did not merely say, "Unless I see, I 
will not believe;" but he added, "Unless I put my hand into the print of the 
nails, and lay my hands upon His side, I will not believe." These words were 
spoken by Thomas, who deemed it possible that the body of the soul might be seen 
by the eye of sense, resembling in all respects its former appearance, "Both in 
size, and in beauty of eyes, And in voice;" and frequently, too, "Having, also, 
such garments around the person (as when alive)." 
Jesus accordingly, having called Thomas, said, "Reach hither thy finger, and 
behold My hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into My side: and be 
not faithless, but believing." 
CHAP. LXII. 
Now it followed from all the predictions which were uttered regarding Him 
--amongst which was this prediction of the resurrection --and, from all that was 
done by Him, and from all the events which befell Him, that this event should be 
marvellous above all others. For it had been said beforehand by the prophet in 
the person of Jesus: "My flesh shall rest in hope, and Thou wilt not leave my 
soul in Hades, and wilt not suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption." And truly, 
after His resurrection, He existed in a body intermediate, as it were, between 
the grossness of that which He had before His sufferings, and the appearance of 
a soul uncovered by such a body. And hence it was, that when His disciples were 
together, and Thomas with them, there "came Jesus, the doors being shut, and 
stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. Then saith He to Thomas, Reach 
hither thy finger," etc. And in the Gospel of Luke also, while Simon and Cleopas 
were conversing with each other respecting all that had happened to them, Jesus 
"drew near, and went with them. And their eyes were holden, that they should not 
know Him. And He said unto them, What manner of communications are these that ye 
have one to another, as ye walk?" And when their eyes were opened, and they knew 
Him, then the Scripture says, in express words, "And He vanished out of their 
sight." And although Celsus may wish to place what is told of Jesus, and of 
those who saw Him after His resurrection, on the same level with imaginary 
appearances of a different kind, and those who have invented such, yet to those 
who institute a candid and intelligent examination, the events will appear only 
the more miraculous. 
CHAP. LXIII. 
After these points, Celsus proceeds to bring against the Gospel narrative a 
charge which is not to be lightly passed over, saying that "if Jesus desired to 
show that his power was really divine, he ought to have appeared to those who 
had ill-treated him, and to him who had condemned him, and to all men 
universally." For it appears to us also to be true, according to the Gospel 
account, that He was not seen after His resurrection in the same manner as He 
used formerly to show Himself--publicly, and to all men. But it is recorded in 
the Acts, that "being seen during forty days," He expounded to His disciples 
"the things pertaining to the kingdom of God." And in the Gospels it is not 
stated that He was always with them; but that on one occasion He appeared in 
their midst, after eight days, when the doors were shut, and on another in some 
similar fashion. And Paul also, in the concluding portions of the first Epistle 
to the Corinthians, in reference to His not having publicly appeared as He did 
in the period before He suffered, writes as follows: "For I delivered unto you 
first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures; and that He was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve: 
after that He was seen of above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the 
greater part remain unto the present time, but some are fallen asleep. After 
that He was seen of James, then of all the apostles. And last of all He was seen 
of me also, as of one born out of due time." I am of opinion now that the 
statements in this passage contain some great and wonderful mysteries, which are 
beyond the grasp not merely of the great multitude of ordinary believers, but 
even of those who are far advanced (in Christian knowledge), and that in them 
the reason would be explained why He did not show Himself, after His 
resurrection from the dead, in the same manner as before that event. And in a 
treatise of this nature, composed in answer to a work directed against the 
Christians and their faith, observe whether we are able to adduce a few rational 
arguments out of a greater number, and thus make an impression upon the hearers 
of this apology. 
CHAP. LXIV. 
Although Jesus was only a single individual, He was nevertheless more things 
than one, according to the different standpoint from which He might be regarded; 
nor was He seen in the same way by all who beheld Him. Now, that He was more 
things than one, according to the varying point of view, is clear from this 
statement, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life;" and from this, "I am the 
bread;" and this, "I am the door," and innumerable others. And that when seen He 
did not appear in like fashion to all those who saw Him, but according to their 
several ability to receive Him, will be clear to those who notice why, at the 
time when He was about to be transfigured on the high mountain, He did not admit 
all His apostles (to this sight), but only Peter, and James, and John, because 
they alone were capable of beholding His glory on that occasion, and of 
observing the glorified appearance of Moses and Elijah, and of listening to 
their conversation, and to the voice from the heavenly cloud. I am of opinion, 
too, that before He ascended the mountain where His disciples came to Him alone, 
and where He taught them the beatitudes, when He was somewhere in the lower part 
of the mountain, and when, as it became late, He healed those who were brought 
to Him, freeing them from all sickness and disease, He did not appear the same 
person to the sick, and to those who needed His healing aid, as to those who 
were able by reason of their strength to go up the mountain along with Him. Nay, 
even when He interpreted privately to His own disciples the parables which were 
delivered to the multitudes without, from whom the explanation was withheld, as 
they who heard them explained were endowed with higher organs of hearing than 
they who heard them without explanation, so was it altogether the same with the 
eyes of their soul, and, I think, also with those of their body. And the 
following statement shows that He had not always the same appearance, viz., that 
Judas, when about to betray Him, said to the multitudes who were setting out 
with him, as not being acquainted with Him, "Whomsoever I shall kiss, the same 
is He." And I think that the Saviour Himself indicates the same thing by the 
words: "I was daily with you, teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on 
Me." Entertaining, then, such exalted views regarding Jesus, not only with 
respect to the Deity within, and which was hidden from the view of the 
multitude, but with respect to the transfiguration of His body, which took place 
when and to whom He would, we say, that before Jesus had "put off the 
governments and powers," and while as yet He was not dead unto sin, all men were 
capable of seeing Him; but that, when He had "put off the governments and 
powers," and had no longer anything which was capable of being seen by the 
multitude, all who had formerly seen Him were not now able to behold Him. And 
therefore, sparing them, He did not show Himself to all after His resurrection 
from the dead. 
CHAP. LXV. 
And why do I say "to all?" For even with His own apostles and disciples He 
was not perpetually present, nor did He constantly show Himself to them, because 
they were not able without intermission to receive His divinity. For His deity 
was more resplendent after lie had finished the economy (of salvation): and this 
Peter, surnamed Cephas, the first-fruits as it were of the apostles, was enabled 
to behold, and along with him the twelve (Matthias having been substituted in 
room of Judas); and after them He appeared to the five hundred brethren at once, 
and then to James, and subsequently to all the others besides the twelve 
apostles, perhaps to the seventy also, and lastly to Paul, as to one born out of 
due time, and who knew well how to say, "Unto me, who am less than the least of 
all saints, is this grace given;" and probably the expression "least of all" has 
the same meaning with "one born out of due time." For as no one could reasonably 
blame Jesus for not having admitted all His apostles to the high mountain, but 
only the three already mentioned, on the occasion of His transfiguration, when 
He was about to manifest the splendour which appeared in His garments, and the 
glory of Moses and Elias talking with Him, so none could reasonably object to 
the statements of the apostles, who introduce the appearance of Jesus after His 
resurrection as having been made not to all, but to those only whom He knew to 
have received eyes capable of seeing His resurrection. I think, moreover, that 
the following statement regarding Him has an apologetic value in reference to 
our subject, viz.: "For to this end Christ died, and rose again, that He might 
be Lord both of the 'dead and living.'' For observe, it is conveyed in these 
words, that Jesus died that He might be Lord of the dead; and that He rose again 
to be Lord not only of the dead, but also of the living. And the apostle 
understands, undoubtedly, by the dead over whom Christ is to be Lord, those who 
are so called in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, "For the trumpet shall 
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible; " and by the living, those 
who are to be changed, and who are different from the dead who are to be raised. 
And respecting the living the words are these, "And we shall be changed;" an 
expression which follows immediately after the statement, "The dead shall be 
raised first." 
Moreover, in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, describing the same 
change in different words, he says, that they who sleep are not the same as 
those who are alive; his language being, "I would not have you to be ignorant, 
brethren, concerning them who are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others 
which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so 
them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him. For this we say unto you 
by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive and remain unto the coming of the 
Lord, shall not prevent them that are asleep." The explanation which appeared to 
us to be appropriate to this passage, we gave in the exegetical remarks which we 
have made on the first Epistle to the Thessalonians. 
CHAP. LXVI. 
And be not surprised if all the multitudes who have believed on Jesus do not 
behold His resurrection, when Paul, writing to the Corinthians, can say to them, 
as being incapable of receiving greater matters, "For I determined not to know 
anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified;" which is the same as 
saying, "Hitherto ye were not able, neither yet now are ye able, for ye are 
still carnal." The Scripture, therefore, doing everything by appointment of God, 
has recorded of Jesus, that before His sufferings He appeared to all 
indifferently, but not always; while after His sufferings He no longer appeared 
to all in the same way, but with a certain discrimination which measured out to 
each his due. And as it is related that "God appeared to Abraham," or to one of 
the saints, and this "appearance" was not a thing of constant occurrence, but 
took place at intervals, and not to all, so understand that the Son of God 
appeared in the one case on the same principle that God appeared to the latter. 
CHAP. LXVII. 
To the best of our ability, therefore, as in a treatise of this nature, we 
have answered the objection, that "if Jesus had really wished to manifest his 
divine power, he ought to have shown himself to those who ill-treated him, and 
to the judge who condemned him, and to all without reservation." There was, 
however, no obligation on Him to appear either to the judge who condemned Him, 
or to those who ill-treated Him. For Jesus spared both the one and the other, 
that they might not be smitten with blindness, as the men of Sodom were when 
they conspired against the beauty of the angels entertained by Lot. And here is 
the account of the matter: "But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot 
into the house to them, and shut to the door. And they smote the men who were at 
the door of the house with blindness, both small and great; so that they wearied 
themselves to find the door." Jesus, accordingly, wished to show that His power 
was divine to each one who was capable of seeing it, and according to the 
measure of His capability. And I do not suppose that He guarded against being 
seen on any other ground than from a regard to the fitness of those who were 
incapable of seeing Him. And it is in vain for Celsus to add, "For he had no 
longer occasion to fear any man after his death, being, as you say, a God; nor 
was he sent into the world at all for the purpose of being hid." Yet He was sent 
into the world not only to become known, but also to be hid. For all that He 
was, was not known even to those to whom He was known, but a certain part of Him 
remained concealed even from them; and to some He was not known at all. And He 
opened the gates of light to those who were the sons of darkness and of night, 
and had devoted themselves to becoming the sons of light and of the day. For our 
Saviour Lord, like a good physician, came rather to us who were full of sins, 
than to those who were righteous. 
CHAP. LXVIII. 
But let us observe how this Jew of Celsus asserts that, "if this at least 
would have helped to manifest his divinity, he ought accordingly to have at once 
disappeared from the cross." Now this seems to me to be like the argument of 
those who oppose the doctrine of providence, and who arrange things differently 
from what they are, and allege that the world would be better if it were as they 
arrange it. Now, in those instances in which their arrangement is a possible 
one, they are proved to make the world, so far as depends upon them, worse by 
their arrangement than it actually is; while in those cases in which they do not 
portray things worse than they really are, they are shown to desire 
impossibilities; so that in either case they are deserving of ridicule. And 
here, accordingly, that them was no impossibility in His coming, as a being of 
diviner nature, in order to disappear when He chose, is clear from the very 
nature of the case; and is certain, moreover, from what is recorded of Him, in 
the judgment of those who do not adopt certain portions merely of the narrative 
that they may have ground for accusing Christianity, and who consider other 
portions to be fiction. For it is related in St. Luke's Gospel, that Jesus after 
His resurrection took bread, and blessed it, and breaking it, distributed it to 
Simon and Cleopas; and when they had received the bread, "their eyes were 
opened, and they knew Him, and He vanished out of their sight," 
CHAP. LXIX. 
But we wish to show that His instantaneous bodily disappearance from the 
cross was not better fitted to serve the purposes of the whole economy of 
salvation (than His remaining upon it was). For the mere letter and narrative of 
the events which happened to Jesus do not present the whole view of the truth. 
For each one of them can be shown, to those who have an intelligent apprehension 
of Scripture, to be a symbol of something else. Accordingly, as His crucifixion 
contains a truth, represented in the words, "I am crucified with Christ," and 
intimated also in these, "God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the 
world; " and as His death was necessary, because of the statement, "For in that 
He died, He died unto sin once," and this, "Being made conformable to His 
death,' and this, "For if we be dead with Him, we shall also live with Him:" so 
also His burial has an application to those who have been made conformable to 
His death, who have been both crucified with Him, and have died with Him; as is 
declared by Paul, "For we were buried with Him by baptism, and have also risen 
with Him." These matters, however, which relate to His burial, and His 
sepulchre, and him who buried Him, we shall expound at greater length on a more 
suitable occasion, when it will be our professed purpose to treat of such 
things. But, for the present, it is sufficient to notice the clean linen in 
which the pure body of Jesus was to be enwrapped, and the new tomb which Joseph 
had hewn out of the rock, where "no one was yet lying," or, as John expresses 
it, "wherein was never man yet laid." And observe whether the harmony of the 
three evangelists here is not fitted to make an impression: for they have 
thought it right to describe the tomb as one that was "quarried or hewn out of 
the rock;" so that be who examines the words of the narrative may see something 
worthy of consideration, both in them and in the newness of the tomb,--a point 
mentioned by Matthew and John-- and in the statement of Luke and John, that no 
one had ever been interred therein before. For it became Him, who was unlike 
other dead men (but who even in death manifested signs of life in the water and 
the blood), and who was, so to speak, a new dead man, to be laid in a new and 
clean tomb, in order that, as His birth was purer than any other (in consequence 
of His being born, not in the way of ordinary generation, but of a virgin), His 
burial also might have the purity symbolically indicated in His body being 
deposited in a sepulchre which was new, not built of stones gathered from 
various quarters, and having no natural unity, but quarried and hewed out of one 
rock, united together in all its parts. Regarding the explanation, however, of 
these points, and the method of ascending from the narratives themselves to the 
things which they symbolized, one might treat more profoundly, and in a manner 
more adapted to their divine character, on a more suitable occasion, in a work 
expressly devoted to such subjects. The literal narrative, however, one might 
thus explain, viz., that it was appropriate for Him who had resolved to endure 
suspension upon the cross, to maintain all the accompaniments of the character 
He had assumed, in order that He who as a man had been put to death, and who as 
a man had died, might also as a man be buried. But even if it had been related 
in the Gospels, according to the view of Celsus, that Jesus had immediately 
disappeared from the cross, he and other unbelievers would have found fault with 
the narrative, and would have brought against it some such objection as this: 
"Why, pray, did he disappear after he had been put upon the cross, and not 
disappear before he suffered?" If, then, after learning from the Gospels that He 
did not at once disappear from the cross, they imagine that they can find fault 
with the narrative, because it did not invent, as they consider it ought to have 
done, any such instantaneous disappearance, but gave a true account of the 
matter, is it not reasonable that they should accord their faith also to His 
resurrection, and should believe that He, according to His pleasure, on one 
occasion, when the doors were shut, stood in the midst of His disciples, and on 
another, after distributing bread to two of His acquaintances, immediately 
disappeared from view, after He had spoken to them certain words? 
CHAP. LXX. 
But how is it that this Jew of Celsus could say that Jesus concealed Himself? 
For his words regarding Him are these: "And who that is sent as a messenger ever 
conceals himself when he ought to make known his message?" Now, He did not 
conceal Himself, who said to those who sought to apprehend Him, "I was daily 
teaching openly in the temple, and ye laid no hold upon Me." Bat having once 
already answered this charge of Celsus, now again repeated, we shall content 
ourselves with what we have formerly said. We have answered, also, in the 
preceding pages, this objection, that "while he was in the body, and no one 
believed upon him, he preached to ail without intermission; but when he might 
have produced a powerful belief in himself after rising from the dead, he showed 
himself secretly only to one woman, and to his own boon companions." Now it is 
not true that He showed Himself only to one woman; for it is stated in the 
Gospel according to Matthew, that "in the end of the Sabbath, as it began to 
dawn towards the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, 
to see the sepulchre. And, behold, there had been a great earthquake: for the 
angel of the Lord had descended from heaven, and come and rolled back the 
stone." And, shortly after, Matthew adds: "And, behold, Jesus met them" - 
clearly meaning the afore-mentioned Marys -"saying, All hail. And they came and 
held Him by the feet, and worshipped Him." And we answered, too, the charge, 
that "while undergoing his punishment he was seen by all, but after his 
resurrection only by one," when we offered our defence of the fact that "He was 
not seen by all." And now we might say that His merely human attributes were 
visible to all men but those which were divine in their nature -- I speak of the 
attributes not as related, but as distinct-- were not capable of being received 
by all But observe here the manifest contradiction into which Celsus falls. For 
having said, a little before, that Jesus had appeared secretly to one woman and 
His own boon companions, he immediately subjoins: "While undergoing his 
punishment he was seen by all men, but after his resurrection by one, whereas 
the opposite ought to have happened." And let us hear what he means by "ought to 
have happened." The being seen by all men while undergoing His punishment, but 
after His resurrection only by one individual, are opposites. Now, so far as his 
language conveys a meaning, he would have that to take place which is both 
impossible and absurd, viz., that while undergoing His punishment He should be 
seen only by one individual, but after His resurrection by all men! or else how 
will you explain his words, "The opposite ought to have happened?" 
CHAP. LXXI. 
Jesus taught us who it was that sent Him, in the words, "None knoweth the 
Father but the Son;'' and in these, "No man hath seen God at any time; the 
only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him." He, 
treating of Deity, stated to His true disciples the doctrine regarding God; and 
we, discovering traces of such teaching in the Scripture narratives, take 
occasion from such to aid our theological conceptions, hearing it declared in 
one passage, that "God is light, and in Him there is no darkness at all;" and in 
another, "God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit 
and in truth." But the purposes for which the Father sent Him are innumerable; 
and these any one may ascertain who chooses, partly from the prophets who 
prophesied of Him, and partly from the narratives of the evangelists. And not a 
few things also will he learn from the apostles, and especially from Paul. 
Moreover, those who are pious He leadeth to the light, and those who sin He will 
punish, -- a circumstance which Celsus not observing, has represented Him "as 
one who will lead the pious to the light, and who will have mercy on others, 
whether they sin or repent." 

CHAP. LXXII. 
After the above statements, he continues: "If he wished to remain hid, why 
was there heard a voice from heaven proclaiming him to be the Son of God? And if 
he did not seek to remain concealed, why was he punished? or why did he die?" 
Now, by such questions he thinks to convict the histories of discrepancy, not 
observing that Jesus neither desired all things regarding Himself to be known to 
all whom He happened to meet, nor yet all things to be unknown. Accordingly, the 
voice from heaven which proclaimed Him to be the Son of God, in the words, "This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," is not stated to have been 
audible to the multitudes, as this Jew of Celsus supposed. The voice from the 
cloud on the high mountain, moreover, was heard only by those who had gone up 
with Him. For the divine voice is of such a nature, as to be heard only by those 
whom the speaker wishes to hear it. And I maintain, that the voice of God which 
is referred to, is neither air which has been struck, nor any concussion of the 
air, nor anything else which is mentioned in treatises on the voice; and 
therefore it is heard by a better and more divine organ of hearing than that of 
sense. And when the speaker will not have his voice to be heard by all; he that 
has the finer ear hears the voice of God, while he who has the ears of his soul 
deadened does not perceive that it is God who speaks. These things I have 
mentioned because of his asking, "Why was there heard a voice from heaven 
proclaiming him to be the Son of God?" while with respect to the query, "Why was 
he punished, if he wished to remain hid?" what has been stated at greater length 
in the preceding pages on the subject of His suffering may suffice. 
CHAP. LXXIII. 
The Jew proceeds, after this, to state as a consequence what does not follow 
from the premises; for it does not follow from "His having wished, by the 
punishments which He underwent, to teach us also to despise death," that after 
His resurrection He should openly summon all men to the light, and instruct them 
in the object of His coming. For He had formerly summoned all men to the light 
in the words, "Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest." And the object of His coming had been explained at great length 
in His discourses on the beatitudes, and in the announcements which followed 
them, and in the parables, and in His conversations with the scribes and 
Pharisees. And the instruction afforded us by the Gospel of John, shows that the 
eloquence of Jesus consisted not in words, but in deeds; while it is manifest 
from the Gospel narratives that His speech was "with power," on which account 
also they marvelled at Him. 
CHAP. LXXIV. 
In addition to all this, the Jew further says: "All these statements are 
taken from your own books, in addition to which we need no other witness; for ye 
fail upon your own swords." 
Now we have proved that many foolish assertions, opposed to the narratives of 
our Gospels, occur in the statements of the Jew, either with respect to Jesus or 
ourselves. And I do not think that he has,shown that "we fall upon our own 
swords;" but he only so imagines. And when the Jew adds, in a general way, this 
to his former remarks: "O most high and heavenly one! what God, on appearing to 
men, is received with incredulity?" we must say to him, that according to the 
accounts in the law of Moses, God is related to have visited the Hebrews in a 
most public manner, not only in the signs and wonders performed in Egypt, and 
also in the passage of the Red Sea, and in the pillar of fire and cloud of 
light, but also when the Decalogue was announced to the whole people, and yet 
was received with incredulity by those who saw these things: for had they 
believed what they saw and heard, they would not have fashioned the calf, nor 
changed their own glory into the likeness of a grass-eating calf; nor would they 
have said to one another with reference to the calf, "These be thy gods, O 
Israel, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt." And observe whether it is 
not entirely in keeping with the character of the same people, who formerly 
refused to believe such wonders and such appearances of divinity, throughout the 
whole period of wandering in the wilderness, as they are recorded in the law of 
the Jews to have done, to refuse to be convinced also, on occasion of the 
glorious advent of Jesus, by the mighty words which were spoken by Him with 
authority, and the marvels which He performed in the presence of all the people. 

CHAP. LXXV. 
I think what has been stated is enough to convince any one that the unbelief 
of the Jews with regard to Jesus was in keeping with what is related of this 
people from the beginning. For I would say in reply to this Jew of Celsus, when 
he asks, "What God that appeared among men is received with incredulity, and 
that, too, when appearing to those who expect him? or why, pray, is he not 
recognized by those who have been long looking for him?" what answer friends, 
would you have us return to your questions? Which class of miracles, in your 
judgment, do you regard as the greater? Those which were wrought in Egypt and 
the wilderness, or those which we declare that Jesus performed among you? For if 
the former are in your opinion greater than the latter, does it not appear from 
this very fact to be in conformity with the character of those who disbelieved 
the greater to despise the less? And this is the opinion entertained with 
respect to our accounts of the miracles of Jesus. But if those related of Jesus 
are considered to be as great as those recorded of Moses, what strange thing has 
come to pass among a nation which has manifested incredulity with regard to the 
commencement of both dispensations? For the beginning of the legislation was in 
the time of Moses, in whose work are recorded the sins of the unbelievers and 
wicked among you, while the commencement of our legislation and second covenant 
is admitted to have been in the time of Jesus. And by your unbelief of Jesus ye 
show that ye are the sons of those who in the desert discredited the divine 
appearances; and thus what was spoken by our Saviour will be applicable also to 
you who believed not on Him: "Therefore ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds 
of your fathers." And there is fulfilled among you also the prophecy which said: 
"Your life shall hang in doubt before your eyes, and you will have no assurance 
of your life." For ye did not believe in the life which came to visit the human 
race. 
CHAP. LXXVI. 
Celsus, in adopting the character of a Jew, could not discover any objections 
to be urged against the Gospel which might not be retorted on him as liable to 
be brought also against the law and the prophets. For he censures Jesus in such 
words as the following: "He makes use of threats, and reviles men on light 
grounds, when he says, 'Woe unto you,' and 'I tell you beforehand.' For by such 
expressions he manifestly acknowledges his inability to persuade; and this would 
not be the case with a God, or even a prudent man." Observe, now, whether these 
charges do not manifestly recoil upon the Jew. For in the writings of the law 
and the prophets God makes use of threats and revilings, when He employs 
language of not less severity than that found in the Gospel, such as the 
following expressions of Isaiah: "Woe unto them that join house to house, and 
lay field to field;" and, "Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning that 
they may follow strong drink;" and, "Woe unto them that draw their sins after 
them as with a long rope;" and, "Woe unto them that call evil good, and good 
evil;" and, "Woe unto those of you who are mighty to drink wine;" and 
innumerable other passages of the same kind. And does not the following resemble 
the threats of which he speaks: "Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, 
a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters?" and so on, to which he 
subjoins such threats as are equal in severity to those which, he says, Jesus 
made use of. For is it not a threatening, and a great one, which declares, "Your 
country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your land, strangers 
devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers?" And 
are there not revilings in Ezekiel directed against the people, when the Lord 
says to the prophet, "Thou dwellest in the midst of scorpions?'' Were you 
serious, then, Celsus, in representing the Jew as saying of Jesus, that "he 
makes use of threats and revilings on slight grounds, when he employs the 
expressions, 'Woe unto you,' and 'I tell you beforehand?'" Do you not see that 
the charges which this Jew of yours brings against Jesus might be brought by him 
against God? For the God who speaks in the prophetic writings is manifestly 
liable to the same accusations, as Celsus regards them, of inability to 
persuade. I might, moreover, say to this Jew, who thinks that he makes a good 
charge against Jesus by such statements, that if he undertakes, in support of 
the scriptural account, to defend the numerous curses recorded in the books of 
Leviticus and Deuteronomy, we should make as good, or better, a defence of the 
revilings and threatenings which are regarded as having been spoken by Jesus. 
And as respects the law of Moses itself, we are in a position to make a better 
defence of it than the Jew is, because we have been taught by Jesus to have a 
more intelligent apprehension of the writings of the law. Nay, if the Jew 
perceive the meaning of the prophetic Scriptures, he will be able to show that 
it is for no light reason that God employs threatenings and revilings, when He 
says, "Woe unto you," and "I tell you beforehand." And how should God employ 
such expressions for the conversion of men, which Celsus thinks that even a 
prudent man would not have recourse to? But Christians, who know only one 
God--the same who spoke in the prophets and in the Lord (Jesus)--can prove the 
reasonableness of those threatenings and revilings, as Celsus considers and 
entitles them. And here a few remarks shall be addressed to this Celsus, who 
professes both to be a philosopher, and to be acquainted with all our system. 
How is it, friend, when Hermes, in Homer, says to Odysseus, "Why, now, 
wretched man, do you come wandering alone over the mountain-tops?" that you are 
satisfied with the answer, which explains that the Homeric Hermes addresses such 
language to Odysseus to remind him of his duty, because it is characteristic of 
the Sirens to flatter and to say pleasing things, around whom "Is a huge heap of 
bones," and who say, "Come hither, much landed Odysseus, great glory of the 
Greeks;" whereas, if our prophets and Jesus Himself, in order to turn their 
hearers from evil, make use of such expressions as "Woe unto you," and what you 
regard as revilings, there is no condescension in such language to the 
circumstances of the hearers, nor any application of such words to them as 
healing medicine? Unless, indeed, you would have God, or one who partakes of the 
divine nature, when conversing with men, to have regard to His own nature alone, 
and to what is worthy of Himself, but to have no regard to what is fitting to be 
brought before men who are under the dispensation and leading of His word, and 
with each one of whom He is to converse agreeably to his individual character. 
And is it not a ridiculous assertion regarding Jesus, to say that He was unable 
to persuade men, when you compare the state of matters not only among the Jews, 
who have many such instances recorded in the prophecies, but also among the 
Greeks, among whom all of those who have at-rained great reputation for their 
wisdom have been unable to persuade those who conspired against them, or to 
induce their judges or accusers to cease from evil, and to endeavour to attain 
to virtue by the way of philosophy? 
CHAP. LXXVII. 
After this the Jew remarks, manifestly in accordance with the Jewish belief: 
"We certainly hope that there will be a bodily resurrection, and that we shall 
enjoy an eternal life; and the example and archetype of this will be He who is 
sent to us, and who will show that nothing is impossible with God." We do not 
know, indeed, whether the Jew would say of the expected I Christ, that He 
exhibits in Himself an example of the resurrection; but let it be supposed that 
he both thinks and says so. We shall give this answer, then, to him who has told 
us that he drew his information from our own writings: "Did you read those 
writings, friend, in which you think you discover matter of accusation against 
us, and not find there the resurrection of Jesus, and the declaration that He 
was the first-born from the dead? Or because you will not allow such things to 
have been recorded, were they not actually recorded?" But as the Jew still 
admits the resurrection of the body, I do not consider the present a suitable 
time to discuss the subject with one who both believes and says that there is a 
bodily resurrection, whether he has an articulate understanding of such a topic, 
and is able to plead well on its behalf, or not, but has only given his assent 
to it as being of a legendary character. Let the above, then, be our reply to 
this Jew of Celsus. And when he adds, "Where, then, is he, that we may see him 
and believe upon him?" we answer: Where is He now who spoke in the prophecies, 
and who wrought miracles, that we may see and believe that He is part of God? 
Are you to be allowed to meet the objection, that God does not perpetually show 
Himself to the Hebrew nation, while we are not to be permitted the same defence 
with regard to Jesus, who has both once risen Himself, and led His disciples to 
believe in His resurrection, and so thoroughly persuaded them of its truth, that 
they show to all men by their sufferings how they are able to laugh at all the 
troubles of life, beholding the life eternal and the resurrection clearly 
demonstrated to them both in word and deed? 
CHAP. LXXVIII. 
The Jew continues: "Did Jesus come into the world for this purpose, that we 
should not believe him?" To which we immediately answer, that He did not come 
with the object of producing incredulity among the Jews; but knowing beforehand 
that such would be the result, He foretold it, and made use of their unbelief 
for the calling of the Gentiles. For through their sin salvation came to the 
Gentiles, respecting whom the Christ who speaks in the prophecies says, "A 
people whom I did not know became subject to Me: they were obedient to the 
hearing of My ear;" and, "I was found of them who sought Me not; I became 
manifest to those who inquired not after Me." It is certain, moreover, that the 
Jews were punished even in this present life, after treating Jesus in the manner 
in which they did. And let the Jews assert what they will when we charge them 
with guilt, and say, "Is not the providence and goodness of God most wonderfully 
displayed in your punishment, and in your being deprived of Jerusalem, and of 
the sanctuary, and of your splendid worship?" For whatever they may say in reply 
with respect to the providence of God, we shall be able more effectually to 
answer it by remarking, that the providence of God was wonderfully manifested in 
using the transgression of that people for the purpose of calling into the 
kingdom of God, through Jesus Christ, those from among the Gentiles who were 
strangers to the covenant and aliens to the promises. And these things were 
foretold by the prophets, who said that, on account of the transgressions of the 
Hebrew nation, God would make choice, not of a nation, but of individuals chosen 
from all lands; and, having selected the foolish things of the world, would 
cause an ignorant nation to become acquainted with the divine teaching, the 
kingdom of God being taken from the one and given to the other. And out of a 
larger number it is sufficient on the present occasion to adduce the prediction 
from the song in Deuteronomy regarding the calling of the Gentiles, which is as 
follows, being spoken in the person of the Lord "They have moved Me to jealousy 
with those who are not gods; they have provoked Me to anger with their idols: 
and I will move them to jealousy with those who are not a people; I will provoke 
them to anger with a foolish nation." 
The conclusion of all these arguments regarding Jesus is thus stated by the 
Jew: "He was therefore a man, and of such a nature, as the truth itself proves, 
and reason demonstrates him to be." I do not know, however, whether a man who 
had the courage to spread throughout the entire world his doctrine of religious 
worship and teaching, could accomplish what he wished without the divine 
assistance, and could rise superior to all who withstood the progress of his 
doctrine--kings and rulers, and the Roman senate, and governors in all places, 
and the common people. And how could the nature of a man possessed of no 
inherent excellence con-yen so vast a multitude? For it would not be wonderful 
if it were only the wise who were so convened; but it is the most irrational of 
men, and those devoted to their passions, and who, by reason of their 
irrationality, change with the greater difficulty so as to adopt a more 
temperate course of life. And yet it is because Christ was the power of God and 
the wisdom of the Father that He accomplished, and still accomplishes, such 
results, although neither the Jews nor Greeks who disbelieve His word will so 
admit. And therefore we shall not cease to believe in God, according to the 
precepts of Jesus Christ, and to seek to convert those who are blind on the 
subject of religion, although it is they who are truly blind themselves that 
charge us with blindness: and they, whether Jews or Greeks, who lead astray 
those that follow them, accuse us of seducing men--a good seduction, 
truly!--that they may become temperate instead of dissolute, or at least may 
make advances to temperance; may become just instead of unjust, or at least may 
tend to become so; prudent instead of foolish, or be on the way to become such; 
and instead of cowardice, meanness, and timidity, may exhibit the virtues of 
fortitude and courage, especially displayed in the struggles undergone for the 
sake of their religion towards God, the Creator of all things. Jesus Christ 
therefore came announced beforehand, not by one prophet, but by all; and it was 
a proof of the ignorance of Celsus, to represent a Jew as saying that one 
prophet only had predicted the advent of Christ. But as this Jew of Celsus, 
after being thus introduced, asserting that these things were indeed in 
conformity with his own law, has somewhere here ended his discourse, with a 
mention of other matters not worthy of remembrance, I too shall here terminate 
this second book of my answer to his treatise. But if God permit, and the power 
of Christ abide in my soul, I shall endeavour in the third book to deal with the 
subsequent statements of Celsus. 


