
Origen












Origen. Contra Celsus
BOOK I. 
PREFACE. 
1. WHEN false witnesses testified against our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, 
He remained silent; and when unfounded charges were brought against Him, He 
returned no answer, believing that His whole life and conduct among the Jews 
were a better refutation than any answer to the false testimony, or than any 
formal defence against the accusations. And I know not, my pious Ambrosius, why 
you wished me to write a reply to the false charges brought by Celsus against 
the Christians, and to his accusations directed against the faith of the 
Churches in his treatise; as if the facts themselves did not furnish a manifest 
refutation, and the doctrine a better answer than any writing, seeing it both 
disposes of the false statements, and does not leave to the accusations any 
credibility or validity. Now, with respect to our Lord's silence when false 
witness was borne against Him, it is sufficient at present to quote the words of 
Matthew, for the testimony of Mark is to the same effect. And the words of 
Matthew are as follow: "And the high priest and the council sought false witness 
against Jesus to put Him to death, but found none, although many false witnesses 
came forward. At last two false witnesses came and said, This fellow said, I am 
able to destroy the temple of God, and after three days to build it up. And the 
high priest arose, and said to Him, Answerest thou nothing to what these witness 
against thee? But Jesus held His peace." And that He returned no answer when 
falsely accused, the following is the statement: "And Jesus stood before the 
governor; and he asked Him, saying, Art Thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus 
said to him, Thou sayest. And when He was accused of the chief priests and 
elders, He answered nothing. Then said Pilate unto Him, Hearest thou not how 
many things they witness against Thee? And He answered him to never a word, 
insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly." 
2. It was, indeed, matter of surprise to men even of Ordinary intelligence, 
that one who was accused and assailed by false testimony, but who was able to 
defend Himself, and to show that He was guilty of none of the charges (alleged), 
and who might have enumerated the praiseworthy deeds of His own life, and His 
miracles wrought by divine power, so as to give the judge an opportunity of 
delivering a more honourable judgment regarding Him, should not have done this, 
but should have disdained such a procedure, and in the nobleness of His nature 
have contemned His accusers. That the judge would, without any hesitation, have 
set Him at liberty if He had offered a defence, is clear from what is related of 
him when he said, "Which of the two do ye wish that I should release unto you, 
Barabbas or Jesus, who is called Christ?" and from what the Scripture adds, "For 
he knew that for envy they had delivered Him." Jesus, however, is at all times 
assailed by false witnesses, hand, while wickedness remains in the world, is 
ever exposed to accusation. And yet even now He continues silent before these 
things, and makes no audible answer, but places His defence in the lives of His 
genuine disciples, which are a pre-eminent testimony, and one that rises 
superior to all false witness, and refutes and overthrows all unfounded 
accusations and charges. 
3. I venture, then, to say that this "apology" which you require me to 
compose will somewhat weaken that defence (of Christianity) which rests on 
facts, and that power of Jesus which is manifest to those who are not altogether 
devoid of perception. Notwithstanding, that we may not have the appearance of 
being reluctant to undertake the task which you have enjoined, we have 
endeavoured, to the best of our ability, to suggest, by way of answer to each of 
the statements advanced by Celsus, what seemed to us adapted to refute them, 
although his arguments have no power to shake the faith of any (true) believer. 
And forbid, indeed, that any one should be found who, after having been a 
partaker in such a love of God as was (displayed) in Christ Jesus, could be 
shaken in his purpose by the arguments of Celsus, or of any such as he. For 
Paul, when enumerating the innumerable causes which generally separate men from 
the love of Christ and from the love of God in Christ Jesus (to all of which, 
the love that was in himself rose superior), did not set down argument among the 
grounds of separation. For observe that he says, firstly: "Who shall separate us 
from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (as it is written, For Thy sake we are 
killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nay, in 
all these things we are more than conquerors through Him that loved us." And 
secondly, when laying down another series of causes which naturally tend to 
separate those who are not firmly grounded in their religion, he says: "For I am 
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor 
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any 
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in 
Christ Jesus our Lord." 
4. Now, truly, it is proper that we should feel elated because afflictions, 
or those other causes enumerated by Paul, do not separate us (from Christ); but 
not that Paul and the other apostles, and any other resembling them, (should 
entertain that feeling), because they were far exalted above such things when 
they said, "In all these things we are more than conquerors through Him that 
loved us," which is a stronger statement than that they are simply "conquerors." 
But if it be proper for apostles to entertain a feeling of elation in not being 
separated from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, that feeling 
will be entertained by them, because neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor 
principalities, nor any of the things that follow, can separate them from the 
love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And therefore I do not 
congratulate that believer in Christ whose faith can be shaken by Celsus--who no 
longer shares the common life of men, but has long since departed--or by any 
apparent plausibility of argument. For I do not know in what rank to place him 
who has need of arguments written in books in answer to the charges of Celsus 
against the Christians, in order to prevent him from being shaken in his faith, 
and confirm him in it. But nevertheless, since in the multitude of those who are 
considered believers some such persons might be found as would have their faith 
shaken and overthrown by the writings of Celsus, but who might be preserved by a 
reply to them of such a nature as to refute his statements and to exhibit the 
truth, we have deemed it right to yield to your injunction, and to furnish an 
answer to the treatise which you sent us, but which I do not think that any one, 
although only a short way advanced in philosophy, will allow to be a "True 
Discourse," as Celsus has entitled it. 
5. Paul, indeed, observing that there are in Greek philosophy certain things 
not to be lightly esteemed, which are plausible in the eyes of the many, but 
which represent falsehood as truth, says with regard to such: "Beware lest any 
man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, 
after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ." And seeing that there 
was a kind of greatness manifest in the words of the world's wisdom, he said 
that the words of the philosophers were "according to the rudiments of the 
world." No man of sense, however, would say that those of Celsus were "according 
to the rudiments of the world." Now those words, which contained some element of 
deceitfulness, the apostle named "vain deceit," probably by way of distinction 
from a deceit that was not "vain;" and the prophet Jeremiah observing this, 
ventured to say to God," O LORD, Thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived; Thou 
art stronger than I, and hast prevailed." But in the language of Celsus there 
seems to me to be no deceitfulness at all, not even that which is "vain;" such 
deceitfulness, viz., as is found in the language of those who have founded 
philosophical sects, and who have been endowed with no ordinary talent for such 
pursuits. And as no one would say that any ordinary error in geometrical 
demonstrations was intended to deceive, or would describe it for the sake of 
exercise in such matters; so those opinions which are to be styled "vain 
deceit," and the "tradition of men," and "according to the rudiments of the 
world," must have some resemblance to the views of those who have been the 
founders of philosophical sects, (if such titles are to be appropriately applied 
to them). 

6. After proceeding with this work as far as the place where Celsus 
introduces the Jew disputing with Jesus, I resolved to prefix this preface to 
the beginning (of the treatise), in order that the reader of our reply to Celsus 
might fall in with it first, and see that this book has been composed not for 
those who are thorough believers, but for such as are either wholly unacquainted 
with the Christian faith, or for those who, as the apostle terms them, are "weak 
in the faith;" regarding whom he says, "Him that is weak in the faith receive 
ye." And this preface must be my apology for beginning my answer to Celsus on 
one plan, and carrying it on on another. For my first intention was to indicate 
his principal objections, and then briefly the answers that were returned to 
them, and subsequently to make a systematic treatise of the whole discourse. But 
afterwards, circumstances themselves suggested to me that I should be economical 
of my time, and that, satisfied with what I had already stated at the 
commencement, I should in the following part grapple closely, to the best of my 
ability, with the charges of Celsus. I have therefore to ask indulgence for 
those portions which follow the preface towards the beginning of the book. And 
if you are not impressed by the powerful arguments which succeed, then, asking 
similar indulgence also with respect to them, I refer you, if you still desire 
an argumentative solution of the objections of Celsus, to those men who are 
wiser than myself, and who are able by words and treatises to overthrow the 
charges which he brings against us. But better is the man who, although meeting 
with the work of Celsus, needs no answer to it at all, but who despises all its 
contents, since they are contemned, and with good reason, by every believer in 
Christ, through the Spirit that is in him. 
CHAP. I. 
The first point which Celsus brings forward, in his desire to throw discredit 
upon Christianity, is, that the Christians entered into secret associations with 
each other contrary to law, saying, that "of associations some are public, and 
that these are in accordance with the laws; others, again, secret, and 
maintained in violation of the laws." And his wish is to bring into disrepute 
what are termed the "love-feasts " of the Christians, as if they had their 
origin in the common danger, and were more binding than any oaths. Since, then, 
he babbles about the public law, alleging that the associations of the 
Christians are in violation of it, we have to reply, that if a man were placed 
among Scythians, whose laws were unholy, and having no opportunity of escape, 
were compelled to live among them, such an one would with good reason, for the 
sake of the law of truth, which the Scythians would regard as wickedness, enter 
into associations contrary to their laws, with those like-minded with himself; 
so, if truth is to decide, the laws of the heathens which relate to images, and 
an atheistical polytheism, are "Scythian" laws, or more impious even than these, 
if there be any such. It is not irrational, then, to form associations in 
opposition to existing laws, if done for the sake of the truth. For as those 
persons would do well who should enter into a secret association in order to put 
to death a tyrant who had seized upon the liberties of a state, so Christians 
also, when tyrannized over by him who is called the devil, and by falsehood, 
form leagues contrary to the laws of the devil, against his power, and for the 
safety of those others whom they may succeed in persuading to revolt from a 
government which is, as it were, "Scythian," and despotic. 
CHAP. II. 
Celsus next proceeds to say, that the system of doctrine, viz., Judaism, upon 
which Christianity depends, was barbarous in its origin. And with an appearance 
of fairness, he does not reproach Christianity because of its origin among 
barbarians, but gives the latter credit for their ability in discovering (such) 
doctrines. To this, however, he adds the statement, that the Greeks are more 
skilful than any others in judging, establishing, and reducing to practice the 
discoveries of barbarous nations. Now this is our answer to his allegations, and 
our defence of the truths contained in Christianity, that if any one were to 
come from the study of Grecian opinions and usages to the Gospel, he would not 
only decide that its doctrines were true, but would by practice establish their 
truth, and supply whatever seemed wanting, from a Grecian point of view, to 
their demonstration, and thus confirm the truth of Christianity. We have to say, 
moreover, that the Gospel has a demonstration of its own, more divine than any 
established by Grecian dialectics. And this diviner method is called by the 
apostle the "manifestation of the Spirit and of power:" of "the Spirit," on 
account of the prophecies, which are sufficient to produce faith in any one who 
reads them, especially in those things which relate to Christ; and of "power," 
because of the signs and wonders which we must believe to have been performed, 
both on many other grounds, and on this, that traces of them are still preserved 
among those who regulate their lives by the precepts of the Gospel. 
CHAP. III. 
After this, Celsus proceeding to speak of the Christians teaching and 
practising their favourite doctrines in secret, and saying that they do this 
to,some purpose, seeing they escape the penalty of death which is imminent, he 
compares their dangers with those which were encountered by such men as Socrates 
for the sake of philosophy; and here he might have mentioned Pythagoras as well, 
and other philosophers. But our answer to this is, that in the case of Socrates 
the Athenians immediately afterwards repented; and no feeling of bitterness 
remained in their minds regarding him, as also happened in the history, of 
Pythagoras. The followers of the latter, indeed, for a considerable time 
established their schools in that part of Italy called Magna Graecia; but in the 
case of the Christians, the Roman Senate, and the princes of the time, and the 
soldiery, and the people, and the relatives of those who had become converts to 
the faith, made war upon their doctrine, and would have prevented (its 
progress), overcoming it by a confederacy of so powerful a nature, had it not, 
by the help of God, escaped the danger, and risen above it, so as (finally) to 
defeat the whole world in its conspiracy against it. 
CHAP. IV. 
Let us notice also how he thinks to cast discredit upon our system of morals, 
alleging that it is only common to us with other philosophers, and no venerable 
or new branch of instruction. In reply to which we have to say, that unless all 
men had naturally impressed upon their minds sound ideas of morality, the 
doctrine of the punishment of sinners would have been excluded by those who 
bring upon themselves the righteous judgments of God. It is not therefore matter 
of surprise that the same God should have sown in the hearts of all men those 
truths which He taught by the prophets and the Saviour, in order that at the 
divine judgment every man may be without excuse, having the "requirements of the 
law written upon his heart,"--a truth obscurely alluded to by the Bible in what 
the Greeks regard as a myth, where it represents God as having with His own 
finger written down the commandments, and given them to Moses, and which the 
wickedness of the worshippers of the calf made him break in pieces, as if the 
flood of wickedness, so to speak, had swept them away. But Moses having again 
hewn tables of stone, i God wrote the commandments a second time, and gave them 
to him; the prophetic word preparing the soul, as it were, after the first 
transgression, for the writing of God a second time. 
CHAP. V. 
Treating of the regulations respecting idolatry as being peculiar to 
Christianity, Celsus establishes their correctness, saying that the Christians 
do not consider those to be gods that are made with hands, On the ground that it 
is not in conformity with right reason (to suppose) that images, fashioned by 
the most worthless and depraved of workmen, and in many instances also provided 
by wicked men, can be (regarded as) gods. In what follows, however, wishing to 
show that this is a common opinion, and one not first discovered by 
Christianity, he quotes a saying of Heraclitus to this effect: "That those who 
draw near to lifeless images, as if they were gods, act in a similar manner to 
those who would enter into conversation with houses." Respecting this, then, we 
have to say, that ideas were implanted in the minds of men like the principles 
of morality, from which not only Heraclitus, but any other Greek or barbarian, 
might by reflection have deduced the same conclusion; for he states that the 
Persians also were of the same opinion, quoting Herodotus as his authority. We 
also can add to these Zeno of Citium, who in his Polity, says: "And there will 
be no need to build temples, for nothing ought to be regarded as sacred, or of 
much value, or holy, which is the work of builders and of mean men." It is 
evident, then, with respect to this opinion (as well as others), that there has 
been en-graven upon the hearts of men by the finger of God a sense of the duty 
that is required. 
CHAP. VI. 
After this, through the influence of some motive which is unknown to me, 
Celsus asserts that it is by the names of certain demons, and by the use of 
incantations, that the Christians appear to be possessed of (miraculous) power; 
hinting, I suppose, at the practices of those who expel evil spirits by 
incantations. And here he manifestly appears to malign the Gospel. For it is not 
by incantations that Christians seem to prevail (over evil spirits), but by the 
name of Jesus, accompanied by the announcement of the narratives which relate to 
Him; for the repetition of these has frequently been the means of driving demons 
out of men, especially when those who repeated them did so in a sound and 
genuinely believing spirit. Such power, indeed, does the name of Jesus possess 
over evil spirits, that there have been instances where it was effectual, when 
it was pronounced even by bad men, which Jesus Himself taught 
(would be the case), when He said: "Many shall say to Me in that day, In Thy 
name we have cast out devils, and done many wonderful works." Whether Celsus 
omitted this from intentional malignity, or from ignorance, I do not know. And 
he next proceeds to bring a charge against the Saviour Himself, alleging that it 
was by means of sorcery that He was able to accomplish the wonders which He 
performed; and that foreseeing that others would attain the same knowledge, and 
do the same things, making a boast of doing them by help of the power of God, He 
excludes such from His kingdom. And his accusation is, that if they are justly 
excluded, while He Himself is guilty of the same practices, He is a wicked man; 
but if He is not guilty of wickedness in doing such things, neither are they who 
do the same as He. But even if it be impossible to show by what power Jesus 
wrought these miracles, it is clear that Christians employ no spells or 
incantations, but the simple, name of Jesus, and certain other words in which 
they repose faith, according to the holy Scriptures. 
CHAP. VII. 
Moreover, since he frequently calls the Christian doctrine a secret system 
(of belief), we must confute him on this point also, since almost the entire 
world is better acquainted with what Christians preach than with the favourite 
opinions of philosophers. For who is ignorant of the statement that Jesus was 
born of a virgin, and that He was crucified, and that His resurrection is an 
article of faith among many, and that a general judgment is announced to come, 
in which the wicked are to be punished according to their deserts, and the 
righteous to be duly rewarded? And yet the mystery of the resurrection, not 
being understood, is made a subject of ridicule among unbelievers. In these 
circumstances, to speak of the Christian doctrine as a secret system, is 
altogether absurd. But that there should be certain doctrines, not made known to 
the multitude, which are (revealed) after the exoteric ones have been taught, is 
not a peculiarity of Christianity alone, but also of philosophic systems, in 
which certain truths are exoteric and others esoteric. Some of the hearers of 
Pythagoras were content with his ipse dixit; while others were taught in secret 
those doctrines which were not deemed fit to be communicated to profane and 
insufficiently prepared ears. Moreover, all the mysteries that are celebrated 
everywhere throughout Greece and barbarous countries, although held in secret, 
have no discredit thrown upon them, so that it is in vain that he endeavours to 
calumniate the secret doctrines of Christianity, seeing he does not correctly 
understand its nature. 
CHAP. VIII. 
It is with a certain eloquence, indeed, that he appears to advocate the cause 
of those who bear witness to the truth of Christianity by their death, in the 
following words: "And I do not maintain that if a man, who has adopted a system 
of good doctrine, is to incur danger from men on that account, he should either 
apostatize, or feign apostasy, or openly deny his opinions." And he condemns 
those who, while holding the Christian views, either pretend that they do not, 
or deny them, saying that "he who holds a certain opinion ought not to feign 
recantation, or publicly disown it." And here Celsus must be convicted of 
self-contradiction. For from other treatises of his it is ascertained that he 
was an Epicurean; but here, because he thought that he could assail Christianity 
with better effect by not professing the opinions of Epicurus, he pretends that 
there is a something better in man than the earthly part of his nature, which is 
akin to God, and says that "they in whom this element, viz., the soul, is in a 
healthy condition, are ever seeking after their kindred nature, mean ing God, 
and are ever desiring to hear something about Him, and to call it to 
remembrance." Observe now the insincerity of his character! Having said a little 
before, that "the man who had embraced a system of good doctrine ought not, even 
if exposed to danger on that account from men, to disavow it, or pretend that he 
had done so, nor yet openly disown it," he now involves himself in all manner of 
contradictions. For he knew that if he acknowledged himself an Epicurean, he 
would not obtain any credit when accusing those who, in any degree, introduce 
the doctrine of Providence, and who place a God over the world. And we have 
heard that there were two individuals of the name of Celsus, both of whom were 
Epicureans; the earlier of the two having lived in the time of Nero, but this 
one in that of Adrian, and later. 
CHAP. IX. 
He next proceeds to recommend, that in adopting opinions we should follow 
reason and a rational guide, since he who assents to opinions without following 
this course is very liable to be deceived. And he compares inconsiderate 
believers to Metragyrtae, and soothsayers, and Mithrae, and Sabbadians, and to 
anything else that one may fall in with, and to the phantoms of Hecate, or any 
other demon or demons. For as amongst such persons are frequently to be found 
wicked men, who, taking advantage of the ignorance of those who are easily 
deceived, lead them away whither they will, so also, he says, is the case among 
Christians. And he asserts that certain persons who do not wish either to give 
or receive a reason for their belief, keep repeating, "Do not examine, but 
believe!" and, "Your faith will save you!" And he alleges that such also say, 
"The wisdom of this life is bad, but that foolishness is a good thing!" To which 
we have to answer, that if it were possible for all to leave the business of 
life, and devote themselves to philosophy, no other method ought to be adopted 
by any one, but this alone. For in the Christian system also it will be found 
that there is, not to speak at all arrogantly, at least as much of investigation 
into articles of belief, and of explanation of dark sayings, occurring in the 
prophetical writings, and of the parables in the Gospels, and of countless other 
things, which either were narrated or enacted with a symbolical signification, 
(as is the case with other systems). But since the course alluded to is 
impossible, partly on account of the necessities of life, partly on account of 
the weakness of men, as only a very few individuals devote themselves earnestly 
to study, what better method could be devised with a view of assisting the 
multitude, than that which was delivered by Jesus to the heathen? And let us 
inquire, with respect to the great multitude of believers, who have washed away 
the mire of wickedness in which they formerly wallowed, whether it were better 
for them to believe without a reason, and to have become reformed and improved 
in their habits, through the belief that men are chastised for sins, and 
honoured for good works or not to have allowed themselves to be converted on the 
strength of mere faith, but have waited) until they could give themselves to a 
thorough examination of the (necessary) reasons. For it is manifest that, (on 
such a plan), all men, with very few exceptions, would not obtain this 
(amelioration of conduct) which they have obtained through a simple faith, but 
would continue to remain in the practice of a wicked life. Now, whatever other 
evidence can be furnished of the fact, that it was not without divine 
intervention that the philanthropic scheme of Christianity was introduced among 
men, this also must be added. For a pious man will not believe that even a 
physician of the body, who restores the sick to better health, could take up his 
abode in any city or country without divine permission, since no good happens to 
men without the help of God. And if he who has cured the bodies of many, or 
restored them to better health, does not effect his cures without the help of 
God, how much more He who has healed the souls of many, and has turned them (to 
virtue), and improved their nature, and attached them to God who is over all 
things, and taught them to refer every action to His good pleasure, and to shun 
all that is displeasing to Him, even to the least of their words or deeds, or 
even of the thoughts of their hearts? 
CHAP. X. 
In the next place, since our opponents keep repeating those statements about 
faith, we must say that, considering it as a useful thing for the multitude, we 
admit that we teach those men to believe without reasons, who are unable to 
abandon all other employments, and give themselves to an examination of 
arguments; and our opponents, although they do not acknowledge it, yet 
practically do the same. For who is there that, on betaking himself to the study 
of philosophy, and throwing himself into the ranks of some sect, either by 
chance, or because he is provided with a teacher of that school, adopts such a 
course for any other reason, except that he believes his particular sect to be 
superior to any other? For, not waiting to hear the arguments of all the other 
philosophers, and of all the different sects, and the reasons for condemning one 
system and for supporting another, he in this way elects to become a Stoic, 
e.g., or a Platonist, or a Peripatetic, or an Epicurean, or a follower of some 
other school, and is thus borne, although they will not admit it, by a kind of 
irrational impulse to the practice, say of Stoicism, to the disregard of the 
others; despising either Platonism, as being marked by greater humility than the 
others; or Peripateticism, as more human, and as admitting with more fairness 
than other systems the blessings of human life. And some also, alarmed at first 
sight about the doctrine of providence, from seeing what happens in the world to 
the vicious and to the virtuous, have rashly concluded that there is no divine 
providence at all, and have adopted the views of Epicurus and Celsus. 
CHAP. XI. 
Since, then, as reason teaches, we must repose faith in some one of those who 
have been the introducers of sects among the Greeks or Barbarians, why should we 
not rather believe in God who is over all things, and in Him who teaches that 
worship is due to God alone, and that other things are to be passed by, either 
as non-existent, or as existing indeed, and worthy of honour, but not of worship 
and reverence? And respecting these things, he who not only believes, but who 
contemplates things with the eye of reason, will state the demonstrations that 
occur to him, and which are the result of careful investigation. And why should 
it not be more reasonable, seeing all human things are dependent upon faith, to 
believe God rather than them? For who enters on a voyage, or contracts a 
marriage, or becomes the father of children, or casts seed into the ground, 
without believing that better things will result from so doing, although the 
contrary might and sometimes does happen? And yet the belief that better things, 
even agreeably to their wishes, will follow, makes all men venture upon 
uncertain enterprises, which may turn out differently from what they expect. And 
if the hope and belief of a better future be the support of life in every 
uncertain enterprise, why shall not this faith rather be rationally accepted by 
him who believes on better grounds than he who sails the sea, or tills the 
ground, or marries a wife, or engages in any other human pursuit, in the 
existence of a God who was the Creator of all these things, and in Him who with 
surpassing wisdom and divine greatness of mind dared to make known this doctrine 
to men in every part of the world, at the cost of great danger, and of a death 
considered infamous, which He underwent for the sake of the human race; having 
also taught those who were persuaded to embrace His doctrine at the first, to 
proceed, under the peril of every danger, and of ever impending death, to all 
quarters of the world to ensure the salvation of men? 
CHAP. XII. 
In the next place, when Celsus says in express words, "If they would answer 
me, not as if I were asking for information, for I am acquainted with all their 
opinions, but because I take an equal interest in them all, it would be well. 
And if they will not, but will keep reiterating, as they generally do, 'Do not 
investigate,' etc., they must, he continues, explain to me at least of what 
nature these things are of which they speak, and whence they are derived," etc. 
Now, with regard to his statement that he "is acquainted with all our 
doctrines," we have to say that this is a boastful and daring assertion; for if 
he had read the prophets in particular, which are full of acknowledged 
difficulties, and of declarations that are obscure to the multitude, and if he 
had perused the parables of the Gospels, and the other writings of the law and 
of the Jewish history, and the utterances of the apostles, and had read them 
candidly, with a desire to enter into their meaning, he would not have expressed 
himself with such boldness, nor said that he "was acquainted with all their 
doctrines." Even we ourselves, who have devoted much study to these writings, 
would not say that "we were acquainted with everything," for we have a regard 
for truth. Not one of us will assert, "I know all the doctrines of Epicurus," or 
will be confident that he knows all those of Plato, in the knowledge of the fact 
that so many differences of opinion exist among the expositors of these systems. 
For who is so daring as to say that he knows all the opinions of the Stoics or 
of the Peripatetics? Unless, indeed, it should be the case that he has heard 
this boast, "I know them all," from some ignorant and senseless individuals, who 
do not perceive their own ignorance, and should thus imagine, from having had 
such persons as his teachers, that he was acquainted with them all. Such an one 
appears to me to act very much as a person would do who had visited Egypt (where 
the Egyptian savans, learned in their country's literature, are greatly given to 
philosophizing about those things which are regarded among them as divine, but 
where the vulgar, hearing certain myths, the reasons of which they do not 
understand, are greatly elated because of their fancied knowledge), and who 
should imagine that he is acquainted with the whole circle of Egyptian 
knowledge, after having been a disciple of the ignorant alone, and without 
having associated with any of the priests, or having learned the mysteries of 
the Egyptians from any other source. And what I have said regarding the learned 
and ignorant among the Egyptians, I might have said also of the Persians; among 
whom there are mysteries, conducted on rational principles by the learned among 
them, but understood in a symbolical sense by the more superficial of the 
multitude. And the same remark applies to the Syrians, and Indians, and to all 
those who have a literature and a mythology. 
CHAP. XIII. 
But since Celsus has declared it to be a saying of many Christians, that "the 
wisdom of this life is a bad thing, but that foolishness is good," we have to 
answer that he slanders the Gospel, not giving the words as they actually occur 
in the writings of Paul, where they run as follow: "If any one among you seemeth 
to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may become wise. For 
the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God." The apostle, therefore, does 
not say simply that "wisdom is fool ishness with God," but "the wisdom of this 
world." And again, not, "If any one among you seemeth to be wise, let him become 
a fool universally;" but, "let him become a fool in this world, that he may 
become wise." We term, then, "the wisdom of this world," every false system of 
philosophy, which, according to the Scriptures, is brought to nought; and we 
call foolishness good, not without restriction, but when a man becomes foolish 
as to this world. As if we were to say that the Platonist, who believes in the 
immortality of the soul, and in the doctrine of its metempsychosis,, incurs the 
charge of folly with the Stoics, who discard this opinion; and with the 
Peripatetics, who babble about the subtleties of Plato; and with the Epicureans, 
who call it superstition to introduce a providence, and to place a God over all 
things. 
Moreover, that it is in agreement with the spirit of Christianity, of much 
more importance to give our assent to doctrines upon grounds of reason and 
wisdom than on that of faith merely, and that it was only in certain 
circumstances that the latter course was desired by Christianity, in order not 
to leave men altogether without help, is shown by that genuine disciple of 
Jesus, Paul, when he says: "For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by 
wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them 
that believe." Now by these words it is clearly shown that it is by the wisdom 
of God that God ought to be known. But as this result did not follow, it pleased 
God a second time to save them that believe, not by "folly" universally, but by 
such foolishness as depended on preaching. For the preaching of Jesus Christ as 
crucified is the "foolishness" of preaching, as Paul also perceived, when he 
said, "But we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the 
Greeks foolishness; but to them who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the 
power of God, and wisdom of God." 
CHAP. XIV. 
Celsus, being of opinion that there is to be found among many nations a 
general relationship of doctrine, enumerates all the nations which gave rise to 
such and such opinions; but for some reason, unknown to me, he casts a slight 
upon the Jews, not including them amongst the others, as having either laboured 
along with them, and arrived at the same conclusions, or as having entertained 
similar opinions on many subjects. It is proper, therefore, to ask him why he 
gives credence to the histories of Barbarians and Greeks respecting the 
antiquity of those nations of whom he speaks, but stamps the histories of this 
nation alone as false. For if the respective writers related the events which 
are found in these works in the spirit of truth, why should we distrust the 
prophets of the Jews alone? And if Moses and the prophets have recorded many 
things in their history from a desire to favour their own system, why should we 
not say the same of the historians of other countries? Or, when the Egyptians or 
their histories speak evil of the Jews, are they to be believed on that point; 
but the Jews, when saying the same things of the Egyptians, and declaring that 
they had suffered great injustice at their hands, and that on this account they 
had been punished by God, are to be charged with falsehood? And this applies not 
to the Egyptians alone, but to others; for we shall find that there was a 
connection between the Assyrians and the Jews, and that this is recorded in the 
ancient histories of the Assyrians. And so also the Jewish historians (I avoid 
using the word "prophets," that I may not appear to prejudge the case) have 
related that the Assyrians were enemies of the Jews. Observe at once, then, the 
arbitrary procedure of this individual, who believes the histories of these 
nations on the ground of their being learned, and condemns others as being 
wholly ignorant. For listen to the statement of Celsus: "There is," he says, "an 
authoritative account from the very beginning, respecting which there is a 
constant agreement among all the most learned nations, and cities, and men." And 
yet he will not call the Jews a learned nation in the same way in which he does 
the Egyptians, and Assyrians, and Indians, and Persians, and Odrysians, and 
Samothracians, and Eleusinians. 
How much more impartial than Celsus is Numenius the Pythagorean, who has 
given many proofs of being a very eloquent man, and who has carefully tested 
many opinions, and collected together from many sources what had the appearance 
of truth; for, in the first hook of his treatise On the Good, speaking of those 
nations who have adopted the opinion that God is incorporeal, he enumerates the 
Jews also among those who hold this view; not showing any reluctance to use even 
the language of their prophets in his treatise, and to give it a metaphorical 
signification. It is said, moreover, that Hermippus has recorded in his first 
book, On Lawgivers, that it was from the Jewish people that Pythagoras derived 
the philosophy which he introduced among the Greeks. And there is extant a work 
by the historian Hecataeus, treat ing of the Jews, in which so high a character 
is bestowed upon that nation for its learning, that Herennius Philo, in his 
treatise on the Jews, has doubts in the first place, whether it is really the 
composition of the historian; and says, in the second place, that if really his, 
it is probable that he was carried away by the plausible nature of the Jewish 
history, and so yielded his assent to their system. 
CHAP. XVI. 
I must express my surprise that Celsus should class the Odrysians, and 
Samothracians, and Eleusinians, and Hyperboreans among the most ancient and 
learned nations, and should not deem the Jews worthy of a place among such, 
either for their learning or their antiquity, although there are many treatises 
in circulation among the Egyptians, and Phoenicians, and Greeks, which testify 
to their existence as an ancient people, but which I have considered it 
unnecessary to quote. For any one who chooses may read what Florins Josephus has 
recorded in his two books, On the Antiquity, of the Jews, where he brings 
together a great collection of writers, who bear witness to the antiquity of the 
Jewish people; and there exists the Discourse to the Greeks of Tatian the 
younger, in which with very great learning he enumerates those historians who 
have treated of the antiquity of the Jewish nation and of Moses. It seems, then, 
to be not from a love of truth, but from a spirit of hatred, that Celsus makes 
these statements, his object being to asperse the origin of Christianity, which 
is connected with Judaism. Nay, he styles the Galactophagi of Homer, and the 
Druids of the Gauls, and the Getae, most learned and ancient tribes, on account 
of the resemblance between their traditions and those of the Jews, although I 
know not whether any of their histories survive; but the Hebrews alone, as far 
as in him lies, he deprives of the honour both of antiquity and learning. And 
again, when making a list of ancient and learned men who have conferred benefits 
upon their contemporaries (by their deeds), and upon posterity by their 
writings, he excluded Moses from the number; while of Linus, to whom Celsus 
assigns a foremost place in his list, there exists neither laws nor discourses 
which produced a change for the better among any tribes; whereas a whole nation, 
dispersed throughout the entire world, obey the laws of Moses. Consider, then, 
whether it is not from open malevolence that he has expelled Moses from his 
catalogue of learned men, while asserting that Linus, and Musaeus, and Orpheus, 
and Pherecydes, and the Persian Zoroaster, and Pythagoras, discussed these 
topics, and that their opinions were deposited in books, and have thus been 
preserved down to the present time. And it is intentionally also that he has 
omitted to take notice of the myth, embellished chiefly by Orpheus, in which the 
gods are described as affected by human weaknesses and passions. 
CHAP. XVII. 
In what follows, Celsus, assailing the Mosaic history, finds fault with those 
who give it a tropical and allegorical signification. And here one might say to 
this great man, who inscribed upon his own work the title of a True Discourse, 
"Why, good sir, do you make it a boast to have it recorded that the gods should 
engage in such adventures as are described by your learned poets and 
philosophers, and be guilty of abominable intrigues, and of engaging in wars 
against their own fathers, and of cutting off their secret parts, and should 
dare to commit and to suffer such enormities; while Moses, who gives no such 
accounts respecting God, nor even regarding the holy angels, and who relates 
deeds of far less atrocity regarding men (for in his writings no one ever 
ventured to commit such crimes as Kronos did against Uranus, or Zeus against his 
father, or that of the father of men and gods, who had intercourse with his own 
daughter), should be considered as having deceived those who were placed under 
his laws, and to have led them into error?" And here Celsus seems to me to act 
somewhat as Thrasymachns the Platonic philosopher did, when he would not allow 
Socrates to answer regarding justice, as he wished, but said, "Take care not to 
say that utility is justice, or duty, or anything of that kind." For in like 
manner Celsus as sails (as he thinks) the Mosaic histories, and finds fault with 
those who understand them allegorically, at the same time bestowing also some 
praise upon those who do so, to the effect that they are more impartial (than 
those who do not); and thus, as it were, he prevents by his cavils those who are 
able to show the true state of the case from offering such a defence as they 
would wish to offer. 
CHAP. XVIII. 
And challenging a comparison of book with book, I would say, "Come now, good 
sir, take down the poems of Linus, and of Musaeus, and of Orpheus, and the 
writings of Pherecydes, and carefully compare these with the laws of 
Moses--histories with histories, and ethical discourses with laws and 
commandments--and see which of the two are the better fitted to change the 
character of the hearer on the very spot, and which to harden him in his 
wickedness; and observe that your series of writers display little concern for 
those readers who are to peruse them at once unaided, but have composed their 
philosophy (as you term it) for those who are able to comprehend its 
metaphorical and allegorical signification; whereas Moses, like a distinguished 
orator who meditates some figure of Rhetoric, and who carefully introduces in 
every part language of twofold meaning, has done this in his five books: neither 
affording, in the portion which relates to morals, any handle to his Jewish 
subjects for committing evil; nor yet giving to the few individuals who were 
endowed with greater wisdom, and who were capable of investigating his meaning, 
a treatise devoid of material for speculation. But of your learned poets the 
very writings would seem no longer to be preserved, although they would have 
been carefully treasured up if the readers had perceived any benefit (likely to 
be derived from them); whereas the works of Moses have stirred up many, who were 
even aliens to the manners of the Jews, to the belief that, as these writings 
testify, the first who enacted these laws and delivered them to Moses, was the 
God who was the Creator of the world. For it became the Creator of the universe, 
after laying down laws for its government, to confer upon His words a power 
which might subdue all men in every part of the earth. And this I maintain, 
having as yet entered into no investigation regarding Jesus, but still 
demonstrating that Moses, who is far inferior to the Lord, is, as the Discourse 
will show, greatly superior to your wise poets and philosophers." 
CHAP. XIX. 
After these statements, Celsus, from a secret desire to cast discredit upon 
the Mosaic account of the creation, which teaches that the world is not yet ten 
thousand years old, but very much under that, while concealing his wish, 
intimates his agreement with those who hold that the world is uncreated. For, 
maintaining that there have been, from all eternity, many conflagrations and 
many deluges, and that the flood which lately took place in the time of 
Deucalion is comparatively modern, he clearly demonstrates to those who are able 
to understand him, that, in his opinion, the world was uncreated. But let this 
assailant of the Christian faith tell us by what arguments he was compelled to 
accept the statement that there have been many conflagrations and many 
cataclysms, and that the flood which occurred in the time of Deucalion, and the 
conflagration in that of Phaethon, were more recent than any others. And if he 
should put forward the dialogues of Plato (as evidence) on these subjects, we 
shall say to him that it is allowable for us also to believe that there resided 
in the pure and pious soul of Moses, who ascended above all created things, and 
united himself to the Creator of the universe, and who made known divine things 
with far greater clearness than Plato, or those other wise men (who lived) among 
the Greeks and Romans, a spirit which was divine. And if he demands of us our 
reasons for such a belief, let him first give grounds for his own unsupported 
assertions, and then we shall show that this view of ours is the correct one. 
CHAP. XX. 
And yet, against his will, Celsus is entangled into testifying that the world 
is comparatively modern, and not yet ten thousand years old, when he says that 
the Greeks consider those things as ancient, because, owing to the deluges and 
conflagrations, they have not beheld or received any memorials of older events. 
But let Celsus have, as his authorities for the myth regarding the 
conflagrations and inundations, those persons who, in his opinion, are the most 
learned of the Egyptians, traces of whose wisdom are to be found in the worship 
of irrational animals, and in arguments which prove that such a worship of God 
is in conformity with reason, and of a secret and mysterious character. The 
Egyptians, then, when they boastfully give their own account of the divinity of 
animals, are to be considered wise; but if any Jew, who has signified his 
adherence to the law and the lawgiver, refer everything to the Creator of the 
universe, and the only God, he is, in the opinion of Celsus and those like him, 
deemed inferior to him who degrades the Divinity not only to the level of 
rational and mortal animals, but even to that of irrational also!--a view which 
goes far beyond the mythical doctrine of transmigration, according to which the 
soul falls down from the summit of heaven, and enters into the body of brute 
beasts, both tame and savage! And if the Egyptians related fables of this kind, 
they are believed to convey a philosophical meaning by their enigmas and 
mysteries; but if Moses compose and leave behind him histories and laws for an 
entire nation, they are to be considered as empty fables, the language of which 
admits of no allegorical meaning! 
CHAP. XXI. 
The following is the view of Celsus and the Epicureans: "Moses having," he 
says, "learned the doctrine which is to be found existing among wise nations and 
eloquent men, obtained the reputation of divinity." Now, in answer to this we 
have to say, that it may be allowed him that. Moses did indeed hear a somewhat 
ancient doctrine, and transmitted the same to the Hebrews; that if the doctrine 
which he heard was false, and neither pious nor venerable, and if 
notwithstanding, he received it and handed it down to those under his authority, 
he is liable to censure; but if, as you assert, he gave his adherence to 
opinions that were wise and true, and educated his people by means of them, 
what, pray, has he done deserving of condemnation? Would, indeed, that not only 
Epicurus, but Aristotle, whose sentiments regarding providence are not so 
impious (as those of the former), and the Stoics, who assert that God is a body, 
had heard such a doctrine! Then the world would not have been filled with 
opinions which either disallow or enfeeble the action of providence, or 
introduce a corrupt corporeal principle, according to which the god of the 
Stoics is a body, with respect to whom they are not afraid to say that he is 
capable of change, and may be altered and transformed in all his parts, and, 
generally, that he is capable of corruption, if there be any one to corrupt him, 
but that he has the good fortune to escape corruption, because there is none to 
corrupt. Whereas the doctrine of the Jews and Christians, which preserves the 
immutability and unalterableness of the divine nature, is stigmatized as 
impious, because it does not partake of the profanity of those whose notions of 
God are marked by impiety, but because it says in the supplication addressed to 
the Divinity, "Thou art the same," it being, moreover, an article of faith that 
God has said, "I change not." 
CHAP. XXII. 
After this, Celsus, without condemning circumcision as practised by the Jews, 
asserts that this usage was derived from the Egyptians; thus believing the 
Egyptians rather than Moses, who says that Abraham was the first among men who 
practised the rite. And it is not Moses alone who mentions the name of Abraham, 
assigning to him great intimacy with God; but many also of those who give 
themselves to the practice of the conjuration of evil spirits, employ in their 
spells the expression "God of Abraham," pointing out by the very name the 
friendship (that existed) between that just man and God. And yet, while making 
use of the phrase "God of Abraham," they do not know who Abraham is! And the 
same remark applies to Isaac, and Jacob, and Israel; which names, although 
confessedly Hebrew, are frequently introduced by those Egyptians who profess to 
produce some wonderful result by means of their knowledge. The rite of 
circumcision, however, which began with Abraham, and was discontinued by Jesus, 
who desired that His disciples should not practise it, is not before us for 
explanation; for the present occasion does not lead us to speak of such things, 
but to make an effort to refute the charges brought against the doctrine of the 
Jews by Celsus, who thinks that he will be able the more easily to establish the 
falsity of Christianity, if, by assailing its origin in Judaism, he can show 
that the latter also is untrue. 
CHAP. XXIII. 
After this, Celsus next asserts that "Those herdsmen and shepherds who 
followed Moses as their leader, had their minds deluded by vulgar deceits, and 
so supposed that there was one God." Let him show, then, how, after this 
irrational departure, as he regards it, of the herdsmen and shepherds from the 
worship of many gods, he himself is able to establish the multiplicity of 
deities that are found amongst the Greeks, or among those other nations that are 
called Barbarian. Let him establish, therefore, the existence of Mnemosyne, the 
mother of the Muses by Zeus; or of Themis, the parent of the Hours; or let him 
prove that the ever naked Graces can have a real, substantial existence. But he 
will not be able to show, from any actions of theirs, that these fictitious 
representations of the Greeks, which have the appearance of being invested with 
bodies, are (really) gods. And why should the fables of the Greeks regarding the 
gods be true, any more than those of the Egyptians for example, who in their 
language know nothing of a Mnemosyne, mother of the nine Muses; nor of a Themis, 
parent of the Hours; nor of a Euphrosyne, one of the Graces; nor of any other of 
these names? How much more manifest (and how much better than all these 
inventions!) is it that, convinced by what we see, in the admirable order of the 
world, we should worship the Maker of it as the one Author of one effect, and 
which, as being wholly in harmony with itself, cannot on that account have been 
the work of many makers; and that we should believe that the whole heaven is not 
held together by the movements of many souls, for one is enough, which bears the 
whole of the non-wandering sphere from east to west, and embraces within it all 
things which the world requires, and which are not self-existing! For all are 
parts of the world, while God is no part of the whole. But God cannot be 
imperfect, as a part is imperfect. And perhaps profounder consideration will 
show, that as God is not a part, so neither is He properly the whole, since the 
whole is composed of parts; and reason will not allow us to believe that the God 
who is over all is composed of parts, each one of which cannot do what all the 
other parts, can. 
CHAP. XXIV. 
After this he continues: "These herdsmen and shepherds concluded that there 
was but one God, named either the Highest, or Adonai, or the Heavenly, or 
Sabaoth, or called by some other of those names which they delight to give this 
world; and they knew nothing beyond that." And in a subsequent part of his work 
he says, that "It makes no difference whether the God who is over all things be 
called by the name of Zeus, which is current among the Greeks, or by that, e.g., 
which is in use among the Indians or Egyptians," Now, in answer to this, we have 
to remark that this involves a deep and mysterious subject--that, viz., 
respecting the nature of names: it being a question whether, as Aristotle 
thinks, names were bestowed by arrangement, or, as the Stoics hold, by nature; 
the first words being imitations of things, agreeably to which the names were 
formed, and in conformity with which they introduce certain principles of 
etymology; or whether, as Epicurus teaches (differing in this from the Stoics), 
names were given by nature,--the first men having uttered certain words varying 
with the circumstances in which they found themselves. If, then, we shall be 
able to establish, in reference to the preceding statement, the nature of 
powerful names, some of which are used by the learned amongst the Egyptians, or 
by the Magi among the Persians, and by the Indian philosophers called Brahmans, 
or by the Samanaeans, and others in different countries; and shall be able to 
make out that the so-called magic is not, as the followers of Epicurus and 
Aristotle suppose, an altogether uncertain thing, but is, as those skilled in it 
prove, a consistent system, having words which are known to exceedingly few; 
then we say that the name Sabaoth, and Adonai, and the other names treated with 
so much reverence among the Hebrews, are not applicable to any ordinary created 
things, but belong to a secret theology which refers to the Framer of all 
things. These names, accordingly, when pronounced with that attendant train of 
circumstances which is appropriate to their nature, are possessed of great 
power; and other names, again, current in the Egyptian tongue, are efficacious 
against certain demons who can only do certain things; and other names in the 
Persian language have corresponding power over other spirits; and so on in every 
individual nation, for different purposes. And thus it will be found that, of 
the various demons upon the earth, to whom different localities have been 
assigned, each one bears a name appropriate to the several dialects of place and 
country. He, therefore, who has a nobler idea, however small, of these matters, 
will be careful not to apply differing names to different things; lest he should 
resemble those who mistakenly apply the name of God to lifeless matter, or who 
drag down the title of "the Good" from the First Cause, or from virtue and 
excellence, and apply it to blind Plutus, and to a healthy and well-proportioned 
mixture of flesh and blood and bones, or to what is considered to be noble 
birth. 
CHAP. XXV. 
And perhaps there is a danger as great as that which degrades the name of 
"God," or of "the Good," to improper objects, in changing the name of God 
according to a secret system, and applying those which belong to inferior beings 
to greater, and vice versa. And I do not dwell on this, that when the name of 
Zeus is uttered, there is heard at the same time that of the son of Kronos and 
Rhea, and the husband of Hera, and brother of Poseidon, and father of Athene, 
and Artemis, who was guilty of incest with his own daughter Persephone; or that 
Apollo immediately suggests the son of Leto and Zeus, and the brother of 
Artemis, and half-brother of Hermes; and so with all the other names invented by 
these wise men of Celsus, who are the parents of these opinions, and the ancient 
theologians of the Greeks. For what are the grounds for deciding that he should 
on the one hand be properly called Zeus, and yet on the other should not have 
Kronos for his father and Rhea for his mother? And the same argument applies to 
all the others that are called gods. But this charge does not at all apply to 
those who, for some mysterious reason, refer the word Sabaoth, or Adonai, or any 
of the other names to the (true) God. And when one is able to philosophize about 
the mystery of names, he will find much to say respecting the titles of the 
angels of God, of whom one is called Michael, and another Gabriel, and another 
Raphael, appropriately to the duties which they discharge in the world, 
according to the will of the God of all things. And a similar philosophy of 
names applies also to our Jesus, whose name has already been seen, in an 
unmistakeable manner, to have expelled myriads of evil spirits from the souls 
and bodies (of men), so great was the power which it exerted upon those from 
whom the spirits were driven out. And while still upon the subject of names, we 
have to mention that those who are skilled in the use of incantations, relate 
that the utterance of the same incantation in its proper language can accomplish 
what the spell professes to do; but when translated into any other tongue, it is 
observed to become inefficacious and feeble. And thus it is not the things 
signified, but the qualities and peculiarities of words, which possess a certain 
power for this or that purpose. And so on such grounds as these we defend the 
conduct of the Christians, when they struggle even to death to avoid calling God 
by the name of Zeus, or to give Him a name from any other language. For they 
either use the common name--God--indefinitely, or with some such addition as 
that of the "Maker of all things," "the Creator of heaven and earth"--He who 
sent down to the human race those good men, to whose names that of God being 
added, certain mighty works are wrought among men. And much more besides might 
be said on the subject of names, against those who think that we ought to be 
indifferent as to our use of them. And if the remark of Plato in the Philebus 
should surprise us, when he says, "My fear, O Protagoras, about the names of the 
gods is no small one," seeing Philebus in his discussion with Socrates had 
called pleasure a "god," how shall we not rather approve the piety of the 
Christians, who apply none of the names used in the mythologies to the Creator 
of the world? And now enough on this subject for the present. 
CHAP. XXVI. 
But let us see the manner in which this Celsus, who professes to know 
everything, brings a false accusation against the Jews, when he alleges that 
"they worship angels, and are addicted to sorcery, in which Moses was their 
instructor." Now, in what part of the writings of Moses he found the lawgiver 
laying down the worship of angels, let him tell, who professes to know all about 
Christianity and Judaism; and let him show also how sorcery can exist among 
those who have accepted the Mosaic law, and read the injunction, "Neither seek 
after wizards, to be defiled by them." Moreover, he promises to show afterwards 
"how it was through ignorance that the Jews were deceived and led into error." 
Now, if he had discovered that the ignorance of the Jews regarding Christ was 
the effect of their not having heard the prophecies about Him, he would show 
with truth how the Jews fell into error. But without any wish whatever that this 
should appear, he views as Jewish errors what are no errors at all. And Celsus 
having promised to make us acquainted, in a subsequent part of his work, with 
the doctrines of Judaism, proceeds in the first place to speak of our Saviour as 
having been the leader of our generation, in so far as we are Christians, and 
says that "a few years ago he began to teach this doctrine, being regarded by 
Christians as the Son of God." Now, with respect to this point--His prior 
existence a few years ago--we have to remark as follows. Could it have come to 
pass without divine assistance, that Jesus, desiring during these years to 
spread abroad His words and teaching, should have been so successful, that 
everywhere throughout the world, not a few persons, Greeks as well as 
Barbarians, learned as well as ignorant, adopted His doctrine, so that they 
struggled, even to death in its defence, rather than deny it, which no one is 
ever related to have done for any other system? I indeed, from no wish to 
flatter Christianity, but from a desire thoroughly to examine the facts, would 
say that even those who are engaged in the healing of numbers of sick persons, 
do not attain their object--the cure of the body--without divine help; and if 
one were to succeed in delivering souls from a flood of wickedness, and 
excesses, and acts of injustice, and from a contempt of God, and were to show, 
as evidence of such a result, one hundred persons improved in their natures (let 
us suppose the number to be so large), no one would reasonably say that it was 
without divine assistance that he had implanted in those hundred individuals a 
doctrine capable of removing so many evils. And if any one, on a candid 
consideration of these things, shall admit that no improvement ever takes place 
among men without divine help, how much more confidently shall he make the same 
assertion regarding Jesus, when he compares the former lives of many converts to 
His doctrine with their after conduct, and reflects in what acts of 
licentiousness and injustice and covetousness they formerly indulged, until, as 
Celsus, and they who think with him, allege, "they were deceived," and accepted 
a doctrine which, as these individuals assert, is destructive of the life of 
men; but who, from the time that they adopted it, have become in some way 
meeker, and more religious, and more consistent, so that certain among them, 
from a desire of exceeding chastity, and a wish to worship God with greater 
purity, abstain even from the permitted indulgences of (lawful) love. 
CHAP. XXVII. 
Any one who examines the subject will see that Jesus attempted and 
successfully accomplished works beyond the reach of human power. For although, 
from the very beginning, all things opposed the spread of His doctrine in the 
world, 
--both the princes of the times, and their chief captains and generals, and 
all, to speak generally, who were possessed of the smallest influence, and in 
addition to these, the rulers of the different cities, and the soldiers, and the 
people,--yet it proved victorious, as being the Word of God, the nature of which 
is such that it cannot be hindered; and becoming more powerful than all such 
adversaries, it made itself master of the whole of Greece, and a considerable 
portion of Barbarian lands, and convened countless numbers of souls to His 
religion. And although, among the multitude of converts to Christianity, the 
simple and ignorant necessarily outnumbered the more intelligent, as the former 
class always does the latter, yet Celsus, unwilling to take note of this, thinks 
that this philanthropic doctrine, which reaches to every soul under the sun, is 
vulgar, and on account of its vulgarity and its want of reasoning power, 
obtained a hold only over the ignorant. And yet he himself admits that it was 
not the simple alone who were led by the doctrine of Jesus to adopt His 
religion; for he acknowledges that there were amongst them some persons of 
moderate intelligence, and gentle disposition, and possessed of understanding, 
and capable of comprehending allegories. 
CHAP. XXVIII. 
And since, in imitation of a rhetorician training a pupil, he introduces a 
Jew, who enters into a personal discussion with Jesus, and speaks in a very 
childish manner, altogether unworthy of the grey hairs of a philosopher, let me 
endeavour, to the best of my ability, to examine his statements, and show that 
he does not maintain, throughout the discussion, the consistency due to the 
character of a Jew. For he represents him disputing with Jesus, and confuting 
Him, as he thinks, on many points; and in the first place, he accuses Him of 
having "invented his birth from a virgin," and upbraids Him with being "born in 
a certain Jewish village, of a poor woman of the country, who gained her 
subsistence by spinning, and who was turned out of doors by her husband, a 
carpenter by trade, because she was convicted of adultery; that after being 
driven away by her husband, and wandering about for a time, she disgracefully 
gave birth to Jesus, an illegitimate child, who having hired himself out as a 
servant in Egypt on account of his poverty, and having there acquired some 
miraculous powers, on which the Egyptians greatly pride themselves, returned to 
his own country, highly elated on account of them, and by means of these 
proclaimed himself a God." Now, as I cannot allow anything said by unbelievers 
to remain unexamined, but must investigate everything from the beginning, I give 
it as my opinion that all these things worthily harmonize with the predictions 
that Jesus is the Son of God. 
CHAP. XXIX. 
For birth is an aid towards an individual's becoming famous, and 
distinguished, and talked about; viz., when a man's parents happen to be in a 
position of rank and influence, and are possessed of wealth, and are able to 
spend it upon the education of their son, and when the country of one's birth is 
great and illustrious; but when a man having all these things against him is 
able, notwithstanding these hindrances, to make himself known, and to produce an 
impression on those who hear of him, and to become distinguished and visible to 
the whole world, which speaks of him as it did not do before, how can we help 
admiring such a nature as being both noble in itself, and devoting itself to 
great deeds, and possessing a courage which is not by any means to be despised? 
And if one were to examine more fully the history of such an individual, why 
should he not seek to know in what manner, after being reared up in frugality 
and poverty, and without receiving any complete education, and without having 
studied systems and opinions by means of which he might have acquired confidence 
to associate with multitudes, and play the demagogue, and attract to himself 
many hearers, he nevertheless devoted himself to the teaching of new opinions, 
introducing among men a doctrine which not only subverted the customs of the 
Jews, while preserving due respect for their prophets, but which especially 
overturned the established observances of the Greeks regarding the Divinity? And 
how could such a person--one who had been so brought up, and who, as his 
calumniators admit, had learned nothing great from men--have been able to teach, 
in a manner not at all to be despised, such doctrines as he did regarding the 
divine judgment, and the punishments that are to overtake wickedness, and the 
rewards that are to be conferred upon virtue; so that not only rustic and 
ignorant individuals were won by his words, but also not a few of those who were 
distinguished by their wisdom, and who were able to discern the hidden meaning 
in those more common doctrines, as they were considered, which were in 
circulation, and which secret meaning enwrapped, so to speak, some more 
recondite' signification still? The Seriphian, in Plato, who reproaches 
Themistocles after he had become celebrated for his military skill, saying that 
his reputation was due not to his own merits, but to his good fortune in having 
been born in the most illustrious country in Greece, received from the 
good-natured Athenian, who saw that his native country did contribute to his 
renown, the following reply: "Neither would I, had I been a Seriphian, have been 
so distinguished as I am, nor would you have been a Themistocles, even if you 
had had the good fortune to be an Athenian!" And now, our Jesus, who is 
reproached with being born in a village, and that not a Greek one, nor belonging 
to any nation widely esteemed, and being despised as the son of a poor labouring 
woman, and as having on account of his poverty left his native country and hired 
himself out in Egypt, and being, to use the instance already quoted, not only a 
Seriphian, as it were, a native of a very small and undistinguished island, but 
even, so to speak, the meanest of the Seriphians, has yet been able to shake the 
whole inhabited world not only to a degree far above what Themistocles the 
Athenian ever did, but beyond what even Pythagoras, or Plato, or any other wise 
man in any part of the world whatever, or any prince or general, ever succeeded 
in doing? 
CHAP. XXX. 
Now, would not any one who investigated with ordinary care the nature of 
these facts, be struck with amazement at this man's victory?--with his complete 
success in surmounting by his reputation all causes that tended to bring him 
into disrepute, and with his superiority over all other illustrious individuals 
in the world? And yet it is a rate thing for distinguished men to succeed in 
acquiring a reputation for several things at once. For one man is admired on 
account of his wisdom, another for his military skill, and some of the 
Barbarians for their marvellous powers of incantation, and some for one quality, 
and others for another; but not many have been admired and acquired a reputation 
for many things at the same time; whereas this man, in addition to his other 
merits, is an object of admiration both for his wisdom, and for his miracles, 
and for his powers of government. For he persuaded some to withdraw themselves 
from their laws, and to secede to him, not as a tyrant would do, nor as a 
robber, who arms his followers against men; nor as a rich man, who bestows help 
upon those who come to him; nor as one of those who confessedly are deserving of 
censure; but as a teacher of the doctrine regarding the God of all things, and 
of the worship which belongs to Him, and of all moral precepts which are able to 
secure the favour of the Supreme God to him who orders his life in conformity 
therewith. Now, to Themistocles, or to any other man of distinction, nothing 
happened to prove a hindrance to their reputation; whereas to this man, besides 
what we have already enumerated, and which are enough to cover with dishonour 
the soul of a man even of the most noble nature, there was that apparently 
infamous death of crucifixion, which was enough to efface his previously 
acquired glory, and to lead those who, as they who disavow his doctrine assert, 
were formerly deluded by him to abandon their delusion, and to pass condemnation 
upon their deceiver. 
CHAP. XXXI. 
And besides this, one may well wonder how it happened that the disciples--if, 
as the calumniators of Jesus say, they did not see Him after His resurrection 
from the dead, and were not persuaded of His divinity--were not afraid to endure 
the same sufferings with their Master, and to expose themselves to danger, and 
to leave their native country to teach, according to the desire of Jesus, the 
doctrine delivered to them by Him. For I think that no one who candidly examines 
the facts would say that these men devoted themselves to a life of danger for 
the sake of the doctrine of Jesus, without profound belief which He had wrought 
in their minds of its truth, not only teaching them to conform to His precepts, 
but others also, and to conform, moreover, when manifest destruction to life 
impended over him who ventured to introduce these new opinions into all places 
and before all audiences, and who could retain as his friend no human being who 
adhered to the former opinions and usages. For did not the disciples of Jesus 
see, when they ventured to prove not only to the Jews from their prophetic 
Scriptures that this is He who was spoken of by the prophets, but also to the 
other heathen nations, that He who was crucified yesterday or the day before 
underwent this death voluntarily on behalf of the human race,--that this was 
analogous to the case of those who have died for their country in order to 
remove pestilence, or barrenness, or tempests? For it is probable that there is 
in the nature of things, for certain mysterious tea-sons which are difficult to 
be understood by the multitude, such a virtue that one just man, dying a 
voluntary death for the common good, might be the means of removing wicked 
spirits, which are the cause of plagues, or barrenness, or tempests, or similar 
calamities. Let those, therefore, who would disbelieve the statement that Jesus 
died on the cross on behalf of men, say whether they also refuse to accept the 
many accounts current both among Greeks and Barbarians, of persons who have laid 
down their lives for the public advantage, in order to remove those evils which 
had fallen upon cities and countries? Or will they say that such events actually 
happened, but that no credit is to be attached to that account which makes this 
so-called man to have died to ensure the destruction of a mighty evil spirit, 
the ruler of evil spirits, who had held in subjection the souls of all men upon 
earth? And the disciples of Jesus, seeing this and much more (which, it is 
probable, they learned from Jesus in private), and being filled, moreover, with 
a divine power (since it was no mere poetical virgin that endowed them with 
strength and courage, but the true wisdom and understanding of God), exerted all 
their efforts "to become distinguished among all men," not only among the 
Argives, but among all the Greeks and Barbarians alike, and "so bear away for 
themselves a glorious renown." 
CHAP. XXXII. 
But let us now return to where the Jew is introduced, speaking of the mother 
of Jesus, and saying that "when she was pregnant she was turned out of doors by 
the carpenter to whom she had been betrothed, as having been guilty of adultery, 
and that she bore a child to a certain soldier named Panthera;" and let us see 
whether those who have blindly concocted these fables about the adultery of the 
Virgin with Panthera, and her rejection by the carpenter, did not invent these 
stories to overturn His miraculous conception by the Holy Ghost: for they could 
have falsified the history in a different manner, on account of its extremely 
miraculous character, and not have admitted, as it were against their will, that 
Jesus was born of no ordinary human marriage. It was to be expected, indeed, 
that those who would not believe the miraculous birth of Jesus would invent some 
falsehood. And their not doing this in a credible manner, but (their) preserving 
the fact that it was not by Joseph that the Virgin conceived Jesus, rendered the 
falsehood very palpable to those who can understand and detect such inventions. 
Is it at all agreeable to reason, that he who dared to do so much for the human 
race, in order that, as far as in him lay, all the Greeks and Barbarians, who 
were looking for divine condemnation, might depart from evil, and regulate their 
entire conduct in a manner pleasing to the Creator of the world, should not have 
had a miraculous birth, but one the vilest and most disgraceful of all? And I 
will ask of them as Greeks, and particularly of Celsus, who either holds or not 
the sentiments of Plato, and at any rate quotes them, whether He who sends souls 
down into the bodies of men, degraded Him who was to dare such mighty acts, and 
to teach so many men, and to reform so many from the mass of wickedness in the 
world, to a birth more disgraceful than any other, and did not rather introduce 
Him into the world through a lawful marriage? Or is it not more in conformity 
with reason, that every soul, for certain mysterious reasons (I speak now 
according to the opinion of Pythagoras, and Plato, and Empedocles, whom Celsus 
frequently names), is introduced into a body, and introduced according to its 
deserts and former actions? It is probable, therefore, that this soul also, 
which conferred more benefit by its residence in the flesh than that of many men 
(to avoid prejudice, I do not say "all"), stood in need of a body not only 
superior to others, but invested with all excellent qualities. 
CHAP. XXXIII. 
Now if a particular soul, for certain mysterious reasons, is not deserving of 
being placed in the body of a wholly irrational being, nor yet in that of one 
purely rational, but is clothed with a monstrous body, so that reason cannot 
discharge its functions in one so fashioned, which has the head disproportioned 
to the other parts, and altogether too short; and another receives such a body 
that the soul is a little more rational than the other; and another still more 
so, the nature of the body counteracting to a greater or less degree the 
reception of the reasoning principle; why should there not be also some soul 
which receives an altogether miraculous body, possessing some qualities common 
to those of other men, so that it may be able to pass through life with them, 
but possessing also some quality of superiority, so that the soul may be able to 
remain untainted by sin? And if there be any truth in the doctrine of the 
physiognomists, whether Zopyrus, or Loxus, or Polemon, or any other who wrote on 
such a subject, and who profess to know in some wonderful way that all bodies 
are adapted to the habits of the souls, must there have been for that soul which 
was to dwell with miraculous power among men, and work mighty deeds, a body 
produced, as Celsus thinks, by an act of adultery between Panthera and the 
Virgin?! Why, from such unhallowed intercourse there must rather have been 
brought forth some fool to do injury to mankind,--a teacher of licentiousness 
and wickedness, and other evils; and not of temperance, and righteousness, and 
the other virtues! 
CHAP. XXXIV. 
But it was, as the prophets also predicted, from a virgin that there was to 
be born, according to the promised sign, one who was to give His name to the 
fact, showing that at His birth 
God was to be with man. Now it seems to me appropriate to the character of a 
Jew to have quoted the prophecy of Isaiah, which says that Immanuel was to be 
born of a virgin. This, however, Celsus, who professes to know everything, has 
not done, either from ignorance or from an unwillingness (if he had read it and 
voluntarily passed it by in silence) to furnish an argument which might defeat 
his purpose. And the prediction runs thus: "And the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, 
saying, Ask thee a sign of the RD thy God; ask it either in the depth or in the 
height above But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the LORD. And 
he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; is it a small thing for you to weary 
men, but will ye weary my God also? Therefore the Lord Himself shall give you a 
sign. Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call His name 
Immanuel, which is, being interpreted, God with us." And that it was from 
intentional malice that Celsus did not quote this prophecy, is clear to me from 
this, that although he makes numerous quotations from the Gospel according to 
Matthew, as of the star that appeared at the birth of Christ, and other 
miraculous occurrences, he has made no mention at all of this. Now, if a Jew 
should split words, and say that the words are not, "Lo, a virgin," but, "Lo, a 
young woman," we reply that the word "Olmah"--which the Septuagint have rendered 
by "a virgin," and others by "a young woman"--occurs, as they say, in 
Deuteronomy, as applied to a "virgin," in the following connection: "If a damsel 
that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, 
and lie with her; then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, 
and ye shall stone them with stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried 
not, being in the city; and the man, because he humbled his neighbour's wife." 
And again: "But if a man find a betrothed damsel in a field, and the man force 
her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall die: but unto 
the damsel ye shall do nothing; there is in her no sin worthy of death." 
CHAP. XXXV. 
But that we may not seem, because of a Hebrew word, to endeavour to persuade 
those who are unable to determine whether they ought to believe it or not, that 
the prophet spoke of this man being born of a virgin, because at his birth these 
words, "God with us," were uttered, let us make good our point from the words 
themselves. The Lord is related to have spoken to Ahaz thus: "Ask a sign for 
thyself from the LORD thy God, either in the depth or height above; " and 
afterwards the sign is given, Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son." 
What kind of sign, then, would that have been--a young woman who was not a 
virgin giving birth to a child? And which of the two is the more appropriate as 
the mother of Immanuel (i.e., "God with us"),--whether a woman who has had 
intercourse with a man, and who has conceived after the manner of women, or one 
who is still a pure and holy virgin? Surely it is appropriate only to the latter 
to produce a being at whose birth it is said, "God with us." And should he be so 
captious l as to say that it is to Ahaz that the command is addressed, "Ask for 
thyself a sign from the LORD thy God," we shall ask in return, who in the times 
of Ahaz bore a son at whose birth the expression is made use of, "Immanuel," 
i.e., "God with us?" And if no one can be found. then manifestly what was said 
to Ahaz was said to the house of David, because it is written that the Saviour 
was born of the house of David according to the flesh; and this sign is said to 
be "in the depth or in the height," since "He that descended is the same also 
that ascended up far above all heavens, that He might fill all things." And 
these arguments I employ as against a Jew who believes in prophecy. Let Celsus 
now tell me, or any of those who think with him, with what meaning the prophet 
utters either these statements about the future, or the others which are 
contained in the prophecies? Is it with any foresight of the future or not? If 
with a foresight of the future, then the prophets were divinely inspired; if 
with no foresight of the future, let him explain the meaning of one who speaks 
thus boldly regarding the future, and who is an object of admiration among the 
Jews because of his prophetic powers. 
CHAP. XXXVI. 
And now, since we have touched upon the subject of the prophets, what we are 
about to advance will be useful not only to the Jews, who believe that they 
spake by divine inspiration, but also to the more candid among the Greeks. To 
these we say that we must necessarily admit that the Jews had prophets, if they 
were to be kept together under that system of law which had been given them, and 
were to believe in the Creator of the world, as they had learned, and to be 
without pretexts, so far as the law was concerned, for apostatizing to the 
polytheism of the heathen And we establish this necessity in the following 
manner. "For the nations," as it is written in the law of the Jews itself, 
"shall hearken unto observers of times, and diviners; " but to that people it is 
said: "But as for thee, the LORD thy God hath not suffered thee so to do." And 
to this is subjoined the promise: "A prophet shall the LORD thy God raise up 
unto thee from among thy brethren." Since, therefore, the heathen employ modes 
of divination either by oracles or by omens, or by birds, or by ventriloquists, 
or by those who profess the art of sacrifice, or by Chaldean genealogists--all 
which practices were forbidden to the Jews--this people, if they had no means of 
attaining a knowledge of futurity, being led by the passion common to humanity 
of ascertaining the future would have despised their own prophets, as not having 
in them any particle of divinity; and would not have accepted any prophet after 
Moses, nor committed their words to writing, but would have spontaneously 
betaken themselves to the divining usages of the heathen, or attempted to 
establish some such practices amongst themselves. There is therefore no 
absurdity in their prophets having uttered predictions even about events of no 
importance, to soothe those who desire such things, as when Samuel prophesies 
regarding three she-asses which were lost, or when mention is made in the third 
book of Kings respecting the sickness of a king's son. And why should not those 
who desired to obtain auguries from idols be severely rebuked by the 
administrators of the law among the Jews?--as Elijah is found rebuking Ahaziah, 
and saying, "Is it because there is not a God in Israel that ye go to inquire of 
Baalzebub, god of Ekron?" 
CHAP. XXXVII. 
I think, then, that it has been pretty well established not only that our 
Saviour was to be born of a virgin, but also that there were prophets among the 
Jews who uttered not merely general predictions about the future,--as, e.g., 
regarding Christ and the kingdoms of the world, and the events that were to 
happen to Israel, and those nations which were to believe on the Saviour, and 
many other things concerning Him,--but also prophecies respecting particular 
events; as, for instance, how the asses of Kish, which were lost, were to be 
discovered, and regarding the sickness which had fallen upon the son of the king 
of Israel, and any other recorded circumstance of a similar kind. But as a 
further answer to the Greeks, who do not believe in the birth of Jesus from a 
virgin, we have to say that the Creator has shown, by the generation of several 
kinds of animals, that what He has done in the instance of one animal, He could 
do, if it pleased Him, in that of others, and also of man himself. For it is 
ascertained that there is a certain female animal which has no intercourse with 
the male (as writers on animals say is the case with vultures), and that this 
animal, without sexual intercourse, preserves the succession of race. What 
incredibility, therefore, is there in supposing that, if God wished to send a 
divine teacher to the human race, He caused Him to be born in some manner 
different from the common! Nay, according to the Greeks themselves, all men were 
not born of a man and woman. For if the world has been created, as many even of 
the Greeks are pleased to admit, then the first men must have been produced not 
from sexual intercourse, but from the earth, in which spermatic elements 
existed; which, however, I consider more incredible than that Jesus was born 
like other men, so far as regards the half of his birth. And there is no 
absurdity in employing Grecian histories to answer Greeks, with the view of 
showing that we are not the only persons who have recourse to miraculous 
narratives of this kind. For some have thought fit, not in regard to ancient and 
heroic narratives, but in regard to events of very recent occurrence, to relate 
as a possible thing that Plato was the son of Amphictione, Ariston being 
prevented from having marital intercourse with his wife until she had given 
birth to him with whom she was pregnant by Apollo. And yet these are veritable 
fables, which have led to the invention of such stories concerning a man whom 
they regarded as possessing greater wisdom and power than the multitude, and as 
having received the beginning of his corporeal substance from better and diviner 
elements than others, because they thought that this was appropriate to persons 
who were too great to be human beings. And since Celsus has introduced the Jew 
disputing with Jesus, and tearing in pieces, as he imagines, the fiction of His 
birth from a virgin, comparing the Greek fables about Danae, and Melanippe, and 
Auge, and Antiope, our answer is, that such language becomes a buffoon, land not 
one who is writing in a serious tone. 
CHAP. XXXVIII. 
But, moreover, taking the history, contained in the Gospel according to 
Matthew, of our Lord's descent into Egypt, he refuses to believe the miraculous 
circumstances attending it, viz., either that the angel gave the divine 
intimation, or that our Lord's quitting Judea and residing in Egypt was an event 
of any significance; but he invents something altogether different, admitting 
somehow the miraculous works done by Jesus, by means of which He induced the 
multitude to follow Him as the Christ. And yet he desires to throw discredit on 
them, as being done by help of magic and not by divine power; for he asserts 
"that he (Jesus), having been brought up as an illegitimate child, and having 
served for hire in Egypt, and then coming to the knowledge of certain miraculous 
powers, returned from thence to his own country, and by means of those powers 
proclaimed himself a god." Now I do not understand how a magician should exert 
himself to teach a doctrine which persuades us always to act as if God were to 
judge every man for his deeds; and should have trained his disciples, whom he 
was to employ as the ministers of his doctrine, in the same belief. For did the 
latter make an impression upon their hearers, after they had been so taught to 
work miracles; or was it without the aid of these? The assertion, therefore, 
that they did no miracles at all, but that, after yielding their belief to 
arguments which were not at all convincing, like the wisdom of Grecian 
dialectics, they gave themselves up to the task of teaching the new doctrine to 
those persons among whom they happened to take up their abode, is altogether 
absurd. For in what did they place their confidence when they taught the 
doctrine and disseminated the new opinions? But if they indeed wrought miracles, 
then how can it be believed that magicians exposed themselves to such hazards to 
introduce a doctrine which forbade the practice of magic? 
CHAP. XXXIX. 
I do not think it necessary to grapple with an argument advanced not in a 
serious but in a scoffing spirit, such as the following: "If the mother of Jesus 
was beautiful, then the god whose nature is not to love a corruptible body, had 
intercourse with her because she was beautiful;" or, "It was improbable that the 
god would entertain a passion for her, because she was neither rich nor of royal 
rank, seeing no one, even of her neighbours, knew her." And it is in the same 
scoffing spirit that he adds: "When hated by her husband, and turned out of 
doors, she was not saved by divine power, nor was her story believed. Such 
things, he says, have no connection with the kingdom of heaven." In what respect 
does such language differ from that of those who pour abuse on others on the 
public streets, and whose words are unworthy of any serious attention? 
CHAP. XL. 
After these assertions, he takes from the Gospel of Matthew, and perhaps also 
from the other Gospels, the account of the dove alighting upon our Saviour at 
His baptism by John, and desires to throw discredit upon the statement, alleging 
that the narrative is a fiction. Having completely disposed, as he imagined, of 
the story of our Lord's birth from a virgin, he does not proceed to deal in an 
orderly manner with the accounts that follow it; since passion and hatred 
observe no order, but angry and vindictive men slander those whom they hate, as 
the feeling comes upon them, being prevented by their passion from arranging 
their accusations on a careful and orderly plan. For if he had observed a proper 
arrangement, he would have taken up the Gospel, and, with the view of assailing 
it, would. have objected to the first narrative, then passed on to the second, 
and so on to the others. But now, after the birth from a virgin, this Celsus, 
who professes to be acquainted with all our history, attacks the account of the 
appearance of the Holy Spirit in the form of a dove at the baptism. He then, 
after that, tries to throw discredit upon the prediction that our Lord was to 
come into the world. In the next place, he runs away to what immediately follows 
the narrative of the birth of Jesus--the account of the star, and of the wise 
men who came from the east to worship the child. And you yourself may find, if 
you take the trouble, many confused statements made by Celsus throughout his 
whole book; so that even in this account he may, by those who know how to 
observe and require an orderly method of arrangement, be convicted of great 
rashness and boasting, in having inscribed upon his work the title of A True 
Discourse,--a thing which is never done by a learned philosopher. For Plato 
says, that it is not an indication of an intelligent man to make strong 
assertions respecting those matters which are somewhat uncertain; and the 
celebrated Chrysippus even, who frequently states the reasons by which he is 
decided, refers us to those whom we shall find to be abler speakers than 
himself. This man, however, who is wiser than those already named, and than all 
the other Greeks, agreeably to his assertion of being acquainted with 
everything, inscribed upon his book the words, A True Discourse! 
CHAP. XLI. 
But, that we may not have the appearance of intentionally passing by his 
charges through inability to refute them, we have resolved to answer each one of 
them separately according to our ability, attending not to the connection and 
sequence of the nature of the things themselves, but to the arrangement of the 
subjects as they occur in this book. Let us therefore notice what he has to say 
by way of impugning the bodily appearance of the Holy Spirit to our Saviour in 
the form of a dove. And it is a Jew who addresses the following language to Him 
whom we acknowledge to be our Lord Jesus: "When you were bathing," says the Jew, 
"beside John, you say that what had the appearance of a bird from the air 
alighted upon you." And then this same Jew of his, continuing his 
interrogations, asks, "What credible witness beheld this appearance? or who 
heard a voice from heaven declaring you to be the Son of God? What proof is 
there of it, save your own assertion, and the statement of another of those 
individuals who have been punished along with you?" 
CHAP. XLII. 
Before we begin our reply, we have to remark that the endeavour to show, with 
regard to almost any history, however true, that it actually occurred, and to 
produce an intelligent conception regarding it, is one of the most difficult 
undertakings that can be attempted, and is in some instances an impossibility. 
For suppose that some one were to assert that there never had been any Trojan 
war, chiefly on account of the impossible narrative interwoven therewith, about 
a certain Achilles being the son of a sea-goddess Thetis and of a man Peleus, or 
Sarpedon being the son of Zeus, or Ascalaphus and Ialmenus the sons of Ares, or 
AEneas that of Aphrodite, how should we prove that such was the case, especially 
under the weight of the fiction attached, I know not how, to the universally 
prevalent opinion that there was really a war in Ilium between Greeks and 
Trojans? And suppose, also, that some one disbelieved the story of OEdipus and 
Jocasta, and of their two sons Eteocles and Polynices, because the sphinx, a 
kind of half-virgin, was introduced into the narrative, how should we 
demonstrate the reality of such a thing? And in like manner also with the 
history of the Epigoni, although there is no such marvellous event interwoven 
with it, or with the return of the Heracleidae, or countless other historical 
events. But he who deals candidly with histories, and would wish to keep himself 
also from being imposed upon by them, will exercise his judgment as to what 
statements he will give his assent to, and what he will accept figuratively, 
seeking to discover the meaning of the authors of such inventions, and from what 
statements he will withhold his belief, as having been written for the 
gratification of certain individuals. And we have said this by way of 
anticipation respecting the whole history related in the Gospels concerning 
Jesus, not as inviting men of acuteness to a simple and unreasoning faith, but 
wishing to show that there is need of candour in those who are to read, and of 
much investigation, and, so to speak, of insight into the meaning of the 
writers, that the object with which each event has been recorded may be 
discovered. 
CHAP. XLIII. 
We shall therefore say, in the first place, that if he who disbelieves the 
appearance of the Holy Spirit in the form of a dove had been described as an 
Epicurean, or a follower of Democritus, or a Peripatetic, the statement would 
have been in keeping with the character of such an objector. But now even this 
Celsus, wisest of all men, did not perceive that it is to a Jew, who believes 
more incredible things contained in the writings of the prophets than the 
narrative of the appearance of the dove, that he attributes such an objection! 
For one might say to the Jew, when expressing his disbelief of the appearance, 
and thinking to assail it as a fiction, "How are you able to prove, sir, that 
the Lord spake to Adam, or to Eve, or to Cain, or to Noah, or to Abraham, or to 
Isaac, or to Jacob, those words which He is recorded to have spoken to these 
men?" And, to compare history with history, I would say to the Jew, "Even your 
own Ezekiel writes, saying,' The heavens were opened, and I saw a vision of 
God." After relating which, he adds, ' This was the appearance of the likeness 
of the glory of the LORD; and He said to me,'" etc. Now, if what is related of 
Jesus be false, since we cannot, as you suppose, clearly prove it to be true, it 
being seen or heard by Himself alone, and, as you appear to have observed, also 
by one of those who were punished, why should we not rather say that Ezekiel 
also was dealing in the marvellous when he said, "The heavens were opened," 
etc.? Nay, even Isaiah asserts, "I saw the Lord of hosts sitting on a throne, 
high and lifted up; and the seraphim stood round about it: the one had six 
wings, and the other had six wings." How can we tell whether he really saw them 
or not? Now, O Jew, you have believed these visions to be true, and to have been 
not only shown to the prophet by a diviner Spirit, but also to have been both 
spoken and recorded by the same. And who is the more worthy of belief, when 
declaring that the heavens were opened before him, and that he heard a voice, or 
beheld the Lord of Sabaoth sitting upon a throne high and lifted up,--whether 
Isaiah and Ezekiel or Jesus? Of the former, indeed, no work has been found equal 
to those of the latter; whereas the good deeds of Jesus have not been confined 
solely to the period of His tabernacling in the flesh, but up to the present 
time His power still produces conversion and amelioration of life in those who 
believe in God through Him. And a manifest proof that these things are done by 
His power, is the fact that, although, as He Himself said, and as is admitted, 
there are not labourers enough to gather in the harvest of souls, there really 
is nevertheless such a great harvest of those who are gathered together and 
conveyed into the everywhere existing threshing-floors and Churches of God. 
CHAP. XLIV. 
And with these arguments I answer the Jew, not disbelieving, I who am a 
Christian, Ezekiel and Isaiah, but being very desirous to show, on the footing 
of our common belief, that this man is far more worthy of credit than they are 
when He says that He beheld such a sight, and, as is probable, related to His 
disciples the vision which He saw, and told them of the voice which He heard. 
But another party might object, that not all those who have narrated the 
appearance of the dove and the voice from heaven heard the accounts of these 
things from Jesus, but that that Spirit which taught Moses the history of events 
before his own time, beginning with the creation, and descending down to Abraham 
his father, taught also the writers of the Gospel the miraculous occurrence 
which took place at the time of Jesus' baptism. And he who is adorned with the 
spiritual gift, called the "word of wisdom," will explain also the reason of the 
heavens opening, and the dove appearing, and why the Holy Spirit appeared to 
Jesus in the form of no other living thing than that of a dove. But our present 
subject does not require us to explain this, our purpose being to show that 
Celsus displayed no sound judgment in representing a Jew as disbelieving, on 
such grounds, a fact which has greater probability in its favour than many 
events in which he firmly reposes confidence. 
CHAP. XLV. 
And I remember on one occasion, at a disputation held with certain Jews who 
were reputed learned men, having employed the following argument in the presence 
of many judges: "Tell me, sirs," I said, "since there are two individuals who 
have visited the human race, regarding whom are related marvellous works 
surpassing human power--Moses, viz., your own legislator, who wrote about 
himself, and Jesus our teacher, who has left no writings regarding Himself, but 
to whom testimony is borne by the disciples in the Gospels--what are the grounds 
for deciding that Moses is to be believed as speaking the truth, although the 
Egyptians slander him as a sorcerer, and as appearing to have wrought his mighty 
works by jugglery, while Jesus is not to be believed because you are His 
accusers? And yet there are nations which bear testimony in favour of both: the 
Jews to Moses; and the Christians, who do not deny the prophetic mission of 
Moses, but proving from that very source the truth of the statement regarding 
Jesus, accept as true the miraculous circumstances related of Him by His 
disciples. Now, if ye ask us for the reasons of our faith in Jesus, give yours 
first for believing in Moses, who lived before Him, and then we shall give you 
ours for accepting the latter. But if you draw back, and shirk a demonstration, 
then we, following your own example, decline for the present to offer any 
demonstration likewise; Nevertheless, admit that ye have no proof to offer for 
Moses, and then listen to our defence of Jesus derived from the law and the 
prophets. And now observe what is almost incredible! It is shown from the 
declarations concerning Jesus, contained in the law and the prophets, that both 
Moses and the prophets were truly prophets of God." 
CHAP. XLVI. 
For the law and the prophets are full of marvels similar to those recorded of 
Jesus at His baptism, viz., regarding the dove and the voice from heaven. And I 
think the wonders wrought by Jesus are a proof of the Holy Spirit's having then 
appeared in the form of a dove, although Celsus, from a desire to cast discredit 
upon them, alleges that He performed only what He had learned among the 
Egyptians. And I shall refer not only to His miracles, but, as is proper, to 
those also of the apostles of Jesus. For they could not without the help of 
miracles and wonders have prevailed on those who heard their new doctrines and 
new teachings to abandon their national usages, and to accept their instructions 
at the danger to themselves even of death. And there are still preserved among 
Christians traces of that Holy Spirit which appeared in the form of a dove. They 
expel evil spirits, and perform many cures, and foresee certain events, 
according to the will of the Logos. And although Celsus, or the Jew whom he has 
introduced, may treat with mockery what I am going to say, I shall say it 
nevertheless,--that many have been converted to Christianity as if against their 
will, some sort of spirit having suddenly transformed their minds from a hatred 
of the doctrine to a readiness to die in its defence, and having appeared to 
them either in a waking vision or a dream of the night. Many such instances have 
we known, which, if we were to commit to writ ing, although they were seen and 
witnessed by ourselves, we should afford great occasion for ridicule to 
unbelievers, who would imagine that we, like those whom they suppose to have 
invented such things, had ourselves also done the same. But God is witness of 
our conscientious desire, not by false statements, but by testimonies of 
different kinds, to establish the divinity of the doctrine of Jesus. And as it 
is a Jew who is perplexed about the account of the Holy Spirit having descended 
upon Jesus in the form of a dove, we would say to him, "Sir, who is it that says 
in Isaiah, 'And now the Lord hath sent me and His Spirit? In which sentence, as 
the meaning is doubtful--viz., whether the Father and the Holy Spirit sent 
Jesus, or the Father sent both Christ and the Holy Spirit--the latter is 
correct. For, because the Saviour was sent, afterwards the Holy Spirit was sent 
also, that the prediction of the prophet might be fulfilled; and as it was 
necessary that the fulfilment of the prophecy should be known to posterity, the 
disciples of Jesus for that reason committed the result to writing. 
CHAP. XLVII. 
I would like to say to Celsus, who represents the Jew as accepting somehow 
John as a Baptist, who baptized Jesus, that the existence of John the Baptist, 
baptizing for the remission of sins, is related by one who lived no great length 
of time after John and Jesus. For in the 18th book of his Antiquities of the 
Jews, Josephus bears witness to John as having been a Baptist, and as promising 
purification to those who underwent the rite. Now this writer, although not 
believing in Jesus as the Christ, in seeking after the cause of the fall of 
Jerusalem and the destruction of the temple, whereas he ought to have said that 
the conspiracy against Jesus was the cause of these calamities befalling the 
people, since they put to death Christ, who was a prophet, says 
nevertheless--being, although against his will, not far from the truth--that 
these disasters happened to the Jews as a punishment for the death of James the 
Just, who was a brother of Jesus (called Christ),--the Jews having put him to 
death, although he was a man most distinguished for his justice. Paul, a genuine 
disciple of Jesus, says that he regarded this James as a brother of the Lord, 
not so much on account of their relationship by blood, or of their being brought 
up together, as because of his virtue and doctrine. If, then, he says that it 
was on account of James that the desolation of Jerusalem was made to overtake 
the Jews, how should it not be more in accordance with reason to say that it 
happened on account (of the death) of Jesus Christ, of whose divinity so many 
Churches are witnesses, composed of those who have been convened from a flood of 
sins, and who have joined themselves to the Creator, and who refer all their 
actions to His good pleasure. 
CHAP. XLVIII. 
Although the Jew, then, may offer no defence for himself in the instances of 
Ezekiel and Isaiah, when we compare the opening of the heavens to Jesus; and the 
voice that was heard by Him, to the similar cases which we find recorded in 
Ezekiel and Isaiah, or any other of the prophets, we nevertheless, so far as we 
can, shall support our position, maintaining that, as it is a matter of belief 
that in a dream impressions have been brought before the minds of many, some 
relating to divine things, and others to future events of this life, and this 
either with clearness or in an enigmatic manner,--a fact which is manifest to 
all who accept the doctrine of providence; so how is it absurd to say that the 
mind which could receive impressions in a dream should be impressed also in a 
waking vision, for the benefit either of him on whom the impressions are made, 
or of those who are to hear the account of them from him? And as in a dream we 
fancy that we hear, and that the organs of hearing are actually impressed, and 
that we see with our eyes--although neither the bodily organs of sight nor 
hearing are affected, but it is the mind alone which has these sensations--so 
there is no absurdity in believing that similar things occurred to the prophets, 
when it is recorded that they witnessed occurrences of a rather wonderful kind, 
as when they either heard the words of the Lord or beheld the heavens opened. 
For I do not suppose that the visible heaven was actually opened, and its 
physical structure divided, in order that Ezekiel might be able to record such 
an occurrence. Should not, therefore, the same be believed of the Saviour by 
every intelligent hearer of the Gospels?--although such an occurrence may be a 
stumbling-block to the simple, who in their simplicity would set the whole world 
in movement, and split in sunder the compact and mighty body of the whole 
heavens. But he who examines such matters more profoundly will say, that there 
being, as the Scripture calls it, a kind of general divine perception which the 
blessed man alone knows how to discover, according to the saying of Solomon, 
"Thou shall find the knowledge of God;" and as there are various forms of this 
perceptive power, such as a faculty of vision which can naturally see things 
that are better than bodies, among which are ranked the cherubim and seraphim; 
and a faculty of hearing which can perceive voices which have not their being in 
the air; and a sense of taste which can make use of living bread that has come 
down from heaven, and that giveth life unto the world; and so also a sense of 
smelling, which scents such things as leads Paul to say that he is a sweet 
savour of Christ unto God; and a sense of touch, by which John says that he 
"handled with his hands of the Word of life;"--the blessed prophets having 
discovered this divine perception, and seeing and hearing in this divine manner, 
and tasting likewise, and smelling, so to speak, with no sensible organs of 
perception, and laying hold on the Logos by faith, so that a healing effluence 
from it comes upon them, saw in this manner what they record as having seen, and 
heard what they say they heard, and were affected in a similar manner to what 
they describe when eating the roll of a book that was given them. And so also 
Isaac smelled the savour of his son's divine garments, and added to the 
spiritual blessing these words: "See, the savour of my son is as the savour of a 
full field which the LORD blessed." And similarly to this, and more as a matter 
to be understood by the mind than to be perceived by the senses, Jesus touched 
the leper, to cleanse him, as I think, in a twofold sense,--freeing him not 
only, as the multitude heard, from the visible leprosy by visible contact, but 
also from that other leprosy, by His truly divine touch. It is in this way, 
accordingly, that John testifies when he says, "I beheld the Spirit descending 
from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon Him. And I knew Him not; but He that 
sent me to baptize with water, the same said to me, Upon whom you will see the 
Spirit descending, and abiding on Him, the same is He that baptizeth with the 
Holy Ghost And I saw, and bear witness, that this is the Son of God." Now it was 
to Jesus that the heavens were opened; and on that occasion no one except John 
is recorded to have seen them opened. But with respect to this opening of the 
heavens, the Saviour, foretelling to His disciples that it would happen, and 
that they would see it, says, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye shall see the 
heavens opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of 
man." And so Paul was carried away into the third heaven, having previously seen 
it opened, since he was a disciple of Jesus. It does not, however, belong to our 
present object to explain why Paul says, "Whether in the body, I know not; or 
whether out of the body, I know not: God knoweth." But I shall add to my 
argument even those very points which Celsus imagines, viz., that Jesus Himself 
related the account of the opening of the heavens, and the descent of the Holy 
Spirit upon Him at the Jordan in the form of a dove, although the Scripture does 
not assert that He said that He saw it. For this great man did not perceive that 
it was not in keeping with Him who commanded His disciples on the occasion of 
the vision on the mount, "Tell what ye have seen to no man, until the Son of man 
he risen from the dead," to have related to His disciples what was seen and 
heard by John at the Jordan. For it may be observed as a trait of the character 
of Jesus, that He on all occasions avoided unnecessary talk about Himself; and 
on that account said, "If I speak of Myself, My witness is not true." And since 
He avoided unnecessary talk about Himself, and preferred to show by acts rather 
than words that He was the Christ, the Jews for that reason said to Him, "If 
Thou art the Christ, tell us plainly." And as it is a Jew who, in the work of 
Celsus, uses the language to Jesus regarding the appearance of the Holy Spirit 
in the form of a dove, "This is your own testimony, unsupported save by one of 
those who were sharers of your punishment, whom you adduce," it is necessary for 
us to show him that such a statement is not appropriately placed in the mouth of 
a Jew. For the Jews do not connect John with Jesus, nor the punishment of John 
with that of Christ. And by this instance, this man who boasts of universal 
knowledge is convicted of not knowing what words he ought to ascribe to a Jew 
engaged in a disputation with Jesus. 
CHAP. XLIX. 
After this he wilfully sets aside, I know not why, the strongest evidence in 
confirmation of the claims of Jesus, viz., that His coming was predicted by the 
Jewish prophets--Moses, and those who succeeded as well as preceded that 
legislator--from inability, as I think, to meet the argument that neither the 
Jews nor any other heretical sect refuse to believe that Christ was the subject 
of prophecy. But perhaps he was unacquainted with the prophecies relating to 
Christ. For no one who was acquainted with the statements of the Christians, 
that many prophets foretold the advent of the Saviour, would have ascribed to a 
Jew sentiments which it would have better befitted a Samaritan or a Sadducee to 
utter; nor would the Jew in the dialogue have expressed himself in language like 
the following: "But my prophet once declared in Jerusalem, that the Son of God 
will come as the Judge of the righteous and the Punisher of the wicked." Now it 
is not one of the prophets merely who predicted the advent of Christ. But 
although the Samaritans and Sadducees, who receive the books of Moses alone, 
would say that there were contained in them predictions regarding Christ, yet 
certainly not in Jerusalem, which is not even mentioned in the times of Moses, 
was the prophecy uttered. It were indeed to be desired, that all the accusers of 
Christianity were equally ignorant with Celsus, not only of the facts, but of 
the bare letter of Scripture, and would so direct their assaults against it, 
that their arguments might not have the least available influence in shaking, I 
do not say the faith, but the little faith of unstable and temporary believers. 
A Jew, however, would not admit that any prophet used the expression, "The ' Son 
of God' will come;" for the term which they employ is, "The 'Christ of God' will 
come." And many a time indeed do they directly interrogate us about the "Son of 
God," saying that no such being exists, or was made the subject of prophecy. We 
do not of course assert that the "Son of God" is not the subject of prophecy; 
but we assert that he most inappropriately attributes to the Jewish disputant, 
who would not allow that He was, such language as, "My prophet once declared in 
Jerusalem that the ' Son of God' will come." 
CHAP. L. 
In the next place, as if the only event predicted were this, that He was to 
be "the Judge of the righteous and the Punisher of the wicked," and as if 
neither the place of His birth, nor the sufferings which He was to endure at the 
hands of the Jews, nor His resurrection, nor the wonderful works which He was to 
perform, had been made the subject of prophecy, he continues "Why should it be 
you alone, rather than innumerable others, who existed after the prophecies were 
published, to whom these predictions are applicable?" And desiring, I know not 
how, to suggest to others the possibility of the notion that they themselves 
were the persons referred to by the prophets, he says that "some, carried away 
by enthusiasm, and others having gathered a multitude of followers, give out 
that the Son of God is come down from heaven." Now we have not ascertained that 
such occurrences are admitted to have taken place among the Jews. we have to 
remark then, in the first place, that many of the prophets have uttered 
predictions! in all kinds of ways regarding Christ; some by means of dark 
sayings, others in allegories or in some other manner, and some also in express 
words. And as in what follows he says, in the character of the Jew addressing 
the converts from his own nation, and repeating emphatically and malevolently, 
that "the prophecies referred to the events of his life may also suit other 
events as well," we shall state a few of them out of a greater number; and with 
respect to these, any one who chooses may say what he thinks fitted to ensure a 
refutation of them, and which may turn away intelligent believers from the 
faith. 
CHAP. LI. 
Now the Scripture speaks, respecting the place of the Saviour's birth--that 
the Ruler was to come forth from Bethlehem--in the following manner: "And thou 
Bethlehem, house of Ephrata, art not the least among the thousands of Judah: for 
out of thee shall He come forth unto Me who is to be Ruler in Israel; and His 
goings forth have been of old, from everlasting." Now this prophecy could not 
suit any one of those who, as Celsus' Jew says, were fanatics and mob-leaders, 
and who gave out that they had come from heaven, unless it were clearly shown 
that He had been born in Bethlehem, or, as another might say, had come forth 
from Bethlehem to be the leader of the people. With respect to the birth of 
Jesus in Bethlehem, if any one desires, after the prophecy of Micah and after 
the history recorded in the Gospels by the disciples of Jesus, to have 
additional evidence from other sources, let him know that, in conformity with 
the narrative in the Gospel regarding His birth, there is shown at Bethlehem the 
cave where He was born, and the manger in the cave where He was wrapped in 
swaddling-clothes. And this sight is greatly talked of in surrounding places, 
even among the enemies of the faith, it being said that in this cave was born 
that Jesus who is worshipped and reverenced by the Christians. Moreover, I am of 
opinion that, before the advent of Christ, the chief priests and scribes of the 
people, on account of the distinctness and clearness of this prophecy, taught 
that in Bethlehem the Christ was to be born. And this opinion had prevailed also 
extensively among the Jews; for which reason it is related that Herod, on 
inquiring at the chief priests and scribes of the people, heard from them that 
the Christ was to be born in Bethlehem of Judea, 
"whence David was." It is stated also in the Gospel according to John, that 
the Jews declared that the Christ was to be born in Bethlehem, "whence David 
was." But after our Lord's coming, those who busied themselves with overthrowing 
the belief that the place of His birth had been the subject of prophecy from the 
beginning, withheld such teaching from the people; acting in a similar manner to 
those individuals who won over those soldiers of the guard stationed around the 
tomb who had seen Him arise from the dead, and who instructed these 
eye-witnesses to report as follows: "Say that His disciples, while we slept, 
came and stole Him away. And if this come to the governor's ears, we shall 
persuade him, and secure you." 
CHAP. LII. 
Strife and prejudice are powerful instruments in leading men to disregard 
even those things which are abundantly clear; so that they who have somehow 
become familiar with certain opinions, which have deeply imbued their minds, and 
stamped them with a certain character, will not give them up. For a man will 
abandon his habits in respect to other things, although it may be difficult for 
him to tear himself from them, more easily than he will surrender his opinions. 
Nay, even the former are not easily put aside by those who have become 
accustomed to them; and so neither houses, nor cities, nor villages, nor 
intimate acquaintances, are willingly forsaken when we are prejudiced in their 
favour. This, therefore, was a reason why many of the Jews at that time 
disregarded the clear testimony of the prophecies, and miracles which Jesus 
wrought, and of the sufferings which He is related to have endured. And that 
human nature is thus affected, will be manifest to those who observe that those 
who have once been prejudiced in favour of the most contemptible and paltry 
traditions of their ancestors and fellow-citizens, with difficulty lay them 
aside. For example, no one could easily persuade an Egyptian to despise what he 
had learned from his fathers, so as no longer to consider this or that 
irrational animal as a god, or not to guard against eating, even under the 
penalty of death, of the flesh of such an animal. Now, if in carrying our 
examination of this subject to a considerable length, we have enumerated the 
points respecting Bethlehem, and the prophecy regarding it, we consider that we 
were obliged to do this, by way of defence against those who would assert that 
if the prophecies current among the Jews l regarding Jesus were so clear as we 
represent them, why did they not at His coming give in their adhesion to His 
doctrine, and betake them selves to the better life pointed out by Him? Let no 
one, however, bring such a reproach against believers, since he may see that 
reasons of no light weight are assigned by those who have learned to state them, 
for their faith in Jesus. 
CHAP. LIII. 
And if we should ask for a second prophecy, which may appear to us to have a 
clear reference to Jesus, we would quote that which was written by Moses very 
many years before the advent of Christ, when he makes Jacob, on his departure 
from this life, to have uttered predictions regarding each of his sons, and to 
have said of Judah along with the others: "The ruler will not fail from Judah, 
and the governor from his loins, until that which is reserved for him come." 
Now, any one meeting with this prophecy, which is in reality much older than 
Moses, so that one who was not a believer might suspect that it was not written 
by him, would be surprised that Moses should be able to predict that the princes 
of the Jews, seeing there are among them twelve tribes, should be born of the 
tribe of Judah, and should be the rulers of the people; for which reason also 
the whole nation are called Jews, deriving their name from the ruling tribe. 
And, in the second place, one who candidly considers the prophecy, would be 
surprised how, after declaring that the rulers and governors of the people were 
to proceed from the tribe of Judah, he should determine also the limit of their 
rule, saying that "the ruler should not fail from Judah, nor the governor from 
his loins, until there should come that which was reserved for him, and that He 
is the expectation of the Gentiles." For He came for whom these things were 
reserved, viz., the Christ of God, the ruler of the promises of God. And 
manifestly He is the only one among those who preceded, and, I might make bold 
to say, among those also who followed Him, who was the expectation of the 
Gentiles; for converts from among all the Gentile nations have believed on God 
through Him, and that in conformity with the prediction of Isaiah, that in His 
name the Gentiles had hoped: "In Thy name shall the Gentiles hope." And this man 
said also to those who are in prison, as every man is a captive to the chains of 
his sins, "Come forth;" and to the ignorant, "Come into the light:" these things 
also having been thus foretold: "I have given Thee for a covenant of the people, 
to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritage; saying to the 
prisoners, Go forth; and to them that are in darkness, Show yourselves." And we 
may see at the appearing of this man, by means of those who everywhere 
throughout the world have reposed a simple faith in Him, the fulfilment of this 
prediction: "They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all the 
beaten tracks." 
CHAP. LIV. 
And since Celsus, although professing to know all about the Gospel, 
reproaches the Saviour because of His sufferings, saying that He received no 
assistance from the Father, or was unable to aid Himself; we have to state that 
His sufferings were the subject of prophecy, along with the cause of them; 
because it was for the benefit of mankind that He should die on their account, 
and should suffer stripes because of His condemnation. It was predicted, 
moreover, that some from among the Gentiles would come to the knowledge of Him 
(among whom the prophets are not included); and it had been declared that He 
would be seen in a form which is deemed dishonourable among men. The words of 
prophecy run thus: "Lo, my Servant shall have understanding, and shall be 
exalted and glorified, and raised exceedingly high. In like manner, many shall 
be astonished at Thee; so Thy form shall be in no reputation among men, and Thy 
glory among the sons of men. Lo, many nations shall marvel because of Him; and 
kings shall close their mouths: because they, to whom no message about Him was 
sent, shall see Him; and they who have not heard of Him, shall have knowledge of 
Him." "Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom was the arm of the LORD 
revealed? We have reported, as a child before Him, as a root in a thirsty 
ground. He has no form nor glory; and we beheld Him, and He had not any form nor 
beauty: but His appearance was without honour, and deficient more than that of 
all men. He was a man under suffering, and who knew how to bear sickness: 
because His countenance was averted, He was treated with disrespect, and was 
made of no account. This man bears our sins, and suffers pain on our behalf; and 
we regarded Him as in trouble, and in suffering, and as ill-treated. But He was 
wounded for our sins, and bruised for our iniquities. The chastisement of our 
peace was upon Him; by His stripes we were healed. We all, like sheep, wandered 
from the way. A man wandered in his way, and the Lord delivered Him on account 
of our sins; and He, because of His evil treatment, opens not His mouth. As a 
sheep was He led to slaughter; and as a lamb before her shearer is dumb, so He 
opens not His mouth. In His humiliation His judgment was taken away. And who 
shall describe His generation? because His life is taken away from the earth; 
because of the iniquities of My people was He led unto death." 
CHAP. LV. 
Now I remember that, on one occasion, at a disputation held with certain 
Jews, who were reckoned wise men, I quoted these prophecies; to which my Jewish 
opponent replied, that these predictions bore reference to the whole people, 
regarded as one individual, and as being in a state of dispersion and suffering, 
in order that many proselytes might be gained, on account of the dispersion of 
the Jews among numerous heathen nations. And in this way he explained the words, 
"Thy form shall be of no reputation among men;" and then, "They to whom no 
message was sent respecting him shall see;" and the expression, "A man under 
suffering." Many arguments were employed on that occasion during the discussion 
to prove that these predictions regarding one particular person were not rightly 
applied by them to the whole nation. And I asked to what character the 
expression would be appropriate, "This man bears our sins, and suffers pain on 
our behalf;" and this, "But He was wounded for our sins, and bruised for our 
iniquities;" and to whom the expression properly belonged, "By His stripes were 
we healed." For it is manifest that it is they who had been sinners, and had 
been healed by the Saviour's sufferings (whether belonging to the Jewish nation 
or converts from the Gentiles), who use such language in the writings of the 
prophet who foresaw these events, and who, under the influence of the Holy 
Spirit, appiled these words to a person. But we seemed to press them hardest 
with the expression, "Because of the iniquities of My people was He led away 
unto death." For if the people, according to them, are the subject of the 
prophecy, how is the man said to be led away to death because of the iniquities 
of the people of God, unless he be a different person from that people of God? 
And who is this person save Jesus Christ, by whose stripes they who believe on 
Him are healed, when "He had spoiled the principalities and powers (that were 
over us), and had made a show of them openly on His cross?" At another time we 
may explain the several parts of the prophecy, leaving none of them unexamined. 
But these matters have been treated at greater length, necessarily as I think, 
on account of the language of the Jew, as quoted in the work of Celsus. 
CHAP. LVI. 
Now it escaped the notice of Celsus, and of the Jew whom he has introduced, 
and of all who are not believers in Jesus, that the prophecies speak of two 
advents of Christ: the former characterized by human suffering and humility, in 
order that Christ, being with men, might make known the way that leads to God, 
and might leave no man in this life a ground of excuse, in saying that he knew 
not of the judgment to come; and the latter, distinguished only by glory and 
divinity, having no element of human infirmity intermingled with its divine 
greatness. To quote the prophecies at length would be tedious; and I deem it 
sufficient for the present to quote a part of the forty-fifth Psalm, which has 
this inscription, in addition to others, "A Psalm for the Beloved," where God is 
evidently addressed in these words: "Grace is poured into Thy lips: therefore 
God will bless Thee for ever and ever. Gird Thy sword on Thy thigh, O mighty 
One, with Thy beauty and Thy majesty. And stretch forth, and ride prosperously, 
and reign, because of Thy truth, and meekness, and righteousness; and Thy right 
hand shall lead Thee marvellously. Thine arrows are pointed, O mighty One; the 
people will fall under Thee in the heart of the enemies of the King." But attend 
carefully to what follows, where He is called God: "For Thy throne, O God, is 
for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom. 
Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: therefore God, even Thy God, 
hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows." And observe that 
the prophet, speaking familiarly to God, whose "throne is for ever and ever," 
and "a sceptre of righteousness the sceptre of His kingdom," says that this God 
has been anointed by a God who was His God, and anointed, because more than His 
fellows He had loved righteousness and hated iniquity. And I remember that I 
pressed the Jew, who was deemed a learned man, very hard with this passage; and 
he, being perplexed about it, gave such an answer as was in keeping with his 
Judaistic views, saying that the words, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and 
ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom," are spoken of 
the God of all things; and these, "Thou hast loved righteousness and hated 
iniquity, therefore Thy God hath anointed Thee," etc., refer to the Messiah. 
CHAP. LVII. 
The Jew, moreover, in the treatise, addresses the Saviour thus: "If you say 
that every man, born according to the decree of Divine Providence, is a son of 
God, in what respect should you differ from another?" In reply to whom we say, 
that every man who, as Paul expresses it, is no longer under fear, as a 
schoolmaster, but who chooses good for its own sake, is "a son of God;" but this 
man is distinguished far and wide above every man who is called, on account of 
his virtues, a son of God, seeing He is, as it were, a kind of source and 
beginning of all such. The words of Paul are as follow: "For ye have not 
received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of 
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father." But, according to the Jew of Celsus, 
"countless individuals will convict Jesus of falsehood, alleging that those 
predictions which were spoken of him were intended of them." We are not aware, 
indeed, whether Celsus knew of any who, after coming into this world, and having 
desired to act as Jesus did, declared themselves to be also the "sons of God," 
or the "power" of God. But since it is in the spirit of truth that we examine 
each passage, we shall mention that there was a certain Theudas among the Jews 
before the birth of Christ, who gave himself out as some great one, after whose 
death his deluded followers were completely dispersed. And after him, in the 
days of the census, when Jesus appears to have been born, one Judas, a Galilean, 
gathered around him many of the Jewish people, saying he was a wise man, and a 
teacher of certain new doctrines. And when he also had paid the penalty of his 
rebellion, his doctrine was overturned, having taken hold of very few persons 
indeed, and these of the very humblest condition. And after the times of Jesus, 
Dositheus the Samaritan also wished to persuade the Samaritans that he was the 
Christ predicted by Moses; and he appears to have gained over some to his views. 
But it is not absurd, in quoting the extremely wise observation of that Gamaliel 
named in the book of Acts, to show how those persons above mentioned were 
strangers to the promise, being neither "sons of God" nor "powers" of God, 
whereas Christ Jesus was truly the Son of God. Now Gamaliel, in the passage 
referred to, said: "If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to 
nought" (as also did the designs of those men already mentioned after their 
death); "but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow this doctrine, lest haply ye 
be found even to fight against God." There was also Simon the Samaritan 
magician, who wished to draw away certain by his magical arts. And on that 
occasion he was successful; but now-a-days it is impossible to find, I suppose, 
thirty of his followers in the entire world, and probably I have even overstated 
the number. There are exceedingly few in Palestine; while in the rest of the 
world, through which he desired to spread the glory of his name, you find it 
nowhere mentioned. And where it is found, it is found quoted from the Acts of 
the Apostles; so that it is to Christians that he owes this mention of himself, 
the unmistakeable result having proved that Simon was in no respect divine. 
CHAP. LVIII. 
After these matters this Jew of Celsus, instead of the Magi mentioned in the 
Gospel, says that "Chaldeans are spoken of by Jesus as having been induced to 
come to him at his birth, and to worship him while yet an infant as a God, and 
to have made this known to Herod the tetrarch; and that the latter sent and slew 
all the infants that had been born about the same time, thinking that in this 
way he would ensure his death among the others; and that he was led to do this 
through fear that, if Jesus lived to a sufficient age, he would obtain the 
throne." See now in this instance the blunder of one who cannot distinguish 
between Magi and Chaldeans, nor perceive that what they profess is different, 
and so has falsified the Gospel narrative. I know not, moreover, why he has 
passed by in silence the cause which led the Magi to come, and why he has not 
stated, according to the scriptural account, that it was a star seen by them in 
the east. Let us see now what answer we have to make to these statements. The 
star that was seen in the east we consider to have been a new star, unlike any 
of the other well-known planetary bodies, either those in the firmament above or 
those among the lower orbs, but partaking of the nature of those celestial 
bodies which appear at times, such as comets, or those meteors which resemble 
beams of wood, or beards, or wine jars, or any of those other names by which the 
Greeks are accustomed to describe their varying appearances. And we establish 
our position in the following manner. 
CHAP. LIX. 
It has been observed that, on the occurrence of great events, and of mighty 
changes in terrestrial things, such stars are wont to appear, indicating either 
the removal of dynasties or the breaking out of wars, or the happening of such 
circumstances as may cause commotions upon the earth. But we have read in the 
Treatise an Comets by Chaeremon the Stoic, that on some occasions also, when 
good was to happen, comets made their appearance; and he gives an account of 
such instances. If, then, at the commencement of new dynasties, or on the 
occasion of other important events, there arises a comet so called, or any 
similar celestial body, why should it be matter of wonder that at the birth of 
Him who was to introduce a new doctrine to the human race, and to make known His 
teaching not only to Jews, but also to Greeks, and to many of the barbarous 
nations besides, a star should have arisen? Now I would say, that with respect 
to comets there is no prophecy in circulation to the effect that such and such a 
comet was to arise in connection with a particular kingdom or a particular time; 
but with respect to the appearance of a star at the birth of Jesus there is a 
prophecy of Balaam recorded by Moses i to this effect: "There shall arise a star 
out of Jacob, and a man shall rise up out of Israel." And now, if it shall be 
deemed necessary to examine the narrative about the Magi, and the appearance of 
the star at the birth of Jesus, the following is what we have to say, partly in 
answer to the Greeks, and partly to the Jews. 
CHAP. LX. 
To the Greeks, then, I have to say that the Magi, being on familiar terms 
with evil spirits, and invoking them for such purposes as their knowledge and 
wishes extend to, bring about such results only as do not appear to exceed the 
superhuman power and strength of the evil spirits, and of the spells which 
invoke them, to accomplish; but should some greater manifestation of divinity be 
made, then the powers of the evil spirits are overthrown, being unable to resist 
the light of divinity. It is probable, therefore, that since at the birth of 
Jesus "a multitude of the heavenly host," as Luke records, and as I believe, 
"praised God, saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will 
towards men," the evil spirits on that account became feeble, and lost their 
strength, the falsity of their sorcery being manifested, and their power being 
broken; this overthrow being brought about not only by the angels having visited 
the terrestrial regions on account of the birth of Jesus, but also by the power 
of Jesus Himself, and His innate divinity. The Magi, accordingly, wishing to 
produce the customary results, which formerly they used to perform by means of 
certain spells and sorceries, sought to know the reason of their failure, 
conjecturing the cause to be a great one; and beholding a divine sign in the 
heaven, they desired to learn its signification. I am therefore of opinion that, 
possessing as they did the prophecies of Balaam, which Moses also records, 
inasmuch as Balaam was celebrated for such predictions, and finding among them 
the prophecy about the star, and the words, "I shall show him to him, but not 
now; I deem him happy, although he will not be near," they conjectured that the 
man whose appearance had been foretold along with that of the star, had actually 
come into the world; and having pro-determined that he was superior in power to 
all demons, and to all common appearances and powers, they resolved to offer him 
homage. They came, accordingly, to Judea, persuaded that some king had been 
born; but not knowing over what kingdom he was to reign, and being ignorant also 
of the place of his birth. bringing gifts, which they offered to him as one 
whose nature partook, if I may so speak, both of God and of a mortal man,--gold, 
viz., as to a king; myrrh, as to one who was mortal; and incense, as to a God; 
and they brought these offerings after they had learned the place of His birth. 
But since He was a God, the Saviour of the human race, raised far above all 
those angels which minister to men, an angel rewarded the piety of the Magi for 
their worship of Him, by making known to them that they were not to go back to 
Herod, but to return to their own homes by another way. 
CHAP. LXI. 
That Herod conspired against the Child (although the Jew of Celsus does not 
believe that this really happened), is not to be wondered at. For wickedness is 
in a certain sense blind, and would desire to defeat fate, as if it were 
stronger than it. And this being Herod's condition, he both believed that a king 
of the Jews had been born, and yet cherished a purpose contradictory of such a 
belief; not seeing that the Child is assuredly either a king and will come to 
the throne, or that he is not to be a king, and that his death, therefore, will 
be to no purpose. He desired accordingly to kill Him, his mind being agitated by 
contending passions on account of his wickedness, and being instigated by the 
blind and wicked devil who from the very beginning plotted against the Saviour, 
imagining that He was and would become some mighty one. An angel, however, 
perceiving the course of events, intimated to Joseph, although Celsus may not 
believe it, that he was to withdraw with the Child and His mother into Egypt, 
while Herod slew all the infants that were in Bethlehem and the surrounding 
borders, in the hope that he would thus destroy Him also who had been born King 
of the Jews. For he saw not the sleepless guardian power that is around those 
who deserve to be protected and preserved for the salvation of men, of whom 
Jesus is the first, superior to all others in honour and excellence, who was to 
be a King indeed, but not in the sense that Herod supposed, but in that in which 
it became God to bestow a kingdom,--for the benefit, viz., of those who were to 
be under His sway, who was to confer no ordinary and unimportant blessings, so 
to speak, upon His subjects, but who was to train them and to subject them to 
laws that were truly from God. And Jesus, knowing this well, and denying that He 
was a king in the sense that the multitude expected, but declaring the 
superiority of His kingdom, says: "If My kingdom were of this world, then would 
My servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is My 
kingdom not of this world." Now, if Celsus had seen this, he would not have 
said: "But if, then, this was done in order that you might not reign in his 
stead when you had grown to man's estate; why, after you did reach that estate, 
do you not become a king, instead of you, the Son of God, wandering about in so 
mean a condition, hiding yourself through fear, and leading a miserable life up 
and down?" Now, it is not dishonourable to avoid exposing one's self to dangers, 
but to guard carefully against them, when this is done, not through fear of 
death, but from a desire to benefit others by remaining in life, until the 
proper time come for one who has assumed human nature to die a death that will 
be useful to mankind. And this is plain to him who reflects that Jesus died for 
the sake of men,--a point of which we have spoken to the best of our ability in 
the preceding pages. 
CHAP. LXII. 
And after such statements, showing his ignorance even of the number of the 
apostles, he proceeds thus: "Jesus having gathered around him ten or eleven 
persons of notorious character, the very wickedest of tax-gatherers and sailors, 
fled in company with them from place to place, and obtained his living in a 
shameful and importunate manner." Let us to the best of our power see what truth 
there is in such a statement. It is manifest to us all who possess the Gospel 
narratives, which Celsus does not appear even to have read, that Jesus selected 
twelve apostles, and that of these Matthew alone was a tax-gatherer; that when 
he calls them indiscriminately sailors, he probably means James and John, 
because they left their ship and their father Zebedee, and followed Jesus; for 
Peter and his brother Andrew, who employed a net to gain their necessary 
subsistence, must be classed not as sailors, but as the Scripture describes 
them, as fishermen. The Lebes also, who was a follower of Jesus, may have been a 
tax-gatherer; but he was not of the number of the apostles, except according to 
a statement in one of the copies of Mark's Gospel. And we have not ascertained 
the employments of the remaining disciples, by which they earned their 
livelihood before becoming disciples of Jesus. I assert, therefore, in answer to 
such statements as the above, that it is clear to all who are able to institute 
an intelligent and candid examination into the history of the apostles of Jesus, 
that it was by help of a divine power that these men taught Christianity, and 
succeeded in leading others to embrace the word of God. For it was not any power 
of speaking, or any orderly arrangement of their message, according to the arts 
of Grecian dialectics or rhetoric, which was in them the effective cause of 
converting their hearers. Nay, I am of opinion that if Jesus had selected some 
individuals who were wise according to the apprehension of the multitude, and 
who were fitted both to think and speak so as to please them, and had used such 
as the ministers of His doctrine, He would most justly have been suspected of 
employing artifices, like those philosophers who are the leaders of certain 
sects, and consequently the promise respecting the divinity of His doctrine 
would not have manifested itself; for had the doctrine and the preaching 
consisted in the persuasive utterance and arrangement of words, then faith also, 
like that of the philosophers of the world in their opinions, would have been 
through the wisdom of men, and not through the power of God. 
Now, who is there on seeing fishermen and tax-gatherers, who had not acquired 
even the merest elements of learning (as the Gospel relates of them, and in 
respect to which Celsus believes that they speak the truth, inasmuch as it is 
their own ignorance which they record), discoursing boldly not only among the 
Jews of faith in Jesus, but also preaching Him with success among other nations, 
would not inquire whence they derived this power of persuasion, as theirs was 
certainly not the common method followed by the multitude? And who would not say 
that the promise, "Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men," had been 
accomplished by Jesus in the history of His apostles by a sort of divine power? 
And to this also, Paul, referring in terms of commendation, as we have stated a 
little above, says: "And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words 
of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your 
faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God." For, 
according to the predictions in the prophets, foretelling the preaching of the 
Gospel, "the Lord gave the word in great power to them who preached it, even the 
King of the powers of the Beloved," in order that the prophecy might be 
fulfilled which said, "His words shall run very swiftly." And we see that "the 
voice of the apostles of Jesus has gone forth into all the earth, and their 
words to the end of the world," On this account are they who hear the word 
powerfully proclaimed filled with power, which they manifest both by their 
dispositions and their lives, and by struggling even to death on behalf of the 
truth; while some are altogether empty, although they profess to believe in God 
through Jesus, inasmuch as, not possessing any divine power, they have the 
appearance only of being converted to the word of God. And although I have 
previously mentioned a Gospel declaration uttered by the Saviour, I shall 
nevertheless quote it again, as appropriate to the present occasion, as it 
confirms both the divine manifestation of our Saviour's foreknowledge regarding 
the preaching of His Gospel, and the power of His word, which without the aid of 
teachers gains the mastery over those who yield their assent to persuasion 
accompanied with divine power; and the words of Jesus referred to are, "The 
harvest is plenteous, but the labourers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of 
the harvest, that He will send forth labourers into His harvest." 
CHAP. LXIII. 
And since Celsus has termed the apostles of Jesus men of infamous notoriety, 
saying that they were tax-gatherers and sailors of the vilest character, we have 
to remark, with respect to this charge, that he seems, in order to bring an 
accusation against Christianity, to believe the Gospel accounts only where he 
pleases, and to express his disbelief of them, in order that he may not be 
forced to admit the manifestations of Divinity related in these same books; 
whereas one who sees the spirit of truth by which the writers are influenced, 
ought, from their narration of things of inferior importance, to believe also 
the account of divine things. Now in the general Epistle of Barnabas, from which 
perhaps Celsus took the statement that the apostles were notoriously wicked men, 
it is recorded that "Jesus selected His own apostles, as persons who were more 
guilty of sin than all other evildoers." And in the Gospel according to Luke, 
Peter says to Jesus, "Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man." Moreover, 
Paul, who himself also at a later time became an apostle of Jesus, says in his 
Epistle to Timothy, "This is a faithful saying, that Jesus Christ came into, the 
world to save sinners, of whom I am the chief." And I do not know how Celsus 
should have forgotten or not have thought of saying something about Paul, the 
founder, after Jesus, of the Churches that are in Christ. He saw, probably, that 
anything he might say about that apostle would require to be explained, in 
consistency with the fact that, after being a persecutor of the Church of God, 
and a bitter opponent of believers, who went so far even as to deliver over the 
disciples of Jesus to death, so great a change afterwards passed over him, that 
he preached the Gospel of Jesus from Jerusalem round about to Illyricum, and was 
ambitious to carry the glad tidings where he needed not to build upon another 
man's foundation, but to places where the Gospel of God in Christ had not been 
proclaimed at all. What absurdity, therefore, is there, if Jesus, desiring to 
manifest to the human race the power which He possesses to heal souls, should 
have selected notorious and wicked men, and should have raised them to such a 
degree of moral excellence, that they, became a pattern of the purest virtue to 
all who were converted by their instrumentality to the Gospel of Christ? 
CHAP. LXIV. 
But if we were to reproach those who have been converted with their former 
lives, then we would have occasion to accuse Phaedo also, even after he became a 
philosopher; since, as the history relates, he was drawn away by Socrates from a 
house of bad fame to the pursuits of philosophy. Nay, even the licentious life 
of Polemo, the successor of Xenocrates, will be a subject of reproach to 
philosophy; whereas even in these instances we ought to regard it as a ground of 
praise, that reasoning was enabled, by the persuasive power of these men, to 
convert from the practice of such vices those who had been formerly entangled by 
them. Now among the Greeks there was only one Phaedo, I know, not if there were 
a second, and one Polemo, who betook themselves to philosophy, after a 
licentious and most wicked life; while with Jesus there were not only at the 
time we speak of, the twelve disciples, but many more at all times, who, 
becoming a band of temperate men, speak in the following terms of their former 
lives: "For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, 
serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and 
hating one another. But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour 
towards man appeared, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy 
Ghost, which He shed upon us richly," we became such as we are. For "God sent 
forth His Word and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions," as 
the prophet taught in the book of Psalms. And in addition to what has been 
already said, I would add the following: that Chrysippus, in his treatise on the 
Cure of the Passions, in his endeavours to restrain the passions of the human 
soul, not pretending to determine what opinions are the true ones, says that 
according to the principles of the different sects are those to be cured who 
have been brought under the dominion of the passions, and continues: "And if 
pleasure be an end, then by it must the passions be healed; and if there be 
three kinds of chief blessings, still, according to this doctrine, it is in the 
same way that those are to be freed from their passions who are under their 
dominion;" whereas the assailants of Christianity do not see in how many persons 
the passions have been brought under restraint, and the flood of wickedness 
checked, and savage manners softened, by means of the Gospel. So that it well 
became those who are ever boasting of their zeal for the public good, to make a 
public acknowledgement of their thanks to that doctrine which by a new method 
led men to abandon many vices, and to bear their testimony at least to it, that 
even though not the truth, it has at all events been productive of benefit to 
the human race. 
CHAP. LXV. 
And since Jesus, in teaching His disciples not to be guilty of rashness, gave 
them the precept. "If they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another; and 
if they persecute you in the other, flee again into a third," to which teaching 
He added the example of a consistent life, acting so as not to expose Himself to 
danger rashly, or unseasonably, or without good grounds; from this Celsus takes 
occasion to bring a malicious and slanderous accusation,--the Jew whom he brings 
forward saying to Jesus, "In company with your disciples you go and hide 
yourself in different places." Now similar to what has thus been made the ground 
of a slanderous charge against Jesus and His disciples, do we say was the 
conduct recorded of Aristotle. This philosopher, seeing that a court was about 
to be summoned to try him, on the ground of his being guilty of impiety on 
account of certain of his philosophical tenets which the Athenians regarded as 
impious, withdrew from Athens, and fixed his school in Chalcis, defending his 
course of procedure to his friends by saying, "Let us depart from Athens, that 
we may not give the Athenians a handle for incurring guilt a second time, as 
formerly in the case of Socrates, and so prevent them from committing a second 
act of impiety against philosophy." He further says, "that Jesus went about with 
His disciples, and obtained His livelihood in a disgraceful and importunate 
manner." Let him show wherein lay the disgraceful and importunate element in 
their manner of subsistence. For it is related in the Gospels, that there were 
certain women who had been healed of their diseases, among whom also was 
Susanna, who from their own possessions afforded the disciples the means of 
support. And who is there among philosophers, that, when devoting himself to the 
service of his acquaintances, is not in the habit of receiving from them what is 
needful for his wants? Or is it only in them that such acts are proper and 
becoming; but when the disciples of Jesus do the same, they are accused by 
Celsus of obtaining their livelihood by disgraceful importunity? 
CHAP. LXVI. 
And in addition to the above, this Jew of Celsus afterwards addresses Jesus: 
"What need, moreover, was there that you, while still an infant, should be 
conveyed into Egygt? Was it to escape being murdered? But then it was not likely 
that a God should be afraid of death; and yet an angel came down from heaven, 
commanding you and your friends to flee, lest ye should be captured and put to 
death! And was not the great God, who had already sent two angels on your 
account, able to keep you, His only Son, there in safety?" From these words 
Celsus seems to think that there was no element of divinity in the human body 
and soul of Jesus, but that His body was not even such as is described in the 
fables of Homer; and with a taunt also at the blood of Jesus which was shed upon 
the cross, he adds that it was not "Ichor, such as flows in the veins of the 
blessed gods." 
We now, believing Jesus Himself, when He says respecting His divinity, "I am 
the way, and the truth, and the life," and employs other terms of similar 
import; and when He says respecting His being clothed with a human body, "And 
now ye seek to kill Me, a man that hath told you the truth," conclude that He 
was a kind of compound being. And so it became Him who was making provision for 
His sojourning in the world as a human being, not to expose Himself unseasonably 
to the danger of death. And in like manner it was necessary that He should be 
taken away by His parents, acting under the instructions of an angel from 
heaven, who communicated to them the divine will, saying on the first occasion, 
"Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that 
which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost;" and on the second, "Arise, and 
take the young Child, and His mother, and flee into Egypt; and be thou there 
until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young Child to destroy Him." 
Now, what is recorded in these words appears to me to be not at all marvellous. 
For in either passage of Scripture it is stated that it was in a dream that the 
angel spoke these words; and that in a dream certain persons may have certain 
things pointed out to them to do, is an event of frequent occurrence to many 
individuals,--the impression on the mind being produced either by an angel or by 
some other thing. Where, then, is the absurdity in believing that He who had 
once become incarnate, should be led also by human guidance to keep out of the 
way of dangers? Not indeed from any impossibility that it should be otherwise, 
but from the moral fitness that ways and means should be made use of to ensure 
the safety of Jesus. And it was certainly better that the Child Jesus should 
escape the snare of Herod, and should reside with His parents in Egypt until the 
death of the conspirator, than that Divine Providence should hinder the 
free-will of Herod in his wish to put the Child to death, or that the fabled 
poetic helmet of Hades should have been employed, or anything of a similar kind 
done with respect to Jesus, or that they who came to destroy Him should have 
been smitten with blindness like the people of Sodom. For the sending of help to 
Him in a very miraculous and unnecessarily public manner, would not have been of 
any service to Him who, wished to show that as a man, to whom witness was borne 
by God, He possessed within that form which was seen by the eyes of men some 
higher element of divinity,--that which was properly the Son of God--God the 
Word--the power of God, and the wisdom of God--He who is called the Christ. 
But this is not a suitable occasion for discussing the composite nature of 
the incarnate Jesus; the investigation into such a subject being for believers, 
so to speak, a sort of private question. 
CHAP. LXVII. 
After the above, this Jew of Celsus, as if he were a Greek who loved 
learning, and were well instructed in Greek literature, continues: "The old 
mythological fables, which attributed a divine origin to Perseus, and Amphion, 
and AEacus, and Minos, were not believed by us. Nevertheless, that they might 
not appear unworthy of credit, they represented the deeds of these personages as 
great and wonderful, and truly beyond the power of man; but what hast thou done 
that is noble or wonderful either in deed or in word? Thou hast made no 
manifestation to us, although they challenged you in the temple to exhibit some 
unmistakeable sign that you were the Son of God." In reply to which we have to 
say Let the Greeks show to us, among those who have been enumerated, any one 
whose deeds have been marked by a utility and splendour extending to after 
generations, and which have been so great as to produce a belief in the fables 
which represented them as of divine descent. But these Greeks can show us 
nothing regarding those men of whom they speak, which is even inferior by a 
great degree to what Jesus did; unless they take us back to their fables and 
histories, wishing us to believe them without any reasonable grounds, and to 
discredit the Gospel accounts even after the clearest evidence. For we assert 
that the whole habitable world contains evidence of the works of Jesus, in the 
existence of those Churches of God which have been founded through Him by those 
who have been converted from the practice of innumerable sins. And the name of 
Jesus can still remove distractions from the minds of men, and expel demons, and 
also take away diseases; and produce a marvellous meekness of spirit and 
complete change of character, and a humanity, and goodness, and gentleness in 
those individuals who do not feign themselves to be Christians for the sake of 
subsistence or the supply of any mortal wants, but who have honestly accepted 
the doctrine concerning God and Christ, and the judgment to come. 
CHAP. LXVIII. 
But after this, Celsus, having a suspicion that the great works performed by 
Jesus, of which we have named a few out of a great number, would be brought 
forward to view, affects to grant that those statements may be true which are 
made regarding His cures, or His resurrection, or the feeding of a multitude 
with a few loaves, from which many fragments remained over, or those other 
stories which Celsus thinks the disciples have recorded as of a marvellous 
nature; and he adds: "Well, let us believe that these were actually wrought by 
you." But then he immediately compares them to the tricks of jugglers, who 
profess to do more wonderful things, and to the feats performed by those who 
have been taught by Egyptians, who in the middle of the market-place, in return 
for a few obols, will impart the knowledge of their most venerated arts, and 
will expel demons from men, and dispel diseases, and invoke the souls of heroes, 
and exhibit expensive banquets, and tables, and dishes, and dainties having no 
real existence, and who will put in motion, as if alive, what are not really 
living animals, but which have only the appearance of life. And he asks, "Since, 
then, these persons can perform such feats, shall we of necessity conclude that 
they are 'sons of God,' or must we admit that they are the proceedings of wicked 
men under the influence of an evil spirit?" You see that by these expressions he 
allows, as it were, the existence of magic. I do not know, however, if he is the 
same who wrote several books against it. But, as it helped his purpose, he 
compares the (miracles) related of Jesus to the results produced by magic. There 
would indeed be a resemblance between them, if Jesus, like the dealers in 
magical arts, had performed His works only for show; but now there is not a 
single juggler who, by means of his proceedings, invites his spectators to 
reform their manners, or trains those to the fear of God who are amazed at what 
they see, nor who tries to persuade them so to live as men who are to be 
justified by God. And jugglers do none of these things, because they have 
neither the power nor the will, nor any desire to busy themselves about the 
reformation of men, inasmuch as their own lives are full of the grossest and 
most notorious sins. But how should not He who, by the miracles which He did, 
induced those who beheld the excellent results to undertake the reformation of 
their characters, manifest Himself not only to His genuine disciples, but also 
to others, as a pattern of most virtuous life, in order that His disciples might 
devote themselves to the work of instructing men in the will of God, and that 
the others, after being more fully instructed by His word and character than by 
His miracles, as to how they were to direct their lives, might in all their 
conduct have a constant reference to the good pleasure of the universal God? And 
if such were the life of Jesus, how could any one with reason compare Him with 
the sect of impostors, and not, on the contrary, believe, according to the 
promise, that He was God, who appeared in human form to do good to our race? 
CHAP. LXIX. 
After this, Celsus, confusing together the Christian doctrine and the 
opinions of some heretical sect, and bringing them forward as charges that were 
applicable to all who believe in the divine word, says: "Such a body as yours 
could not have belonged to God." Now, in answer to this, we have to say that 
Jesus, on entering into the world, assumed, as one born of a woman, a human 
body, and one which was capable of suffering a natural death. For which reason, 
in addition to others, we say that He was also a great wrestler; having, on 
account of His human body, been tempted in all respects like other men, but no 
longer as men, with sin as a consequence, but being altogether without sin. For 
it is distinctly clear to us that "He did no sin, neither was guile found in His 
mouth; and as one who knew no sin," God delivered Him up as pure for all who had 
sinned. Then Celsus says: "The body of god would not have been so generated as 
you, O Jesus, were." He saw, besides, that if, as it is written, it had been 
born, His body somehow might be even more divine than that of the multitude, and 
in a certain sense a body of god. But he disbelieves the accounts of His 
conception by the Holy Ghost, and believes that He was begotten by one Panthera, 
who corrupted the Virgin, "because a god's body would not have been so generated 
as you were." But we have spoken of these matters at greater length in the 
preceding pages. 
CHAP. LXX. 
He asserts, moreover, that "the body of a god is not nourished with such food 
(as was that of Jesus)," since he is able to prove from. the Gospel narratives 
both that He partook of food, and food of a particular kind. Well, be it so. Let 
him assert that He ate the passover with His disciples, when He not only used 
the words, "With desire have I desired to eat this passover with you," but also 
actually partook of the same. And let him say also, that He experienced the 
sensation of thirst beside the well of Jacob, and drank of the water of the 
well. In what respect do these facts militate against what we have said 
respecting the nature of His body? Moreover, it appears indubitable that after 
His resurrection He ate a piece of fish; for, according to our view, He assumed 
a (true) body, as one born of a woman. "But," objects Celsus, "the body of a god 
does not make use of such a voice as that of Jesus, nor employ such a method of 
persuasion as he." These are, indeed, trifling and altogether contemptible 
objections. For our reply to him will be, that he who is believed among the 
Greeks to be a god, viz., the Pythian and Didymean Apollo, makes use of such a 
voice for his Pythian priestess at Delphi, and for his prophetess at Miletus; 
and yet neither the Pythian nor Didymean is charged by the Greeks with not being 
a god, nor any other Grecian deity whose worship is established in one place. 
And it was far better, surely, that a god should employ a voice which, on 
account of its being uttered with power, should produce an indescribable sort of 
persuasion in the minds of the hearers. 
CHAP. LXXI. 
Continuing to pour abuse upon Jesus as one who, on account of his impiety and 
wicked opinions, was, so to speak, hated by God, he asserts that "these tenets 
of his were those of a wicked and God-hated sorcerer." And yet, if the name and 
the thing be properly examined, it will be found an impossibility that man 
should be hated by God, seeing God loves all existing things, and "hateth 
nothing of what He has made," for He created nothing in a spirit of hatred. And 
if certain expressions in the prophets convey such an impression, they are to be 
interpreted in accordance with the general principle by which Scripture employs 
such language with regard to God as if He were subject to human affections. But 
what reply need be made to him who, while professing to bring foreward credible 
statements, thinks himself bound to make use of calumnies and slanders against 
Jesus, as if He were a wicked sorcerer? Such is not the procedure of one who 
seeks to make good his case, but of one who is in an ignorant and unphilosophic 
state of mind, inasmuch as the proper course is to state the case, and candidly 
to investigate it; and, according to the best of his ability, to bring forward 
what occurs to him with regard to it. But as the Jew of Celsus has, with the 
above remarks, brought to a close his charges against Jesus, so we also shall 
here bring to a termination the contents of our first book in reply to him. And 
if God bestow the gift of that truth which destroys all falsehood, agreeably to 
the words of the prayer, "Cut them off in thy truth," we shall begin, in what 
follows, the consideration of the second appearance of the Jew, in which he is 
represented by Celsus as addressing those who have become converts to Jesus. 


