
Origen












Origen. Commentary on John
Book V 
FROM THE PREFACE. 
You are not content to fulfil the office, when I am present with you, of a 
taskmaster to drive me to labour at theology; even when I am absent you demand 
that I should spend most of my time on you and on the task I have to do for you. 
I, for my part, am inclined to shrink from toil, and to avoid that danger which 
threatens from God those who give themselves to writing on divinity; thus I 
would take shelter in Scripture in refraining from making many books. For 
Solomon says in Ecclesiastes, "My son, beware of making many books; there is no 
end of it, and much study is a weariness of the flesh." For we, except that text 
have some hidden meaning which we do not yet perceive, have directly 
transgressed the injunction, we have not guarded ourselves against making many 
books. 
Then, after saying that this discussion of but a few sentences of the 
Gospel have run to four volumes, he goes on . . . .
2. HOW SCRIPTURE WARNS US AGAINST MAKING MANY BOOKS. 
For, to judge by the words of the phrase, "My son, beware of making many 
books," two things appear to be indicated by it: first, that we ought not to 
possess many books, and then that we ought not to compose many books. If the 
first is not the meaning the second must be, and if the second is the meaning 
the first does not necessarily follow. In either case we appear to be told that 
we ought not to make many books. I might take my stand on this dictum which now 
confronts us, and send you the text as an excuse, and I might appeal in support 
of this position to the fact that not even the saints found leisure to compose 
many books; and thus I might cry off from the bargain we made with each other, 
and give up writing what I was to send to you. You, on your side, would no doubt 
feel the force of the text I have cited, and might, for the future, excuse me. 
But we must treat Scripture conscientiously, and must not congratulate ourselves 
because we see the primary meaning of a text, that we understand it altogether. 
I do not, therefore, shrink from bringing forward what excuse I think I am able 
to offer for myself, and to point out the arguments, which you would certainly 
use against me, if I acted contrary to our agreement. And in the first place. 
the Sacred History seems to agree with the text in question, inasmuch as none of 
the saints composed several works, or set forth his views in a number of books. 
I will take up this point: when I proceed to write a number of books, the critic 
will remind me that even such a one as Moses left behind him only five books. 
3. THE APOSTLES WROTE LITTLE. 
But he who was made fit to be a minister of the New Covenant, not of the 
letter, but of the spirit, Paul, who fulfilled the Gospel from Jerusalem round 
about to Illyricum, did not write epistles to all the churches he taught, and to 
those to whom he did write he sent no more than a few lines. And Peter, on whom 
the Church of Christ is built, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail 
left only one epistle of acknowledged genuineness. Suppose we allow that he left 
a second; for this is doubtful. What are we to say of him who leaned on Jesus' 
breast, namely, John, who left one Gospel, though confessing that he could make 
so many that the world would not contain them? But he wrote also the Apocalypse, 
being commanded to be silent and not to write the voices of the seven thunders. 
But he also left an epistle of very few lines. Suppose also a second and a 
third, since not all pronounce these to be genuine; but the two together do not 
amount to a hundred lines. 
Then, after enumerating the prophets and Apostles, and showing how each 
wrote only a little, or not even a little, he goes on . . . .
4. I feel myself growing dizzy with all this, and wonder whether, in obeying 
you, I have not been obeying God, nor walking in the footsteps of the saints, 
unless it be that my too great love to you, and my unwillingness to cause you 
any pain, has led me astray and caused me to think of all these excuses. We 
started from the words of the preacher, where he says: "My son, beware of making 
many books." With this I compare a saying from the Proverbs of the same Solomon, 
"In the multitude of words thou shall not escape sin; but in sparing thy lips 
thou shalt be wise." Here I ask whether speaking many words of whatever kind is 
a multitude of words (in the sense of the preacher), even if the many words a 
man speaks are sacred and connected with salvation. If this be the case, and if 
he who makes use of many salutary words is guilty of "multitude of words," then 
Solomon himself did not escape this sin, for "he spoke three thousand proverbs, 
and five thousand songs, and he spoke of trees from the cedar that is in Lebanon 
even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall, he spoke also of beasts and 
of fowl, and of creeping things and of fishes." How, I may ask, can any one give 
any course of instruction, without a multitude of words, using the phrase in its 
simplest sense? Does not Wisdom herself say to those who are perishing, "I 
stretched out my words, and ye heeded not"? Do we not find Paul, too, extending 
his discourse from morning to midnight, when Eutychus was borne down with sleep 
and fell down, to the dismay of the hearers. who thought he was killed? If, 
then, the words are true, "In much speaking thou wilt not escape sin," and if 
Solomon was yet not guilty of great sin when he discoursed on the subjects above 
mentioned, nor Paul when he prolonged his discourse till midnight, then the 
question arises, What is that much speaking which is referred to? and then we 
may pass on to consider what are the many books. Now the entire Word of God, who 
was in the beginning with God, is not much speaking, is not words; for the Word 
is one, being composed of the many speculations (theoremata), each of which is a 
part of the Word in its entirety. Whatever words there be outside of this one, 
which promise to give any description and exposition, even though they be words 
about truth, none of these, to put it in a somewhat paradoxical way, is Word or 
Reason, they are all words or reasons. They are not the monad, far from it; they 
are not that which agrees and is one in itself, by their inner divisions and 
conflicts unity has departed from them, they have become numbers, perhaps 
infinite numbers. We are obliged, therefore, to say that whoever speaks that 
which is foreign to religion is using many words, while he who speaks the words 
of truth, even should he go over the whole field and omit nothing, is always 
speaking the one word. Nor are the saints guilty of much speaking, since they 
always have the aim in view which is connected with the one word. It appears, 
then, that the much speaking which is condemned is judged to be so rather from 
the nature of the views propounded, than from the number of the words 
pronounced. Let us see if we cannot conclude in the same way that all the sacred 
books are one book, but that those outside are the "many books" of the preacher. 
The proof of this must be drawn from Holy Scripture, and it will be most 
satisfactorily established if I am able to show that it is not only one book, 
taking the word now in its commoner meaning, that we find to be written about 
Christ. Christ is written about even in the Pentateuch; He is spoken of in each 
of the Prophets, and in the Psalms, and, in a word, as the Saviour Himself says, 
in all the Scriptures. He refers us to them all, when He says: "Search the 
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and these are they which 
testify of Me." And if He refers us to the Scriptures as testifying of Him, it 
is not to one that He sends us, to the exclusion of another, but to all that 
speak of Him, those which, in the Psalms, He calls the chapter of the book, 
saying, "In the chapter of the book it is written of Me." If any one proposes to 
take these words, "In the chapter of the book it is written of Me," literally, 
and to apply them to this or that special passage where Christ is spoken of, let 
him tell us on what principle he warrants his preference for one book over 
another. If any one supposes that we are doing something of this kind ourselves. 
and applying the words in question to the book of Psalms, we deny that we do so, 
and we would urge that in that case the words should have been, "In this book it 
is written of Me." But He speaks of all the books as one chapter, thus sum-ruing 
up in one all that is spoken of Christ for our instruction. In fact the book was 
seen by John, "written within and without, and sealed; and no one could open it 
to read it, and to loose the seals thereof, but the Lion of the tribe of Judah, 
the root of David, who has the key of David, he that openeth and none shall 
shut, and that shutteth and none shall open." For the book here spoken of means 
the whole of Scripture; and it is written within (lit. in front), on account of 
the meaning which is obvious, and on the back, on account of its remoter and 
spiritual sense. Observe, in addition to this, if a proof that the sacred 
writings are one book, and those of an opposite character many. may not be found 
in the fact that there is one book of the living from which those who have 
proved unworthy to be in it are blotted out, as it is written: "Let them be 
blotter out of the book of the living," while of those who are to undergo the 
judgment, there are books in the plural, as Daniel says: "The judgment was set, 
and the books were opened." But Moses also bears witness to the unity of the 
sacred book, when he says: "If Thou forgive the people their sins, forgive, but 
if not, then wipe me out of the book which Thou hast written." The passage in 
Isaiah, too, I read in the same way. It is not peculiar to his prophecy that the 
words of the book should be sealed, and should neither be read by him who does 
not know letters, because he is ignorant of letters, nor by him who is learned, 
because the book is sealed. This is true of every writing, for every written 
work needs the reason (Logos) which closed it to open it. "He shall shut, and 
none shall open," and when He opens no one can cast doubt on the interpretation 
He brings. Hence it is said that He shall open and no man shall shut. I infer a 
similar lesson from the book spoken of in Ezekiel, in which was written 
lamentation, and a song, and woe. For the whole book is full of the woe of the 
lost, and the song of the saved, and the lamentation of those between these two. 
And John, too, when he speaks of his eating the one roll, in which both front 
and back were written on, means the whole of Scripture, one book which is, at 
first, most sweet when one begins, as it were, to chew it, but bitter in the 
revelation of himself which it makes to the conscience of each one who knows it. 
I will add to the proof of this an apostolic saying which has been quite 
misunderstood by the disciples of Marcion, who, therefore, set the Gospels at 
naught. The Apostle says: "According to my Gospel in Christ Jesus;" he does not 
speak of Gospels in the plural, and, hence, they argue that as the Apostle only 
speaks of one Gospel in the singular, there was only one in existence. But they 
fail to see that, as He is one of whom all the evangelists write, so the Gospel, 
though written by several hands, is, in effect, one. And, in fact, the Gospel, 
though written by four, is one. From these considerations, then, we learn what 
the one book is, and what the many books, and what I am now concerned about is, 
not the quantity I may write, but the effect of what I say, lest, if I fail in 
this point, and set forth anything against the truth itself, even in one of my 
writings, I should prove to have transgressed the commandment, and to be a 
writer of "many books." Yet I see the heterodox assailing the holy Church of God 
in these days, under the pretence of higher wisdom, and bringing forward works 
in many volumes in which they offer expositions of the evangelical and apostolic 
writings, and I fear that if I should be silent and should not put before our 
members the saving and true doctrines, these teachers might get a hold of 
curious souls, which, in the absence of wholesome nourishment, might go after 
food that is forbidden, and, in fact, unclean and horrible. It appears to me, 
therefore, to be necessary that one who is able to represent in a genuine manner 
the doctrine of the Church, and to refute those dealers in knowledge, falsely 
so-called, should take his stand against historical fictions, and oppose to them 
the true and lofty evangelical message in which the agreement of the doctrines, 
found both in the so-called Old Testament and in the so-called New, appears so 
plainly and fully. You yourself felt at one time the lack of good 
representatives of the better cause, and were impatient of a faith which was at 
issue with reason and absurd, and you then, for the love you bore to the Lord, 
gave yourself to composition from which, however, in the exercise of the 
judgment with which you are endowed, you afterwards desisted. This is the 
defence which I think admits of being made for those who have the faculty of 
speaking and writing. But I am also pleading my own cause, as I now devote 
myself with what boldness I may to the work of exposition; for it may be that I 
am not endowed with that habit and disposition which he ought to have who is 
fitted by God to be a minister of the New Covenant, not of the letter but of the 
spirit. 

