
Origen











Origen 
De Principiis
PREFACE. 
1. ALL who believe and are assured that grace and truth were obtained through 
Jesus Christ, and who know Christ to be the truth, agreeably to His own 
declaration, "I am the truth," derive the knowledge which incites men to a good 
and happy life from no other source than from the very words and teaching of 
Christ. And by the words of Christ we do not mean those only which He spake when 
He became man and tabernacled in the flesh; for before that time, Christ, the 
Word of God, was in Moses and the prophets. For without the Word of God, how 
could they have been able to prophesy of Christ? And were it not our purpose to 
confine the present treatise within the limits of all attainable brevity, it 
would not be difficult to show, in proof of this statement, out of the Holy 
Scriptures, how Moses or the prophets both spake and performed all they did 
through being filled with the Spirit of Christ. And therefore I think it 
sufficient to quote this one testimony of Paul from the Epistle to the Hebrews, 
in which he says: "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be 
called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with 
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming 
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of the Egyptians." 
Moreover, that after His ascension into heaven He spake in His apostles, is 
shown by Paul in these words: "Or do you seek a proof of Christ who speaketh in 
me?" 
2. Since many, however, of those who profess to believe in Christ differ from 
each other, not only in small and trifling matters, but also on subjects of the 
highest importance, as, e.g., regarding God, or the Lord Jesus Christ, or the 
Holy Spirit; and not only regarding these, but also regarding others which are 
created existences, viz., the powers and the holy virtues; it seems on that 
account necessary first of all to fix a definite limit and to lay down an 
unmistakable rule regarding each one of these, and then to pass to the 
investigation of other points. For as we ceased to seek for truth 
(notwithstanding the professions of many among Greeks and Barbarians to make it 
known) among all who claimed it for erroneous opinions, after we had come to 
believe that Christ was the Son of God, and were persuaded that we must learn it 
from Himself; so, seeing there are many who think they hold the opinions of 
Christ, and yet some of these think differently from their predecessors, yet as 
the teaching of the Church, transmitted in orderly succession from the apostles, 
and remaining in the Churches to the present day, is still preserved, that alone 
is to be accepted as truth which differs in no respect from ecclesiastical and 
apostolical tradition. 
3. Now it ought to be known that the holy apostles, in preaching the faith of 
Christ, delivered themselves with the utmost clearness on certain points which 
they believed to be necessary to every one, even to those who seemed somewhat 
dull in the investigation of divine knowledge; leaving, however, the grounds of 
their statements to be examined into by those who should deserve the excellent 
gifts of the Spirit, and who, especially by means of the Holy Spirit Himself, 
should obtain the gift of language, of wisdom, and of knowledge: while on other 
subjects they merely stated the fact that things were so, keeping silence as to 
the manner or origin of their existence; clearly in order that the more zealous 
of their successors, who should be lovers of wisdom, might have a subject of 
exercise on which to display the fruit of their talents, -- those persons, I 
mean, who should prepare themselves to be fit and worthy receivers of wisdom. 
4. The particular points clearly delivered in the teaching of the apostles 
are as follow:- First, That there is one God, who created and arranged all 
things, and who, when nothing existed, called all things into being--God from 
the first creation and foundation of the world--the God of all just men, of 
Adam, Abel, Seth, Enos, Enoch, Noe, Sere, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the twelve 
patriarchs, Moses, and the prophets; and that this God in the last days, as He 
had announced beforehand by His prophets, sent our Lord Jesus Christ to call in 
the first place Israel to Himself, and in the second place the Gentiles, after 
the unfaithfulness of the people of Israel. This just and good God, the Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, Himself gave the law and the prophets, and the 
Gospels, being also the God of the apostles and of the Old and New Testaments. 
Secondly, That Jesus Christ Himself, who came (into the world), was born of 
the Father before all creatures; that, after He had been the servant of the 
Father in the creation of all things--"For by Him were all things made"--He in 
the last times, divesting Himself (of His glory), became a man, and was 
incarnate although God, and while made a man remained the God which He was; that 
He assumed a body like to our own, differing in this respect only, that it was 
born of a virgin and of the Holy Spirit: that this Jesus Christ was truly born, 
and did truly suffer, and did not endure this death common (to man) in 
appearance only, but did truly die; that He did truly rise from the dead; and 
that after His resurrection He conversed with His disciples, and was taken up 
(into heaven). 
Then, Thirdly, the apostles related that the Holy Spirit was associated in 
honour and dignity with the Father and the Son. But in His case it is not 
clearly distinguished whether He is to be regarded as born or innate, or also as 
a Son of God or not: for these are points which have to be inquired into out of 
sacred Scripture according to the best of our ability, and which demand careful 
investigation. And that this Spirit inspired each one of the saints, whether 
prophets or apostles; and that there was not one Spirit in the men of the old 
dispensation, and another in those who were inspired at the advent of Christ, is 
most clearly taught throughout the Churches. 
5. After these points, also, the apostolic teaching is that the soul, having 
a substance and life of its own, shall, after its departure from the world, be 
rewarded according to its deserts, being destined to obtain either an 
inheritance of eternal life and blessedness, if its actions shall have procured 
this for it, or to be delivered up to eternal fire and punishments, if the guilt 
of its crimes shall have brought it down to this: and also, that there is to be 
a time of resurrection from the dead, when this body, which now "is sown in 
corruption, shall rise in incorruption," and that which "is sown in dishonour 
will rise in glory." This also is clearly defined in the teaching of the Church, 
that every rational soul is possessed of free-will and volition; that it has a 
straggle to maintain with the devil and his angels, and opposing influences, 
because they strive to burden it with sins; but if we live rightly and wisely, 
we should endeavour to shake ourselves free of a burden of that kind. From which 
it follows, also, that we understand ourselves not to be subject to necessity, 
so as to be compelled by all means, even against our will, to do either good or 
evil. For if we are our own masters, some influences perhaps may impel us to 
sin, and others help us to salvation; we are not forced, however, by any 
necessity either to act rightly or wrongly, which those persons think is the 
case who say that the courses and movements of the stars are the cause of human 
actions, not only of those which take place beyond the influence of the freedom 
of the will, but also of those which are placed within our own power. But with 
respect to the soul, whether it is derived from the seed by a process of 
traducianism, so that the reason or substance of it may be considered as placed 
in the seminal particles of the body themselves, or whether it has any other 
beginning; and this beginning, itself, whether it be by birth or not, or whether 
bestowed upon the body from without or no, is not distinguished with sufficient 
clearness in the teaching of the Church. 
6. Regarding the devil and his angels, and the opposing influences, the 
teaching of the Church has laid down that these beings exist indeed; but what 
they are, or how they exist, it has not explained with sufficient clearness. 
This opinion, however, is held by most, that the devil was an angel, and that, 
having become an apostate, he induced as many of the angels as possible to fall 
away with himself, and these up to the present time are called his angels. 
7. This also is a part of the Church's teaching, that the world was made and 
took its beginning at a certain time, and is to be destroyed on account of its 
wickedness. But what existed before this world, or what will exist after it, has 
not become certainly known to the many, for there is no clear statement 
regarding it in the teaching of the Church. 
8. Then, finally, that the Scriptures were written by the Spirit of God, and 
have a meaning, not such only as is apparent at first sight, but also another, 
which escapes the notice of most. For those (words) which are written are the 
forms of certain mysteries, and the images of divine things. Respecting which 
there is one opinion throughout the whole Church, that the whole law is indeed 
spiritual; but that the spiritual meaning which the law conveys is not known to 
all, but to those only on whom the grace of the Holy Spirit is bestowed in the 
word of wisdom and knowledge. 
The term aswmaton, i.e., incorporeal, is disused and unknown, not only 
in many other writings, but also in our own Scriptures. And if any one should 
quote it to us out of the little treatise entitled The Doctrine of Peter, in 
which the Saviour seems to say to His disciples, "I am not an incorporeal 
demon," I have to reply, in the first place, that that work is not included 
among ecclesiastical books; for we can show that it was not composed either by 
Peter or by any other person inspired by the Spirit of God. But even if the 
point were to be conceded, the word aswmaton there does not convey the 
same meaning as is intended by Greek and Gentile authors when incorporeal nature 
is discussed by philosophers. For in the little treatise referred to he used the 
phrase "incorporeal demon" to denote that that form or outline of demoniacal 
body, whatever it is, does not resemble this gross and visible body of ours; 
but, agreeably to the intention of the author of the treatise, it must be 
understood to mean that He had not such a body as demons have, which is 
naturally fine, and thin as if formed of air (and for this reason is either 
considered or called by many incorporeal), but that He had a solid and palpable 
body. Now, according to human custom, everything which is not of that nature is 
called by the simple or ignorant incorporeal; as if one were to say that the air 
which we breathe was incorporeal, because it is not a body of such a nature as 
can be grasped and held, or can offer resistance to pressure. 
9. We shall inquire, however, whether the thing which Greek philosophers call 
aswmaton, or "incorporeal," is found in holy Scripture under another 
name. For it is also to be a subject of investigation how God himself is to be 
understood,--whether as corporeal, and formed according to some shape, or of a 
different nature from bodies,--a point which is not clearly indicated in our 
teaching. And the same inquiries have to be made regarding Christ and the Holy 
Spirit, as well as respecting every soul, and everything possessed of a rational 
nature. 
10. This also is a part of the teaching of the Church, that there are certain 
angels of God, and certain good influences, which are His servants in 
accomplishing the salvation of men. When these, however, were created, or of 
what nature they are, or how they exist, is not clearly stated. Regarding the 
sun, moon, and stars, whether they are living beings or without life, there is 
no distinct deliverance. 
Every one, therefore, must make use of elements and foundations of this sort, 
according to the precept, "Enlighten yourselves with the light of knowledge," if 
he would desire to form a connected series and body of truths agreeably to the 
reason of all these things, that by dear and necessary statements he may 
ascertain the truth regarding each individual topic, and form, as we have said, 
one body of doctrine, by means of illustrations and arguments,--either those 
which he has discovered in holy Scripture, or which he has deduced by closely 
tracing out the consequences and following a correct method. 

