
Origen












Origen. Contra Celsus
BOOK V. 
CHAP. I. 
IT is not, my reverend Ambrosius, because we seek after many words--a thing 
which is forbidden, and in the indulgence of which it is impossible to avoid 
sin--that we now begin the fifth book of our reply to the treatise of Celsus, 
but with the endeavour, so far as may be within our power, to leave none of his 
statements without examination, and especially those in which it might appear to 
some that he had skilfully assailed us and the Jews. If it were possible, 
indeed, for me to enter along with my words into the conscience of every one 
without exception who perUses this work, and to extract each dart which wounds 
him who is not completely protected with the "whole armour" of God, and apply a 
rational medicine to cure the wound inflicted by Celsus, which prevents those 
who listen to his words from remaining "sound in the faith," I would do so. But 
since it is the work of God alone, in conformity with His own Spirit, and along 
with that of Christ, to take up His abode invisibly in those persons whom He 
judges worthy of being visited; so, on the other hand, is our object to try, by 
means of arguments and treatises, to confirm men in their faith, and to earn the 
name of "workmen needing not to be ashamed, tightly dividing the word of truth." 
And there is one thing above all which it appears to us we ought to do, if we 
would discharge faithfully the task enjoined upon us by you, and that is to 
overturn to the best of our ability the confident assertions of Celsus. Let us 
then quote such assertions of his as follow those which we have already refuted 
(the reader: must decide whether we have done so successfully or not), and let 
us reply to them. And may God grant that we approach not our subject with our 
understanding and reason empty and devoid of divine inspiration, that the faith 
of those whom we wish to aid may not depend upon human wisdom, but that, 
receiving the "mind" of Christ from His Father, who alone can bestow it, and 
being strengthened by participating in the word of God, we may pull down "every 
high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God," and the 
imagination of Celsus, who exalts himself against us, and against Jesus, and 
also against Moses and the prophets, in order that He who "gave the word to 
those who published it with great power" may supply us also, and bestow upon us 
"great power," so that faith in the word and power of God may be implanted in 
the minds of all who will peruse our work. 
CHAP. II. 
We have now, then, to refute that statement of his which runs as follows: "O 
Jews and Christians, no God or son of a God either came or will come down (to 
earth). But if you mean that certain angels did so, then what do you call them? 
Are they gods, or some other race of beings? Some other race of beings 
(doubtless), and in all probability demons." Now as Celsus here is guilty of 
repeating himself (for in the preceding pages such assertions have been 
frequently advanced by him), it is unnecessary to discuss the matter at greater 
length, seeing what we have already said upon this point may suffice. 
We shall mention, however, a few considerations out of a greater number, such 
as we deem in harmony with our former arguments, but which have not altogether 
the same bearing as they, and by which we shall show that in asserting generally 
that no God, or son of God, ever descended (among men), he overturns not only 
the opinions entertained by the majority of mankind regarding the manifestation 
of Deity, but also what was formerly admitted by himself. For if the general 
statement, that "no God or son of God has come down or will come down," be truly 
maintained by Celsus, it is manifest that we have here overthrown the belief in 
the existence of gods upon the earth who had descended from heaven either to 
predict the future to mankind or to heal them by means of divine responses; and 
neither the Pythian Apollo, nor AEsculapius, nor any other among those supposed 
to have done so, would be a god descended from heaven. He might, indeed, either 
be a god who had obtained as his lot (the obligation) to dwell on earth for 
ever, and be thus a fugitive, as it were, from the abode of the gods, or he 
might be one who had no power to share in the society of the gods in heaven; or 
else Apollo, and AEsculapius, and those others who are believed to perform acts 
on earth, would not be gods, but only certain demons, much inferior to those 
wise men among mankind, who on account of their virtue ascend to the vault of 
heaven. 
CHAP. III. 
But observe how, in his desire to subvert our opinions, he who never 
acknowledged himself throughout his whole treatise to be an Epicurean, is 
convicted of being a deserter to that sect. And now is the time for you, 
(reader), who peruse the works of Celsus, and give your assent to what has been 
advanced, either to overturn the belief in a God who visits the human race, and 
exercises a providence over each individual man, or to grant this, and prove the 
falsity of the assertions of Celsus. If you, then, wholly annihilate providence, 
you will falsify those assertions of his in which he grants the existence of 
"God and a providence," in order that you may maintain the truth of your own 
position; but if, on the other hand, you still admit the existence of 
providence, because you do not assent to the dictum of Celsus, that "neither has 
a God nor the son of a God come down nor is to come down to mankind," why not 
rather carefully ascertain from the statements made regarding Jesus, and the 
prophecies uttered concerning Him, who it is that we are to consider as having 
come down to the human race as God, and the Son of God?--whether that Jesus who 
said and ministered so much, or those who under pretence of oracles and 
divinations, do not reform the morals of their worshippers, but who have besides 
apostatized from the pure and holy worship and honour due to the Maker of all 
things, and who tear away the souls of those who give heed to them from the one 
only visible and true God, under a pretence of paying honour to a multitude of 
deities? 
CHAP. IV. 
But since he says, in the next place, as if the Jews or Christians had 
answered regarding those who come down to visit the human race, that they were 
angels: "But if ye say that they are angels, what do you call them?" he 
continues, "Are they gods, or some other race of beings?" and then again 
introduces us as if answering, "Some other race of beings, and probably 
demons,"--let us proceed to notice these remarks. For we indeed acknowledge that 
angels are "ministering spirits," and we say that "they are sent forth to 
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation;" and that they ascend, 
bearing the supplications of men, to the purest of the heavenly places in the 
universe, or even to supercelestial regions purer still; and that they come down 
from these, conveying to each one, according to his deserts, something enjoined 
by God to be conferred by them upon those who are to be the recipients of His 
benefits. Having thus learned to call these beings "angels" from their 
employments, we find that because they are divine they are sometimes termed 
"god" in the sacred Scriptures, but not so that we are commanded to honour and 
worship in place of God those who minister to us, and bear to us His blessings. 
For every prayer, and supplication, and intercession, and thanksgiving, is to be 
sent up to the Supreme God through the High Priest, who is above all the angels, 
the living Word and God. And to the Word Himself shall we also pray and make 
intercessions, and offer thanksgivings and supplications to Him, if we have the 
capacity of distinguishing between the proper use and abuse of prayer. 
CHAP. V. 
For to invoke angels without having obtained a knowledge of their nature 
greater than is possessed by men, would be contrary to reason. But, conformably 
to our hypothesis, let this knowledge of them, which is something wonderful and 
mysterious, be obtained. Then this knowledge, making known to us their nature, 
and the offices to which they are severally appointed, will not permit us to 
pray with confidence to any other than to the Supreme God, who is sufficient for 
all things, and that through our Saviour the Son of God, who is the Word, and 
Wisdom, and Truth, and everything else which the writings of God's prophets and 
the apostles of Jesus entitle Him. And it is enough to secure that the holy 
angels of God be pro pitious to us, and that they do all things on our behalf, 
that our disposition of mind towards God should imitate as far as it is within 
the power of human nature the example of these holy angels, who again follow the 
example of their God; and that the conceptions which we entertain of His Son, 
the Word, so far as attainable by us, should not be opposed to the clearer 
conceptions of Him which the holy angels possess, but should daily approach 
these in clearness and distinctness. But because Celsus has not read our holy 
Scriptures, he gives himself an answer as if it came from us, saying that we 
"assert that the angels who come down from heaven to confer benefits on mankind 
are a different race from the gods," and adds that "in all probability they 
would be called demons by us:" not observing that the name "demons" is not a 
term of indifferent meaning like that of "men," among whom some are good and 
some bad, nor yet a term of excellence like that of "the gods," which is applied 
not to wicked demons, or to statues, or to animals, but (by those who know 
divine things) to what is truly divine and blessed; whereas the term "demons" is 
always applied to those wicked powers, freed from the encumbrance of a grosser 
body, who lead men astray, and fill them with distractions and drag them down 
from God and supercelestial thoughts to things here below. 
CHAP. VI. 
He next proceeds to make the following statement about the Jews:--"The first 
point relating to the Jews which is fitted to excite wonder, is that they should 
worship the heaven and the angels who dwell therein, and yet pass by and neglect 
its most venerable and powerful parts, as the sun, the moon, and the other 
heavenly bodies, both fixed stars and planets, as if it were possible that 'the 
whole' could be God, and yet its parts not divine; or (as if it were reasonable) 
to treat with the greatest respect those who are said to appear to such as are 
in darkness somewhere, blinded by some crooked sorcery, or dreaming dreams 
through the influence of shadowy spectres, while those who prophesy so clearly 
and strikingly to all men, by means of whom rain, and heat, and clouds, and 
thunder (to which they offer worship), and lightnings, and fruits, and all kinds 
of productiveness, are brought about,--by means of whom God is revealed to 
them,--the most prominent heralds among those beings that are above,--those that 
are truly heavenly angels,--are to be regarded as of no account!" In making 
these statements, Celsus appears to have fallen into confusion, and to have 
penned them from false ideas of things which he did not understand; for it is 
patent to all who investigate the practices of the Jews, and compare them with 
those of the Christians, that the Jews who follow the law, which, speaking in 
the person of God, says, "Thou shall have no other gods before Me: thou shalt 
not make unto thee an image, nor a likeness of anything that is in heaven above, 
or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters under the earth; thou 
shall not bow down to them, nor serve them," worship nothing else than the 
Supreme God, who made the heavens, and all things besides. Now it is evident 
that those who live according to the law, and worship the Maker of heaven, will 
not worship the heaven at the same time with God. Moreover, no one who obeys the 
law of Moses will bow down to the angels who are in heaven; and, in like manner, 
as they do not bow down to sun, moon, and stars, the host of heaven, they 
refrain from doing obeisance to heaven and its angels, obeying the law which 
declares: "Lest thou lift up thine eyes to heaven, and when thou seest the sun, 
and the moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldst be driven to 
worship them, and serve them, which the LORD thy God hath divided unto all 
nations." 
CHAP. VII. 
Having, moreover, assumed that the Jews consider the heaven to be God, he 
adds that this is absurd; finding fault with those who bow down to the heaven, 
but not also to the sun, and moon, and stars, saying that the Jews do this, as 
if it were possible that "the whole" should be God, and its several parts not 
divine. And he seems to call the heaven "a whole," and sun, moon, and stars its 
several parts. Now, certainly neither Jews nor Christians call the "heaven" God. 
Let it be granted, however, that, as he alleges, the heaven is called God by the 
Jews, and suppose that sun, moon, and stars are parts of "heaven,"--which is by 
no means true, for neither are the animals and plants upon the earth any portion 
of it,--how is it true, even according to the opinions of the Greeks, that if 
God be a whole, His parts also are divine? 
Certainly they say that the Cosmos taken as the whole is God, the Stoics 
calling it the First God, the followers of Plato the Second, and some of them 
the Third. According to these philosophers, then, seeing the whole Cosmos is 
God, its parts also are divine; so that not only are human be ings divine, but 
the whole of the irrational creation, as being "portions" of the Cosmos; and 
besides these, the plants also are divine. And if the rivers, and mountains, and 
seas are portions of the Cosmos, then, since the whole Cosmos is God, are the 
riven and seas also gods? But even this the Greeks will not assert. Those, 
however, who preside over rivers and seas (either demons or gods, as they call 
them), they would term gods. Now from this it follows that the general statement 
of Celsus, even according to the Greeks, who hold the doctrine of Providence, is 
false, that if any "whole" be a god, its parts necessarily are divine. But it 
follows from the doctrine of Celsus, that if the Cosmos be God, all that is in 
it is divine, being parts of the Cosmos. 
Now, according to this view, animals, as flies, and gnats, and worms, and 
every species of serpent, as well as of birds and fishes, will be divine,--an 
assertion which would not be made even by those who maintain that the Cosmos is 
God. But the Jews, who live according to the law of Moses, although they may not 
know how to receive the secret meaning of the law, which is conveyed in obscure 
language, will not maintain that either the heaven or the angels are God. 
CHAP. VIII. 
As we allege, however, that he has fallen into confusion in consequence of 
false notions which he has imbibed, come and let us point them out to the best 
of our ability, and show that although Celsus considers it to be a Jewish custom 
to bow down to the heaven and the angels in it, such a practice is not at all 
Jewish, but is in violation of Judaism, as it also is to do obeisance to sun, 
moon, and stars, as well as images. You will find at least in the book of 
Jeremiah the words of God censuring by the mouth of the prophet the Jewish 
people for doing obeisance to such objects, and for sacrificing to the queen of 
heaven, and to all the host of heaven. The writings of the Christians, moreover, 
show, in censuring the sins committed among the Jews, that when God abandoned 
that people on account of certain sins, these sins (of idol-worship) also were 
committed by them. For it is related in the Acts of the Apostles regarding the 
Jews, that "God turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven; as it is 
written in the book of the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye offered to Me 
slain beasts and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wilderness? Yea, 
ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, figures 
which you made to worship them." And in the writings of Paul, who was carefully 
trained in Jewish customs, and converted afterwards to Christianity by a 
miraculous appearance of Jesus, the following words may be read in the Epistle 
to the Colossians: "Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary 
humility and worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he hath 
not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind; and not holding the Head, from 
which all the body by joint and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit 
together, increaseth with the increase of God." But Celsus, having neither read 
these verses, nor having learned their contents from any other source, has 
represented, I know not how, the Jews as not transgressing their law in bowing 
down to the heavens, and to the angels therein. 
CHAP. IX. 
And still continuing a little confused, and not taking care to see what was 
relevant to the matter, he expressed his opinion that the Jews were induced by 
the incantations employed in jugglery and sorcery (in consequence of which 
certain phantoms appear, in obedience to the spells employed by the magicians) 
to bow down to the angels in heaven, not observing that this was contrary to 
their law, which said to them who practised such observances: "Regard not them 
which have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them: 
I am the LORD your God." He ought, therefore, either not to have at all 
attributed this practice to the Jews, seeing he has observed that they keep 
their law, and has called them "those who live according to their law;" or if he 
did attribute it, he ought to have shown that the Jews did this in violation of 
their code. But again, as they transgress their law who offer worship to those 
who are said to appear to them who are involved in darkness and blinded by 
sorcery, and who dream dreams, owing to obscure phantoms presenting themselves; 
so also do they transgress the law who offer sacrifice to sun, moon, and stars. 
And there is thus great inconsistency in the same individual saying that the 
Jews are careful to keep their law by not bowing down to sun, and moon, and 
stars, while they are not so careful to keep it in the matter of heaven and the 
angels. 
CHAP. X. 
And if it be necessary for us to offer a defence of our refusal to recognise 
as gods, equally with angels, and sun, and moon, and stars, those who are called 
by the Greeks "manifest and visible" 
divinities, we shall answer that the law of Moses knows that these latter 
have been apportioned by God among all the nations under the heaven, but not 
amongst those who were selected by God as His chosen people above all the 
nations of the earth. For it is written in the book of Deuteronomy: "And lest 
thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, 
and the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldst be driven to worship them, 
and serve them, which the LORD thy God hath divided unto all nations unto the 
whole heaven. But the LORD hath taken us, and brought as forth out of the iron 
furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto Him a people of inheritance, as ye are 
this day." The Hebrew people, then, being called by God a "chosen generation, 
and a royal priesthood, and a holy nation, and a purchased people," regarding 
whom it was foretold to Abraham by the voice of the Lord addressed to him, "Look 
now towards heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and He 
said unto him, So shall thy seed be;" and having thus a hope that they would 
become as the stars of heaven, were not likely to bow down to those objects 
which they were to resemble as a result of their understanding and observing the 
law of God. For it was said to them: 
"The LORD our God hath multiplied us; and, behold, ye are this day as the 
stars of heaven for multitude." In the book of Daniel, also, the following 
prophecies are found relating to those who are to share in the resurrection: 
"And at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that has been 
written in the book. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall 
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And 
they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and (those) of 
the many righteous as the stars for ever and ever," etc. And hence Paul, too, 
when speaking of the resurrection, says: 
"And there are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory 
of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is 
one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the 
stars; for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the 
resurrection of the dead." It was not therefore consonant to reason that those 
who had been taught sublimely to ascend above all created things, and to hope 
for the enjoyment of the most glorious rewards with God on account of their 
virtuous lives, and who had heard the words, "Ye are the light of I the world," 
and, "Let your light so shine before men, that they, seeing your good works, may 
glorify your Father who is in heaven," and who possessed through practice this 
brilliant and unfading wisdom, or who had secured even the "very reflection of 
everlasting light," should be so impressed with the (mere) visible light of sun, 
and moon, and stars, that, on account of that sensible light of theirs, they 
should deem themselves (although possessed of so great a rational light of 
knowledge, and of the true light, and the light of the world, and the light of 
men) to be somehow inferior to them, and to bow down to them; seeing they ought 
to be worshipped, if they are to receive worship at all, not for the sake of the 
sensible light which is admired by the multitude, but because of the rational 
and true light, if indeed the stars in heaven are rational and virtuous beings, 
and have been illuminated with the light of knowledge by that wisdom which is 
the "reflection of everlasting light." For that sensible light of theirs is the 
work of the Creator of all things, while that rational light is derived perhaps 
from the principle of free-will within them. 
CHAP. XI. 
But even this rational light itself ought not to be worshipped by him who 
beholds and understands the true light, by sharing in which these also are 
enlightened; nor by him who beholds God, the Father of the true light,--of whom 
it has been said, "God is light, and in Him there is no darkness at all." Those, 
indeed, who worship sun, moon, and stars because their light is visible and 
celestial, would not bow down to a spark of fire or a lamp upon earth, because 
they see the incomparable superiority of those objects which are deemed worthy 
of homage to the light of sparks and lamps. So those who understand that God is 
light, and who have apprehended that the Son of God is "the true light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world," and who comprehend also how He 
says, "I am the light of the world," would not rationally offer worship to that 
which is, as it were, a spark in sun, moon, and stars, in comparison with God, 
who is light of the true light. Nor is it with a view to depreciate these great 
works of God's creative power, or to call them, after the fashion of Anaxagoras, 
"fiery masses," that we thus speak of sun, and moon, and stars; but because we 
perceive the inexpressible superiority of the divinity of God, and that of His 
only-begotten Son, which surpasses all other things. And being persuaded that 
the sun himself, and moon, and stars pray to the Supreme God through His 
only-begotten Son, we judge it improper to pray to those beings who themselves 
offer up prayers (to God), seeing even they themselves would prefer that we 
should send up our requests to the God to whom they pray, rather than send them 
downwards to themselves, or apportion our power of prayer between God and them. 
And here I may employ this illustration, as beating upon this point: Our Lord 
and Saviour, heating Himself on one occasion addressed as "Good Master," 
referring him who used it to His own Father, said, "Why callest thou Me good? 
There is none good but one, that is, God the Father." And since it was in 
accordance with sound reason that this should be said by the Son of His Father's 
love, as being the image of the goodness of God, why should not the sun say with 
greater reason to those that bow down to him, Why do you worship me? "for thou 
wilt worship the LORD thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve;" for it is He whom 
I and all who are with me serve and worship. And although one may not be so 
exalted (as the sun), nevertheless let such an one pray to the Word of God (who 
is able to heal him), and still more to His Father, who also to the righteous of 
former times "sent His word, and healed them, and delivered them from their 
destructions." 
CHAP. XII. 
God accordingly, in His kindness, condescends to mankind, not in any local 
sense, but through His providence; while the Son of God, not only (when on 
earth), but at all times, is with His own disciples, fulfilling the promise, 
"Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world." And if a branch cannot 
bear fruit except it abide in the vine, it is evident that the disciples also of 
the Word, who are the rational branches of the Word's true vine, cannot produce 
the fruits of virtue unless they abide in the true vine, the Christ of God, who 
is with us locally here below upon the earth, and who is with those who cleave 
to Him in all parts of the world, and is also in all places with those who do 
not know Him. Another is made manifest by that John who wrote the Gospel, when, 
speaking in the person of John the Baptist, he said, "There standeth one among 
you whom ye know not; He it is who cometh after me." And it is absurd, when He 
who fills heaven and earth, and who said, "Do I not fill heaven and earth? saith 
the LORD," is with us, and near us (for I believe Him when He says, "I am a God 
nigh at hand, and not afar off, saith the LORD" to seek to pray to sun or moon, 
or one of the stars, whose influence does not reach the whole of the world. But, 
to use the very words of Celsus, let it be granted that "the sun, moon, and 
stars do foretell rain, and heat, and clouds, and thunders," why, then, if they 
really do foretell such great things, ought we not rather to do homage to God, 
whose servant they are in uttering these predictions, and show reverence to Him 
rather than His prophets? Let them predict, then, the approach of lightnings, 
and fruits, and all manner of productions, and let all such things be under 
their administration; yet we shall not on that account worship those who 
themselves offer worship, as we do not worship even Moses, and those prophets 
who came from God after him, and who predicted better things than rain, and 
heat, and clouds, and thunders, and lightnings, and fruits, and all sorts of 
productions visible to the senses. Nay, even if sun, and moon, and stars were 
able to prophesy better things than rain, not even then shall we worship them, 
but the Father of the prophecies which are in them, and the Word of God, their 
minister. But grant that they are His heralds, and truly messengers of heaven, 
why, even then ought we not to worship the God whom they only proclaim and 
announce, rather than those who are the heralds and messengers? 
CHAP. XIII. 
Celsus, moreover, assumes that sun, and moon, and stars are regarded by us as 
of no account. Now, with regard to these, we acknowledge that they too are 
"waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God," being for the present 
subjected to the "vanity" of their material bodies, "by reason of Him who has 
subjected the same in hope." But if Celsus had read the innumerable other 
passages where we speak of sun, moon, and stars, and especially these,--"Praise 
Him, all ye stars, and thou, O light," and, "Praise Him, ye heaven of 
heavens,"--he would not have said of us that we regard such mighty beings, which 
"greatly praise" the Lord God, as of no account. Nor did Celsus know the 
passage: "For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the 
manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature was made subject to vanity, 
not willingly, but by reason of Him who hath subjected the same in hope; because 
the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into 
the glorious liberty of the children of God." And with these words let us 
terminate our defence against the charge of not worshipping sun, moon, and 
stars. And let us now bring forward those statements of his which follow, that 
we may, God willing, address to him in reply such arguments as shall be 
suggested by the light of truth. 
CHAP. XIV. 
The following, then, are his words: "It is folly on their part to suppose 
that when God, as if He were a cook, introduces the fire (which is to consume 
the world), all the rest of the human race will be burnt up, while they alone 
will remain, not only such of them as are then alive, but also those who are 
long since dead, which latter will arise from the earth clothed with the 
self-same flesh (as during life); for such a hope is simply one which might be 
cherished by worms. For what sort of human soul is that which would still long 
for a body that had been subject to corruption? Whence, also, this opinion of 
yours is not shared by some of the Christians, and they pronounce it to be 
exceedingly vile, and loathsome, and impossible; for what kind of body is that 
which, after being completely corrupted, can return to its original nature, and 
to that self-same first condition out of which it fell into dissolution? Being 
unable to return any answer, they betake themselves to a most absurd refuge, 
viz., that all things are possible to God. And yet God cannot do things that are 
disgraceful, nor does He wish to do things that are contrary to His nature; nor, 
if (in accordance with the wickedness of your own heart) you desired anything 
that was evil, would God accomplish it; nor must you believe at once that it 
will be done. For God does not rule the world in order to satisfy inordinate 
desires, or to allow disorder and confusion, but to govern a nature that is 
upright and just. For the soul, indeed, He might be able to provide an 
everlasting life; while dead bodies, on the contrary, are, as Heraclitus 
observes, more worthless than dung. God, however, neither can nor will declare, 
contrary to all reason, that the flesh, which is full of those things which it 
is not even honourable to mention, is to exist for ever. 
For He is the reason of all things that exist, and therefore can do nothing 
either contrary to reason or contrary to Himself." 
CHAP. XV. 
Observe, now, here at the very beginning, how, in ridiculing the doctrine of 
a conflagration of the world, held by certain of the Greeks who have treated the 
subject in a philosophic spirit not to be depreciated, he would make us, 
"representing God, as it were, as a cook, hold the belief in a general 
conflagration;" not perceiving that, as certain Greeks were of opinion (perhaps 
having received their information from the ancient nation of the Hebrews), it is 
a purificatory fire which is brought upon the world, and probably also on each 
one of those who stand in need of chastisement by the fire and healing at the 
same time, seeing it burns indeed, but does not consume, those who are without a 
material body, which needs to be consumed by that fire, and which burns and 
consumes those who by their actions, words, and thoughts have built up wood, or 
hay, or stubble, in that which is figuratively termed a "building." And the holy 
Scriptures say that the Lord will, like a refiner's fire and fullers' soap, 
visit each one of those who require purification, because of the intermingling 
in them of a flood of wicked matter proceeding from their evil nature; who need 
fire, I mean, to refine, as it were, (the dross of) those who are intermingled 
with copper, and tin, and lead. And he who likes may learn this from the prophet 
Ezekiel. But that we say that God brings fire upon the world, not like a cook, 
but like a God, who is the benefactor of them who stand in need of the 
discipline of fire, will be testified by the prophet Isaiah, in whose writings 
it is related that a sinful nation was thus addressed: "Because thou hast coals 
of fire, sit upon them: they shall be to thee a help." Now the Scripture is 
appropriately adapted to the multitudes of those who are to peruse it, because 
it speaks obscurely of things that are sad and gloomy, in order to terrify those 
who cannot by any other means be saved from the flood of their sins, although 
even then the attentive reader will dearly discover the end that is to be 
accomplished by these sad and painful punishments upon those who endure them. It 
is sufficient, however, for the present to quote the words of Isaiah: 
"For My name's sake will I show Mine anger, and My glory I will bring upon 
thee, that I may not destroy thee." We have thus been under the necessity of 
referring in obscure terms to questions not fitted to the capacity of simple 
believers, who require a simpler instruction in words, that we might not appear 
to leave unrefuted the accusation of Celsus, that "God introduces the fire 
(which is to destroy the world), as if He were a cook." 
CHAP. XVI. 
From what has been said, it will be manifest to intelligent hearers how we 
have to answer the following: "All the rest of the race will be completely burnt 
up, and they alone will remain." It is not to be wondered at, indeed, if such 
thoughts have been entertained by those amongst us who are called in Scripture 
the "foolish things" of the world, and "base things," and "things which are 
despised," and "things which are not," because "by the foolishness of preaching 
it pleased God to save them that believe on Him, after that, in the wisdom of 
God, the world by wisdom knew not God,"--because such individuals are unable to 
see distinctly the sense of each particular passage, or unwilling to devote the 
necessary leisure to the investigation of Scripture, notwithstanding the 
injunction of Jesus, "Search the Scriptures." The following, moreover, are his 
ideas regarding the fire which is to be brought upon the world by God, and the 
punishments which are to befall sinners. And perhaps, as it is appropriate to 
Children that some things should be addressed to them in a manner befitting 
their infantile condition, to convert them, as being of very tender age, to a 
better course of life; so, to those whom the word terms "the foolish things of 
the world," and "the base," and "the despised," the just and obvious meaning of 
the passages relating to punishments is suitable, inasmuch as they cannot 
receive any other mode of conversion than that which is by fear and the 
presentation of punishment, and thus be saved from the many evils (which would 
befall them). The Scripture accordingly declares that only those who are 
unscathed by the fire and the punishments are to remain,--those, viz., whose 
opinions, and morals, and mind have been purified to the highest degree; while, 
on the other hand, those of a different nature--those, viz., who, according to 
their deserts, require the administration of punishment by fire--will be 
involved in these sufferings with a view to an end which it is suitable for God 
to bring upon those who have been created in His image, but who have lived in 
opposition to the will of that nature which is according to His image. And this 
is our answer to the statement, "All the rest of the race will be completely 
burnt up, but they alone are to remain." 
CHAP. XVII. 
Then, in the next place, having either himself misunderstood the sacred 
Scriptures, or those (interpreters) by whom they were not understood, he 
proceeds to assert that "it is said by us that there will remain at the time of 
the visitation which is to come upon the world by the fire of purification, not 
only those who are then alive, but also those who are long ago dead;" not 
observing that it is with a secret kind of wisdom that it was said by the 
apostle of Jesus: "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; for the trumpet shall 
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed." Now 
he ought to have noticed what was the meaning of him who uttered these words, as 
being one who was by no means dead, who made a distinction between himself and 
those like him and the dead, and who said afterwards, "The dead shall be raised 
incorruptible," and "we shall be changed." And as a proof that such was the 
apostle's meaning in writing those words which I have quoted from the first 
Epistle to the Corinthians, I will quote also from the first to the 
Thessalonians, in which Paul, as one who is alive and awake, and different from 
those who are asleep, speaks as follows: 
"For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive and 
remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them who are asleep; for 
the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the 
archangel, and with the trump of God." Then, again, after this, knowing that 
there were others dead in Christ besides himself and such as he, he subjoins the 
words, "The dead in Christ shall rise first; then we who are alive and remain 
shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the 
air." 
CHAP. XVIII. 
But since he has ridiculed at great length the doctrine of the resurrection 
of the flesh, which has been preached in the Churches, and which is more clearly 
understood by the more intelligent believer; and as it is unnecessary again to 
quote his words, which have been already adduced, let us, with regard to the 
problem (as in an apologetic work directed against an alien from the faith, and 
for the sake of those who are still "children, tossed to and fro, and carried 
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning 
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive"), state and establish to the 
best of our ability a few points expressly intended for our readers. Neither we, 
then, nor the holy Scriptures, assert that with the same bodies, without a 
change to a higher condition, "shall those who were long dead arise from the 
earth and live again;" for in so speaking, Celsus makes a false charge against 
us. For we may listen to many passages of Scripture treating of the resurrection 
in a manner worthy of God, although it may, suffice for the present to quote the 
language of Paul from the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says: "But 
some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come? 
Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. And that 
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it 
may chance of wheat, or of some other grain; but God giveth it a body as it hath 
pleased Him, and to every seed his own body." Now, observe how in these words he 
says that there is sown, "not that body that shall be;" but that of the body 
which is sown and cast naked into the earth (God giving to each seed its own 
body), there takes place as it were a resurrection: from the seed that was east 
into the ground there arising a stalk, e.g., among such plants as the following, 
viz., the mustard plant, or of a larger tree, as in the olive, or one of the 
fruit-trees. 
CHAP. XIX. 
God, then, gives to each thing its own body as He pleases: as in the case of 
plants that are sown, so also in the case of those beings who are, as it were, 
sown in dying, and who in due time receive, out of what has been "sown," the 
body assigned by God to each one according to his deserts. And we may hear, 
moreover, the Scripture teaching us at great length the difference between that 
which is, as it were, "sown," and that which is, as it were, "raised" from it in 
these words: "It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown 
in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in 
power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body." And let him 
who has the capacity understand the meaning of the words: "As is the earthy, 
such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also 
that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also 
bear the image of the heavenly." And although the apostle wished to conceal the 
secret meaning of the passage, which was not adapted to the simpler class of 
believers, and to the understanding of the common people, who are led by their 
faith to enter on a better course of life, he was nevertheless obliged 
afterwards to say (in order that we might not misapprehend his meaning), after 
"Let us bear the image of the heavenly," these words also: "Now this I say, 
brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth 
corruption inherit incorruption." Then, knowing that there was a secret and 
mystical meaning in the passage, as was becoming in one who was leaving, in his 
Epistles, to those who were to come after him words full of significance, he 
subjoins the following, "Behold, I show you a mystery;" which is his usual style 
in introducing matters of a profounder and more mystical nature, and such as are 
fittingly concealed from the multitude, as is written in the book of Tobit: "It 
is good to keep close the secret of a king, but honourable to reveal the works 
of God,"--in a way consistent with truth and God's glory, and so as to be to the 
advantage of the multitude. Our hope, then, is not" the hope of worms, nor does 
our soul long for a body that has seen corruption;" for although it may require 
a body, for the sake of moving from place to place, yet it understands--as 
having meditated on the wisdom (that is from above), agreeably to the 
declaration, "The mouth of the righteous will speak wisdom"--the difference 
between the "earthly house," in which is the tabernacle of the building that is 
to be dissolved, and that in which the righteous do groan, being burdened,--not 
wishing to "put off" the tabernacle, but to be "clothed therewith," that by 
being clothed upon, mortality might be swallowed up of life. For, in virtue of 
the whole nature of the body being corruptible, the corruptible tabernacle must 
put on incorruption; and its other part, being mortal, and becoming liable to 
the death which follows sin, must put on immortality, in order that, when the 
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and the mortal immortality, then 
shall come to pass what was predicted of old by the prophets,--the annihilation 
of the "victory" of death (because it had conquered and subjected us to his 
sway), and of its "sting," with which it stings the imperfectly defended soul, 
and inflicts upon it the wounds which result from sin. 
CHAP. XX. 
But since our views regarding the resurrection have, as far as time would 
permit, been stated in part on the present occasion (for we have systematically 
examined the subject in greater detail in other parts of our writings); and as 
now we must by means of sound reasoning refute the fallacies of Celsus, who 
neither understands the meaning of our Scripture, nor has the capacity of 
judging that the meaning of our wise men is not to be determined by those 
individuals who make no profession of anything more than of a (simple) faith in 
the Christian system, let us show that men, not to be lightly esteemed on 
account of their reasoning powers and dialectic subtleties, have given 
expression to very absurd opinions. And if we must sneer at them as contemptible 
old wives' fables, it is at them rather than at our narrative that we must 
sneer. The disciples of the Porch assert, that after a period of years there 
will be a conflagration of the world, and after that an arrangement of things in 
which everything will be unchanged, as compared with the former arrangement of 
the world. Those of them, however, who evinced their respect for this doctrine 
have said that there will be a change, although exceedingly slight, at the end 
of the cycle, from what prevailed during the preceding. And these men maintain, 
that in the succeeding cycle the same things will occur, and Socrates will be 
again the son of Sophroniscus, and a native of Athens; and Phaenarete, being 
married to Sophroniscus, will again become his mother. And although they do not 
mention the word "resurrection," they show in reality that Socrates, who derived 
his origin from seed, will spring from that of Sophroniscus, and will be 
fashioned in the womb of Phaenarete; and being brought up at Athens, will 
practise the study of philosophy, as if his former philosophy had arisen again, 
and were to be in no respect different from what it was before. Anytus and 
Melitus, too, will arise again as accusers of Socrates, and the Council of 
Areopagus will condemn him to death! But what is more ridiculous still, is that 
Socrates will clothe himself with garments not at all different from those which 
he wore during the former cycle, and will live in the same unchanged state of 
poverty, and in the same unchanged city of Athens! And Phalaris will again play 
the tyrant, and his brazen bull will pour forth its bellowings from the voices 
of victims within, unchanged from those who were condemned in the former cycle! 
And Alexander of Pherae, too, will again act the tyrant with a cruelty unaltered 
from the former time, and will condemn to death the same "unchanged" individuals 
as before. But what need is there to go into detail upon the doctrine held by 
the Stoic philosophers on such things, and which escapes the ridicule of Celsus, 
and is perhaps even venerated by him, since he regards Zeno as a wiser man than 
Jesus? 
CHAP. XXI. 
The disciples of Pythagoras, too, and of Plato, although they appear to hold 
the incorruptibility of the world, yet fall into similar errors. For as the 
planets, after certain definite cycles, assume the same positions, and hold the 
same relations to one another, all things on earth will, they assert, be like 
what they were at the time when the same state of planetary relations existed in 
the world. From this view it necessarily follows, that when, after the lapse of 
a lengthened cycle, the planets come to occupy towards each other the same 
relations which they occupied in the time of Socrates, Socrates will again be 
born of the same parents, and suffer the same treatment, being accused by Anytus 
and Melitus, and condemned by the Council of Areopagus! The learned among the 
Egyptians, moreover, hold similar views, and yet they are treated with respect, 
and do not incur the ridicule of Celsus and such as he; while we, who maintain 
that all things are administered by God in proportion to the relation of the 
free-will of each individual, and are ever being brought into a better 
condition, so far as they admit of being so, and who know that the nature of our 
free-will admits of the occurrence of contingent events (for it is incapable of 
receiving the wholly unchangeable character of God), yet do not appear to say 
anything worthy of a testing examination. 
CHAP. XXII. 
Let no one, however, suspect that, in speaking as we do, we belong to those 
who are indeed called Christians, but who set aside the doctrine of the 
resurrection as it is taught in Scripture. For these persons cannot, so far as 
their principles apply, at all establish that the stalk or tree which springs up 
comes from the grain of wheat, or anything else (which was cast into the 
ground); whereas we, who believe that that which is "sown" is not "quickened" 
unless it die, and that there is sown not that body that shall be (for God gives 
it a body as it pleases Him, raising it in incorruption after it is sown in 
corruption; and after it is sown in dishonour, raising it in glory; and after it 
is sown in weakness, raising it in power; and after it is sown a natural body, 
raising it a spiritual),--we preserve both the doctrine of the Church of Christ 
and the grandeur of the divine promise, proving also the possibility of its 
accomplishment not by mere assertion, but by arguments; knowing that although 
heaven and earth, and the things that are in them, may pass away, yet His words 
regarding each individual thing, being, as parts of a whole, or species of a 
genus, the utterances of Him who was God the Word, who was in the beginning with 
God, shall by no means pass away. For we desire to listen to Him who said: 
"Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words shall not pass away." 
CHAP. XXIII. 
We, therefore, do not maintain that the body which has undergone corruption 
resumes its original nature, any more than the gain of wheat which has decayed 
returns to its former condition. But we do maintain, that as above the gain of 
wheat there arises a stalk, so a certain power is implanted in the body, which 
is not destroyed, and from which the body is raised up in incorruption. The 
philosophers of the Porch, however, in consequence of the opinions which they 
hold regarding the unchangeableness of things after a certain cycle, assert that 
the body, after undergoing complete corruption, will return to its original 
condition, and will again assume that first nature from which it passed into a 
state of dissolution, establishing these points, as they think, by irresistible 
arguments. We, however, do not betake ourselves to a most absurd refuge, saying 
that with God all things are possible; for we know how to understand this word 
"all" as not referring either to things that are "non-existent" or that are 
inconceivable. But we maintain, at the same time, that God cannot do what is 
disgraceful, since then He would be capable of ceasing to be God; for if He do 
anything that is disgraceful, He is not God. Since, however, he lays it down as 
a principle, that "God does not desire what is contrary to nature," we have to 
make a distinction, and say that if any one asserts that wickedness is contrary 
to nature, while we maintain that "God does not desire what is contrary to 
nature,"--either what springs from wickedness or from an irrational 
principle,--yet, if such things happen according to the word and will of God, we 
must at once necessarily hold that they are not contrary to nature. 
Therefore things which are done by God, although they may be, or may appear 
to some to be incredible, are not contrary to nature. And if we must press the 
force of words, we would say that, in comparison with what is generally 
understood as "nature," there are certain things which are beyond its power, 
which God could at any time do; as, e.g., in raising man above the level of 
human nature, and causing him to pass into a better and more divine condition, 
and preserving him in the same, so long as he who is the object of His care 
shows by his actions that he desires (the continuance of His help). 
CHAP. XXIV. 
Moreover, as we have already said that for God to desire anything unbecoming 
Himself would be destructive of His existence as Deity, we will add that if man, 
agreeably to the wickedness of his nature, should desire anything that is 
abominable, God cannot grant it. And now it is from no spirit of contention that 
we answer the assertions of Celsus; but it is in the spirit of truth that we 
investigate them, as assenting to his view that "He is the God, not of 
inordinate desires, nor of error and disorder, but of a nature just and 
upright," because He is the source of all that is good. And that He is able to 
provide an eternal life for the soul we acknowledge; and that He possesses not 
only the "power," but the "will." In view, therefore, of these considerations, 
we are not at all distressed by the assertion of Heraclitus, adopted by Celsus, 
that "dead bodies are to be cast out as more worthless than dung;" and yet, with 
reference even to this, one might say that dung, indeed, ought to be cast out, 
while the dead bodies of men, on account of the soul by which they were 
inhabited, especially if it had been virtuous, ought not to be cast out. 
For, in harmony with those laws which are based upon the principles of 
equity, bodies are deemed worthy of sepulture, with the honours accorded on such 
occasions, that no insult, so far as can be helped, may be offered to the soul 
which dwelt within, by casting forth the body (after the soul has departed) like 
that of the animals. Let it not then be held, contrary to reason, that it is the 
will of God to declare that the grain of wheat is not immortal, but the stalk 
which springs from it, while the body which is sown in corruption is not, but 
that which is raised by Him in incorruption. But according to Celsus, God 
Himself is the reason of all things, while according to our view it is His Son, 
of whom we say in philosophic language, "In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God;" while in our judgment also, God cannot 
do anything which is contrary to reason, or contrary to Himself. 
CHAP. XXV. 
Let us next notice the statements of Celsus, which follow the preceding, and 
which are as follow: "As the Jews, then, became a peculiar people, and enacted 
laws in keeping with the customs of their country, and maintain them up to the 
present time, and observe a mode of worship which, whatever be its nature, is 
yet derived from their fathers, they act in these respects like other men, 
because each nation retains its ancestral customs, whatever they are, if they 
happen to be established among them. And such an arrangement appears to be 
advantageous, not only because it has occurred to the mind of other nations to 
decide some things differently, but also because it is a duty to protect what 
has been established for the public advantage; and also because, in all 
probability, the various quarters of the earth were from the beginning allotted 
to different superintending spirits, and were thus distributed among certain 
governing powers, and in this manner the administration of the world is carried 
on. And whatever is done among each nation in this way would be rightly done, 
wherever it was agreeable to the wishes (of the superintending powers), while it 
would be an act of impiety to get rid of the institutions established from the 
beginning in the various places." By these words Celsus shows that the Jews, who 
were formerly Egyptians, subsequently became a "peculiar people," and enacted 
laws which they carefully preserve. And not to repeat his statements, which have 
been already before us, he says that it is advantageous to the Jews to observe 
their ancestral worship, as other nations carefully attend to theirs. And he 
further states a deeper reason why it is of advantage to the Jews to cultivate 
their ancestral customs, in hinting dimly that those to whom was allotted the 
office of superintending the country which was being legislated for, enacted the 
laws of each land in co-operation with its legislators. He appears, then, to 
indicate that both the country of the Jews, and the nation which inhabits it, 
are superintended by one or more beings, who, whether they were one or more, 
co-operated with Moses, and enacted the laws of the Jews. 
CHAP. XXVI. 
"We must," he says, "observe the laws, not only because it has occurred to 
the mind of others to decide some things differently, but because it is a duty 
to protect what has been enacted for the public advantage, and aim because, in 
all probability, the various quarters of the earth were from the beginning 
allotted to different superintending spirits, and were distributed among certain 
governing powers, and in this manner the administration of the world is carried 
on." Thus Celsus, as if he had forgotten what he had said against the Jews, now 
includes them in the general eulogy which he passes upon all who observe their 
ancestral customs, remarking: "And whatever is done among each nation in this 
way, would be rightly done whenever agreeable to the wishes (of the 
superintendents)." And observe here, whether he does not openly, so far as he 
can, express a wish that the Jew should live in the observance of his own laws, 
and not depart from them, because he would commit an act of impiety if he 
apostatized; for his words are: "It would be an act of impiety to get rid of the 
institutions established from the beginning in the various places." Now I should 
like to ask him, and those who entertain his views, who it was that distributed 
the various quarters of the earth from the beginning among the different 
superintending spirits; and especially, who gave the country of the Jews, and 
the Jewish people themselves, to the one or more superintendents to whom it was 
allotted? Was it, as Celsus would say, Jupiter who assigned the Jewish people 
and their country to a certain spirit or spirits? And was it his wish, to whom 
they were thus assigned, to enact among them the laws which prevail, or was it 
against his will that it was done? You will observe that, whatever be his 
answer, he is in a strait. But if the various quarters of the earth were not 
allotted by some one being to the various superintending spirits, then each one 
at random, and without the superintendence of a higher power, divided the earth 
according to chance; and yet such a view is absurd, and destructive in no small 
degree of the providence of the God who presides over all things. 
CHAP. XXVII. 
Any one, indeed, who chooses, may relate how the various quarters of the 
earth, being distributed among certain governing powers, are administered by 
those who superintend them; but let him tell us also how what is done among each 
nation is done rightly when agreeable to the wishes of the superintendents. Let 
him, for example, tell us whether the laws of the Scythians, which permit the 
murder of parents, are right laws; or those of the Persians, which do not forbid 
the marriages of sons with their mothers, or of daughters with their own 
fathers. But what need is there for me to make selections from those who have 
been engaged in the business of enacting laws among the different nations, and 
to inquire how the laws are rightly enacted among each, according as they please 
the superintending powers? Let Celsus, however, tell us how it would be an act 
of impiety to get rid of those ancestral laws which permit the marriages of 
mothers and daughters; or which pronounce a man happy who puts an end to his 
life by hanging, or declare that they undergo entire purification who deliver 
themselves over to the fire, and who terminate their existence by fire; and how 
it is an act of impiety to do away with those laws which, for example, prevail 
in the Tauric Chersonese, regarding the offering up of strangers in sacrifice to 
Diana, or among certain of the Libyan tribes regarding the sacrifice of children 
to Saturn. Moreover, this inference follows from the dictum of Celsus, that it 
is an act of impiety on the part of the Jews to do away with those ancestral 
laws which forbid the worship of any other deity than the Creator of all things. 
And it will follow, according to his view, that piety is not divine by its own 
nature, but by a certain (external) arrangement and appointment. For it is an 
act of piety among certain tribes to worship a crocodile, and to eat what is an 
object of adoration among other tribes; while, again, with others it is a pious 
act to worship a calf, and among others, again, to regard the goat as a god. 
And, in this way, the same individual will be regarded as acting piously 
according to one set of laws, and impiously according to another; and this is 
the most absurd result that can be conceived! 
CHAP. XXVIII. 
It is probable, however, that to such remarks as the above, the answer 
returned would be, that he was pious who kept the laws of his own country, and 
not at all chargeable with impiety for the non-observance of those of other 
lands; and that, again, he who was deemed guilty of impiety among certain 
nations was not really so, when he worshipped his own gods, agreeably to his 
country's laws, although he made war against, and even feasted on, those who 
were regarded as divinities among those nations which possessed laws of an 
opposite kind. Now, observe here whether these statements do not exhibit the 
greatest confusion of mind regarding the nature of what is just, and holy, and 
religious; since there is no accurate definition laid down of these things, nor 
are they described as having a peculiar character of their own, and stamping as 
religious those who act according to their injunctions. If, then, religion, and 
piety, and righteousness belong to those things which are so only by comparison, 
so that the same act may be both pious and impious, according to different 
relations and different laws, see whether it will not follow that temperance 
also is a thing of comparison, and courage as well, and prudence, and the other 
virtues, than which nothing could be more absurd! What we have said, however, is 
sufficient for the more general and simple class of answers to the allegations 
of Celsus. But as we think it likely that some of those who are accustomed to 
deeper investigation will fall in with this treatise, let us venture to lay down 
some considerations of a profounder kind, conveying a mystical and secret view 
respecting the original distribution of the various quarters of the earth among 
different superintending spirits; and let us prove to the best of our ability, 
that our doctrine is free from the absurd consequences enumerated above. 
CHAP. XXIX. 
It appears to me, indeed, that Celsus has misunderstood some of the deeper 
reasons relating to the arrangement of terrestrial affairs, some of which are 
touched upon even in Grecian history, when certain of those who are considered 
to be gods are introduced as having contended with each other about the 
possession of Attica; while in the writings of the Greek poets also, some who 
are called gods are represented as acknowledging that certain places here are 
preferred by them before others. The history of barbarian nations, moreover, and 
especially that of Egypt, contains some such allusions to the division of the 
so-called Egyptian homes, when it states that Athena, who obtained Sais by lot, 
is the same who also has possession of Attica. And the learned among the 
Egyptians can enumerate innumerable instances of this kind, although I do not 
know whether they include the Jews and their country in this division. And now, 
so far as testimonies outside the word God bearing on this point are concerned, 
enough have been adduced for the present. We say, moreover, that our prophet of 
God and His genuine servant Moses, in his song in the book of Deuteronomy, makes 
a statement regarding the portioning out of the earth in the following terms: 
"When the Most High divided the nations, when He dispersed the sons of Adam, He 
set the bounds of the people according to the number of the angels of God; and 
the portion was His people Jacob, and Israel the cord of His inheritance." And 
regarding the distribution of the nations, the same Moses, in his work entitled 
Genesis, thus expresses himself in the style of a historical narrative: "And the 
whole earth was of one language and of one speech; and it came to pass, as they 
journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they 
dwelt there." A little further on he continues: "And the LORD came down to see 
the city and the tower, which the children of men had built. And the LORD said, 
Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they have 
begun to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them which they have 
imagined to do. Go to, let Us go down, and there confound their language, that 
they may not understand one another's speech. And the LORD scattered them abroad 
from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city 
and the tower. Therefore is the name of it called Confusion; because the LORD 
did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the LORD 
scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth." In the treatise of Solomon, 
moreover, on "Wisdom," and on the events at the time of the confusion of 
languages, when the division of the earth took place, we find the following 
regarding Wisdom: "Moreover, the nations in their wicked conspiracy being 
confounded, she found out the righteous, and preserved him blameless unto God, 
and kept him strong in his tender compassion towards his son." But on these 
subjects much, and that of a mystical kind, might be said; in keeping with which 
is the following: "It is good to keep close the secret of a king,"--in order 
that the doctrine of the entrance of souls into bodies (not, however, that of 
the transmigration from one body into another) may not be thrown before the 
common understanding, nor what is holy given to the dogs, nor pearls be cast 
before swine. For such a procedure would be impious, being equivalent to a 
betrayal of the mysterious declarations of God's wisdom. of which it has been 
well said: "Into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter, nor dwell in a body 
subject to sin." It is sufficient, however, to represent in the style of a 
historic narrative what is intended to convey a secret meaning in the garb of 
history, that those who have the capacity may work out for themselves all that 
relates to the subject. (The narrative, then, may be understood as follows.) 
CHAP. XXX. 
All the people upon the earth are to be regarded as having used one divine 
language, and so long as they lived harmoniously together were preserved in the 
use of this divine language, and they remained without moving from the east so 
long as they were imbued with the sentiments of the "light," and of the 
"reflection" of the eternal light. But when they departed from the east, and 
began to entertain sentiments alien to those of the east, they found a place in 
the land of Shinar (which, when interpreted, means "gnashing of teeth," by way 
of indicating symbolically that they had lost the means of their support), and 
in it they took up their abode. Then, desiring to gather together material 
things, and to join to heaven what had no natural affinity for it, that by means 
of material things they might conspire against such as were immaterial, they 
said, "Come, let us made bricks, and burn them with fire." Accordingly, when 
they had hardened and compacted these materials of clay and matter, and had 
shown their desire to make brick into stone, and clay into bitumen, and by these 
means to build a city and a tower, the head of which was, at least in their 
conception, to reach up to the heavens, after the manner of the "high things 
which exalt themselves against the I knowledge of God," each one was handed over 
(in proportion to the greater or less departure from the east which had taken 
place among them, and in proportion to the extent in which bricks had been 
converted into stones, and clay into bitumen, and building carried on out of 
these materials) to angels of character more or less severe, and of a nature 
more or less stern, until they had paid the penalty of their daring deeds; and 
they were conducted by those angels, who imprinted on each his native language, 
to the different parts of the earth according to their deserts: some, for 
example, to a region of burning heat, others to a country which chastises its 
inhabitants by its cold; others, again, to a land exceedingly difficult of 
cultivation, others to one less so in degree; while a fifth were brought into a 
land filled with wild beasts, and a sixth to a country comparatively free of 
these. 
CHAP. XXXI. 
Now, in the next place, if any one has the capacity, let him understand that 
in what assumes the form of history, and which contains some things that are 
literally true, while yet it conveys a deeper meaning, those who preserved their 
original language continued, by reason of their not having migrated from the 
east, in possession of the east, and of their eastern language. And let him 
notice, that these alone became the portion of the Lord, and His people who were 
called Jacob, and Israel the cord of His inheritance; and these alone were 
governed by a ruler who did not receive those who were placed under him for the 
purpose of punishment, as was the case with the others. Let him also, who has 
the capacity to perceive as far as mortals may, observe that in the body politic 
of those who were assigned to the Lord as His pre-eminent portion, sins were 
committed, first of all, such as might be forgiven, and of such a nature as not 
to make the sinner worthy of entire desertion while subsequently they became 
more numerous though still of a nature to be pardoned. And while remarking that 
this state of matters continued for a considerable time, and that a remedy was 
always applied, and that after certain intervals these persons returned to their 
duty, let him notice that they were given over, in proportion to their 
transgressions, to those to whom had been assigned the other quarters of the 
earth; and that, after being at first slightly punished, and having made 
atonement, they returned, as if they had undergone discipline, to their proper 
habitations. Let him notice also that afterwards they were delivered over to 
rulers of a severer character--to Assyrians and Babylonians, as the Scriptures 
would call them. In the next place, notwithstanding that means of healing were 
being applied, let him observe that they were still multiplying their 
transgressions, and that they were on that account dispersed into other regions 
by the rulers of the nations that oppressed them. And their own ruler 
intentionally overlooked their oppression at the hands of the rulers of the 
other nations, in order that he also with good reason, as avenging himself, 
having obtained power to tear away from the other nations as many as he can, may 
do so, and enact for them laws, and point out a manner of life agreeably to 
which they ought to live, that so he may conduct them to the end to which those 
of the former people were conducted who did not commit sin. 
CHAP. XXXII. 
And by this means let those who have the capacity of comprehending truths so 
profound, learn that he to whom were allotted those who had not formerly sinned 
is far more powerful than the others, since he has been able to make a selection 
of individuals from the portion of the whole, and to separate them from those 
who received them for the purpose of punishment, and to bring them under the 
influence of laws, and of a mode of life which helps to produce an oblivion of 
their former transgressions. But, as we have previously observed, these remarks 
are to be understood as being made by us with a concealed meaning, by way of 
pointing out the mistakes of those who asserted that "the various quarters of 
the earth were from the beginning distributed among different superintending 
spirits, and being allotted among certain governing powers, were administered in 
this way;" from which statement Celsus took occasion to make the remarks 
referred to. But since those who wandered away from the east were delivered 
over, on account of their sins, to "a reprobate mind," and to "vile affections," 
and to "uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts," in order that, being 
sated with sin, they might hate it, we shall refuse our assent to the assertion 
of Celsus, that "because of the superintending spirits distributed among the 
different parts of the earth, what is done among each nation is rightly done;" 
for our desire iS to do what is not agreeable to these spirits. For we see that 
it is a religious act to do away with the customs originally established in the 
various places by means of laws of a better and more divine character, which 
were enacted by Jesus, as one possessed of the greatest power, who has rescued 
us "from the present evil world," and "from the princes of the world that come 
to nought;" and that it is a mark of irreligion not to throw ourselves at the 
feet of Him who has manifested Himself to be holier and more powerful than all 
other rulers, and to whom God said, as the prophets many generations before 
predicted: "Ask of Me, and I shall give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, 
and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession." For He, too, has 
become the "expectation" of us who from among the heathen have believed upon 
Him, and upon His Father, who is God over all things. 
CHAP. XXXIII. 
The remarks which we have made not only answer the statements of Celsus 
regarding the superintending spirits, but anticipate in some measure what he 
afterwards brings forward, when he says: "Let the second party come forward; and 
I shall ask them whence they come, and whom they regard as the originator of 
their ancestral customs. They will reply, No one, because they spring from the 
same source as the Jews themselves, and derive their instruction and 
superintendence from no other quarter, and notwithstanding they have revolted 
from the Jews." Each one of us, then, is come "in the last days," when one Jesus 
has visited us, to the "visible mountain of the Lord," the Word that is above 
every word, and to the "house of God," which is "the Church of the living God, 
the pillar and ground of the truth." And we notice how it is built upon "the 
tops of the mountains," i.e., the predictions of all the prophets, which are its 
foundations. And this house is exalted above the hills, i.e., those individuals 
among men who make a profession of superior attainments in wisdom and truth; and 
all the nations come to it, and the "many nations" go forth, and say to one 
another, turning to the religion which in the last days has shone forth through 
Jesus Christ: "Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the 
house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in 
them." For the law came forth from the dwellers in Sion, and settled among us as 
a spiritual law. Moreover, the word of the Lord came forth from that very 
Jerusalem, that it might be disseminated through all places, and might judge in 
the midst of the heathen selecting those whom it sees to be submissive and 
rejecting the disobedient, who are many in number. And to those who inquire of 
us whence we come, or who is our founder, we reply that we are come, agreeably 
to the counsels of Jesus, to "cut down our hostile and insolent 'wordy' swords 
into ploughshares, and to convert into pruning-hooks the spears formerly 
employed in war." For we no longer take up "sword against nation," nor do we 
"learn war any more," having become children of peace, for the sake of Jesus, 
who is our leader, instead of those whom our fathers followed, among whom we 
were "strangers to the covenant," and having received a law, for which we give 
thanks to Him that rescued us from the error (of our ways), saying, "Our fathers 
honoured lying idols, and there is not among them one that causeth it to rain." 
Our Superintendent, then, and Teacher, having come forth from the Jews, 
regulates the whole world by the word of His teaching. And having made these 
remarks by way of anticipation, we have refuted as well as we could the untrue 
statements of Celsus, by subjoining the appropriate answer. 
CHAP. XXXIV. 
But, that we may not pass without notice what Celsus has said between these 
and the preceding paragraphs, let us quote his words: "We might adduce Herodotus 
as a witness on this point, for he expresses himself as follows: 'For the people 
of the cities Mares and Apis, who inhabit those parts of Egypt that are adjacent 
to Libya, and who look upon themselves as Libyans, and not as Egyptians, finding 
their sacrificial worship oppressive, and wishing not to be excluded from the 
use of cows' flesh, sent to the oracle of Jupiter Ammon, saying that there was 
no relationship between them and the Egyptians, that they dwelt outside the 
Delta, that there was no community of sentiment between them and the Egyptians, 
and that they wished to be allowed to partake of all kinds of food. But the god 
would not allow them to do as they desired, saying that that country was a part 
of Egypt, which was watered by the inundation of the Nile, and that those were 
Egyptians who dwell to the south of the city of Elephantine, and drink of the 
river Nile.' Such is the narrative of Herodotus. But," continues Celsus, "Ammon 
in divine things would not make a worse ambassador than the angels of the Jews, 
so that there is nothing wrong in each nation observing its established method 
of worship. Of a truth, we shall find very great differences prevailing among 
the nations, and yet each seems to deem its own by far the best. Those 
inhabitants of Ethiopia who dwell in Meroe worship Jupiter and Bacchus alone; 
the Arabians, Urania and Bacchus only; all the Egyptians, Osiris and Isis; the 
Saites, Minerva; while the Naucratites have recently classed Serapis among their 
deities, and the rest according to their respective laws. And some abstain from 
the flesh of sheep, and others from that of crocodiles; others, again, from that 
of cows, while they regard swine's flesh with loathing. The Scythians, indeed, 
regard it as a noble act to banquet upon human beings. Among the Indians, too, 
there are some who deem themselves discharging a holy duty in eating their 
fathers, and this is mentioned in a certain passage by Herodotus. For the sake 
of credibility, I shall again quote his very words, for he writes as follows: 
'For if any one were to make this proposal to all men, viz., to bid him select 
out of all existing laws the best, each would choose, after examination, those 
of his own country. Men each consider their own laws much the best, and 
therefore it is not likely than any other than a madman would make these things 
a subject of ridicule. But that such are the conclusions of all men regarding 
the laws, may be determined by many other evidences, and especially by the 
following illustration. Darius, during his reign, having summoned before him 
those Greeks who happened to be present at the time, inquired of them for how 
much they would be willing to eat their deceased fathers? their answer was, that 
for no consideration would they do such a thing. After this, Darius summoned 
those Indians who are called Callatians. who are in the habit of eating their 
parents, and asked of them in the presence of these Greeks, who learned what 
passed through an interpreter, for what amount of money they would undertake to 
burn their deceased fathers with fire? on which they raised a loud shout, and 
bade the king say no more.' Such is the way, then, in which these matters are 
regarded. And Pindar appears to me to be right in saying that 'law' is the king 
of all things." 
CHAP. XXXV. 
The argument of Celsus appears to point by these illustrations to this 
conclusion: that it is "an obligation incumbent on all men to live according to 
their country's customs, in which case they will escape censure; whereas the 
Christians, who have abandoned their native usages, and who are not one nation 
like the Jews, are to be blamed for giving their adherence to the teaching of 
Jesus." Let him then tell us whether it is a becoming thing for philosophers, 
and those who have been taught not to yield to superstition, to abandon their 
country's customs, so as to eat of those articles of food which are prohibited 
in their respective cities? or whether this proceeding of theirs is opposed to 
what is becoming? For if, on account of their philosophy, and the instructions 
which they have received against superstition, they should eat, in disregard of 
their native laws, what was interdicted by their fathers, why should the 
Christians (since the Gospel requires them not to busy themselves about statues 
and images, or even about any of the created works of God but to ascend on high, 
and present the soul to the Creator); when acting in a similar manner to the 
philosophers, be censured for so doing? But if, for the sake of defending the 
thesis which he has proposed to himself, Celsus, or those who think with him, 
should say, that even one who had studied philosophy would keep his country's 
laws, then philosophers in Egypt, for example, would act most ridiculously in 
avoiding the eating of onions, in order to observe their country's laws, or 
certain parts of the body, as the head and shoulders, in order not to transgress 
the traditions of their fathers. And I do not speak of those Egyptians who 
shudder with fear at the discharge of wind from the body, because if any one of 
these were to become a philosopher, and still observe the laws of his country, 
he would be a ridiculous philosopher, acting very unphilosophically. In the same 
way, then, he who has been led by the Gospel to worship the God of all things, 
and, from regard to his country's laws, lingers here below among images and 
statues of men, and does not desire to ascend to the Creator, will resemble 
those who have indeed learned philosophy, but who are afraid of things which 
ought to inspire no terrors, and who regard it as an act of impiety to eat of 
those things which have been enumerated. 
CHAP. XXXVI. 
But what sort of being is this Ammon of Herodotus, whose words Celsus has 
quoted, as if by way of demonstrating how each one ought to keep his country's 
laws? For this Ammon would not allow the people of the cities of Marea and Apis, 
who inhabit the districts adjacent to Libya, to treat as a matter of 
indifference the use of cows' flesh, which is a thing not only indifferent in 
its own nature, but which does not prevent a man from being noble and virtuous. 
If Ammon, then, forbade the use of cows' flesh, because of the advantage which 
results from the use of the animal in the cultivation of the ground, and in 
addition to this, because it is by the female that the breed is increased, the 
account would possess more plausibility. But now he simply requires that those 
who drink of the Nile should observe the laws of the Egyptians regarding kine. 
And hereupon Celsus, taking occasion to pass a jest upon the employment of the 
angels among the Jews as the ambassadors of God, says that "Ammon did not make a 
worse ambassador of divine things than did the angels of the Jews," into the 
meaning of whose words and manifestations he instituted no investigation; 
otherwise he would have seen, that it is not for oxen that God is concerned, 
even where He may appear to legislate for them, or for irrational animals, but 
that what is written for the sake of men, under the appearance of relating to 
irrational animals, contains certain truths of nature. Celsus, moreover, says 
that no wrong is committed by any one who wishes to observe the religious 
worship sanctioned by the laws of his country; and it follows, according to his 
view, that the Scythians commit no wrong, when, in conformity with their 
country's laws, they eat human beings. And those Indians who eat their own 
fathers are considered, according to Celsus, to do a religious, or at least not 
a wicked act. He adduces, indeed, a statement of Herodotus which favours the 
principle that each one ought, from a sense of what is becoming, to obey his 
country's laws; and he appears to approve of the custom of those Indians called 
Callatians, who in the time of Darius devoured their parents, since, on Darius 
inquiring for how great a sum of money they would be willing to lay aside this 
usage, they raised a loud shout, and bade the king say no more. 
CHAP. XXXVII. 
As there are, then, generally two laws presented to us, the one being the law 
of nature, of which God would be the legislator, and the other being the written 
law of cities, it is a proper thing, when the written law is not opposed to that 
of God, for the citizens not to abandon it under pretext of foreign customs; but 
when the law of nature, that is, the law of God, commands what is opposed to the 
written law, observe whether reason will not tell us to bid a long farewell to 
the written code, and to the desire of its legislators, and to give ourselves up 
to the legislator God, and to choose a life agreeable to His word, although in 
doing so it may be necessary to encounter dangers, and countless labours, and 
even death and dishonour. For when there are some laws in harmony with the will 
of God, which are opposed to others which are in force in cities, and when it is 
impracticable to please God (and those who administer laws of the kind referred 
to), it would be absurd to contemn those acts by means of which we may please 
the Creator of all things, and to select those by which we shall become 
displeasing to God, though we may satisfy unholy laws, and those who love them. 
But since it is reasonable in other matters to prefer the law of nature, which 
is the law of God, before the written law, which has been enacted by men in a 
spirit of opposition to the law of God, why should we not do this still more in 
the case of those laws which relate to God? Neither shall we, like the 
Ethiopians who inhabit the parts about Meroe, worship, as is their pleasure, 
Jupiter and Bacchus only; nor shall we at all reverence Ethiopian gods in the 
Ethiopian manner; nor, like the Arabians, shall we regard Urania and Bacchus 
alone as divinities; nor in any degree at all deities in which the difference of 
sex has been a ground of distinction (as among the Arabians, who worship Urania 
as a female, and Bacchus as a male deity); nor shall we, like all the Egyptians, 
regard Osiris and Isis as gods; nor shall we enumerate Athena among these, as 
the Saites are pleased to do. And if to the ancient inhabitants of Naucratis it 
seemed good to worship other divinities, while their modern descendants have 
begun quite recently to pay reverence to Scrapis, who never was a god at all, we 
shall not on that account assert that a new being who was not formerly a god, 
nor at all known to men, is a deity. For the Son of God, "the First-born of all 
creation," although He seemed recently to have become incarnate, is not by any 
means on that account recent. For the holy Scriptures know Him to be the most 
ancient of all the works of creation; for it was to Him that God said regarding 
the creation of man, "Let Us make man in Our image, after Our likeness." 
CHAP. XXXVIII. 
I wish, however, to show how Celsus asserts without any good reason, that 
each one reveres his domestic and native institutions. For he declares that 
"those Ethiopians who inhabit Meroe know only of two gods, Jupiter and Bacchus, 
and worship these alone; and that the Arabians also know only of two, viz., 
Bacchus, who is also an Ethiopian deity, and Urania, whose worship is confined 
to them." According to his account, neither do the Ethiopians worship Urania, 
nor the Arabians Jupiter. If, then, an Ethiopian were from any accident to fall 
into the hands of the Arabians, and were to be judged guilty of impiety because 
he did not worship Urania, and for this reason should incur the danger of death, 
would it be proper for the Ethiopian to die, or to act contrary to his country's 
laws, and do obeisance to Urania? Now, if it would be proper for him to act 
contrary to the laws of his country, he will do what is not right, so far as the 
language of Celsus is any standard; while, if he should be led away to death, 
let him show the reasonableness of selecting such a fate. I know not whether, if 
the Ethiopian doctrine taught men to philosophize on the immortality of the 
soul, and the honour which is paid to religion, they would reverence those as 
deities who are deemed to be such by the laws of the country. A similar 
illustration may be employed in the case of the Arabians, if from any accident 
they happened to visit the Ethiopians about Meroe. For, having been taught to 
worship Urania and Bacchus alone, they will not worship Jupiter along with the 
Ethiopians; and if, adjudged guilty of impiety, they should be led away to 
death, let Celsus tell us what it would be reasonable on their part to do. And 
with regard to the fables which relate to Osiris and Isis, it is superfluous and 
out of place at present to enumerate them. For although an allegorical meaning 
may be given to the fables, they will nevertheless teach us to offer divine 
worship to cold water, and to the earth, which is subject to men, and all the 
animal creation. For in this way, I presume, they refer Osiris to water, and 
Isis to earth; while with regard to Serapis the accounts are numerous and 
conflicting, to the effect that very recently he appeared in public, agreeably 
to certain juggling tricks performed at the desire of Ptolemy, who wished to 
show to the people of Alexandria as it were a visible god. And we have read in 
the writings of Numenius the Pythagorean regarding his formation, that he 
partakes of the essence of all the animals and plants that are under the control 
of nature, that he may appear to have been fashioned into a god, not by the 
makers of images alone, with the aid of profane mysteries, and juggling tricks 
employed to invoke demons, but also by magicians and sorcerers, and those demons 
who are bewitched by their incantations. 
CHAP. XXXIX. 
We must therefore inquire what may be fittingly eaten or not by the rational 
and gentle animal, which acts always in conformity with reason; and not worship 
at random, sheep, or goats, or kine; to abstain from which is an act of 
moderation, for much advantage is derived by men from these animals. Whereas, is 
it not the most foolish of all things to spare crocodiles, and to treat them as 
sacred to some fabulous divinity or other? For it is a mark of exceeding 
stupidity to spare those animals which do not spare us, and to bestow care on 
those which make a prey of human beings. But Celsus approves of those who, in 
keeping with the laws of their country, worship and tend crocodiles, and not a 
word does he say against them, while the Christians appear deserving of censure, 
who have been taught to loath evil, and to turn away from wicked works, and to 
reverence and honour virtue as being generated by God, and as being His Son. For 
we must not, on account of their feminine name and nature, regard wisdom and 
righteousness as females; for these things are in our view the Son of God, as 
His genuine disciple has shown, when he said of Him, "Who of God is made to us 
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption." And although we 
may call Him a "second" God, let men know that by the term "second God" we mean 
nothing else than a virtue capable of including all other virtues, and a reason 
capable of containing all reason whatsoever which exists in all things, which 
have arisen naturally, directly, and for the general advantage, and which 
"reason," we say, dwelt in the soul of Jesus, and was united to Him in a degree 
far above all other souls, seeing He alone was enabled completely to receive the 
highest share in the absolute reason, and the absolute wisdom, and the absolute 
righteousness. 
CHAP. XL. 
But since, after Celsus had spoken to the above effect of the different kinds 
of laws, he adds the following remark, "Pindar appears to me to be correct in 
saying that law is king of all things," let us proceed to discuss this 
assertion. What law do you mean to say, good sir, is "king of all things?" If 
you mean those which exist in the various cities, then such an assertion is not 
true. For all men are not governed by the same law. You ought to have said that 
"laws are kings of all men," for in every nation some law is king of all. But if 
you mean that which is law in the proper sense, then it is this which is by 
nature "king of all things;" although there are some individuals who, having 
like robbers abandoned the law, deny its validity, and live lives of violence 
and injustice. We Christians, then, who have come to the knowledge of the law 
which is by nature "king of all things," and which is the same with the law of 
God, endeavour to regulate our lives by its prescriptions, having bidden a long 
farewell to those of an unholy kind. 
CHAP. XLI. 
Let us notice the charges which are next advanced by Celsus, in which there 
is exceedingly little that has reference to the Christians, as most of them 
refer to the Jews. His words are: "If, then, in these respects the Jews were 
carefully to preserve their own law, they are not to be blamed for so doing, but 
those persons rather who have forsaken their own usages, and adopted those of 
the Jews. And if they pride themselves on it, as being possessed of superior 
wisdom, and keep aloof from intercourse with others, as not being equally pure 
with themselves, they have already heard that their doctrine concerning heaven 
is not peculiar to them, but, to pass by all others, is one which has long ago 
been received by the Persians, as Herodotus somewhere mentions. 'For they have a 
custom,' he says, 'of going up to the tops of the mountains, and of offering 
sacrifices to Jupiter, giving the name of Jupiter to the whole circle of the 
heavens.' And I think," continues Celsus, "that it makes no difference whether 
you call the highest being Zeus, or Zen, or Adonai, or Sabaoth, or Ammoun like 
the Egyptians, or Pappaeus like the Scythians. Nor would they be deemed at all 
holier than others in this respect, that they observe the rite of circumcision, 
for this was done by the Egyptians and Colchians before them; nor because they 
abstain from swine's flesh, for the Egyptians practised abstinence not only from 
it, but from the flesh of goats, and sheep, and oxen, and fishes as well; while 
Pythagoras and his disciples do not eat beans, nor anything that contains life. 
It is not probable, however, that they enjoy God's favour, or are loved by Him 
differently from others, or that angels were sent from heaven to them alone, as 
if they had had allotted to them 'some region of the blessed,' for we see both 
themselves and the country of which they were deemed worthy. Let this band, 
then, take its departure, after paying the penalty of its vaunting, not having a 
knowledge of the great God, but being led away and deceived by the artifices of 
Moses, having become his pupil to no good end." 
CHAP. XLII. 
It is evident that, by the preceding remarks, Celsus charges the Jews with 
falsely giving themselves out as the chosen portion of the Supreme God above all 
other nations. And he accuses them of boasting, because they gave out that they 
knew the great God, although they did not really know Him, but were led away by 
the artifices of Moses, and were deceived by him, and became his disciples to no 
good end. Now we have in the preceding pages already spoken in part of the 
venerable and distinguished polity of the Jews, when it existed amongst them as 
a symbol of the city of God, and of His temple, and of the sacrificial worship 
offered in it and at the altar of sacrifice. But if any one were to turn his 
attention to the meaning of the legislator, and to the constitution which he 
established, and were to examine the various points relating to him, and compare 
them with the present method of worship among other nations, there are none 
which he would admire to a greater degree; because, so far as can be 
accomplished among mortals, everything that was not of advantage to the human 
race was withheld from them, and only those things which are useful bestowed. 
And for this reason they had neither gymnastic contests, nor scenic 
representations, nor horse-races; nor were there among them women who sold their 
beauty to any one who wished to have sexual intercourse without offspring, and 
to cast contempt upon the nature of human generation. And what an advantage was 
it to be taught from their tender years to ascend above all visible nature, and 
to hold the belief that God was not fixed anywhere within its limits, but to 
look for Him on high, and beyond the sphere of all bodily substance! And how 
great was the advantage which they enjoyed in being instructed almost from their 
birth, and as soon as they could speak, in the immortality of the soul, and in 
the existence of courts of justice under the earth, and in the rewards provided 
for those who have lived righteous lives! These truths, indeed, were proclaimed 
in the veil of fable to children, and to those whose views of things were 
childish; while to those who were already occupied in investigating the truth, 
and desirous of making progress therein, these fables, so to speak, were 
transfigured into the truths which were concealed within them. And I consider 
that it was in a manner worthy of their name as the "portion of God" that they 
despised all kinds of divination, as that which bewitches men to no purpose, and 
which proceeds rather from wicked demons than from anything of a better nature; 
and sought the knowledge of future events in the souls of those who, owing to 
their high degree of purity, received the spirit of the Supreme God. 
CHAP. XLIII. 
But what need is there to point out how agreeable to sound reason, and 
unattended with injury either to master or slave, was the law that one of the 
same faith should not be allowed to continue in slavery more than six years? The 
Jews, then, cannot be said to preserve their own law in the same points with the 
other nations. For it would be censurable in them, and would involve a charge of 
insensibility to the superiority of their law, if they were to believe that they 
had been legislated for in the same way as the other nations among the heathen. 
And although Celsus will not admit it, the Jews nevertheless are possessed of a 
wisdom superior not only to that of the multitude, but also of those who have 
the appearance of philosophers; because those who engage in philosophical 
pursuits, after the utterance of the most venerable philosophical sentiments, 
fall away into the worship of idols and demons, whereas the very lowest Jew 
directs his look to the Supreme God alone; and they do well, indeed, so far as 
this point is concerned, to pride themselves thereon, and to keep aloof from the 
society of others as accursed and impious. And would that they had not sinned, 
and transgressed the law, and slain the prophets in former times, and in these 
latter days conspired against Jesus, that we might be in possession of a pattern 
of a heavenly city which even Plato would have sought to describe; although I 
doubt whether he could have accomplished as much as was done by Moses and those 
who followed him, who nourished a "chosen generation," and "a holy nation," 
dedicated to God, with words free from all superstition. 
CHAP. XLIV. 
But as Celsus would compare the venerable customs of the Jews with the laws 
of certain nations, let us proceed to look at them. He is of opinion, 
accordingly, that there is no differ ence between the doctrine regarding 
"heaven" and that regarding "God;" and he says that "the Persians, like the 
Jews, offer sacrifices to Jupiter upon the tops of the mountains,"--not 
observing that, as the Jews were acquainted with one God, so they had only one 
holy house of prayer, and one altar of whole burnt-offerings, and one censer for 
incense, and one high priest of God. The Jews, then, had nothing in common with 
the Persians, who ascend the summits of their mountains, which are many in 
number, and offer up sacrifices which have nothing in common with those which 
are regulated by the Mosaic code,--in conformity to which the Jewish priests 
"served unto the example and shadow of heavenly things," explaining 
enigmatically the object of the law regarding the sacrifices, and the things of 
which these sacrifices were the symbols. The Persians therefore may call the 
"whole circle of heaven" Jupiter; but we maintain that "the heaven" is neither 
Jupiter nor God, as we indeed know that certain beings of a class inferior to 
God have ascended above the heavens and all visible nature: and in this sense we 
understand the words, "Praise God, ye heaven of heavens, and ye waters that be 
above the heavens: let them praise the name of the LORD." 
CHAP. XLV. 
As Celsus, however, is of opinion that it matters nothing whether the highest 
being be called Jupiter, or Zen, or Adonai, or Sabaoth, or Ammoun (as the 
Egyptians term him), or Pappaeus (as the Scythians entitle him), let us discuss 
the point for a little, reminding the reader at the same time of what has been 
said above upon this question, when the language of Celsus led us to consider 
the subject. And now we maintain that the nature of names is not, as Aristotle 
supposes, an enactment of those who impose them. For the languages which are 
prevalent among men do not derive their origin from men, as is evident to those 
who are able to ascertain the nature of the charms which are appropriated by the 
inventors of the languages differently, according to the various tongues, and to 
the varying pronunciations of the names, on which we have spoken briefly in the 
preceding pages, remarking that when those names which in a certain language 
were possessed of a natural power were translated into another, they were no 
longer able to accomplish what they did before when uttered in their native 
tongues. And the same peculiarity is found to apply to men; for if we were to 
translate the name of one who was called from his birth by a certain appellation 
in the Greek language into the Egyptian or Roman, or any other tongue, we could 
not make him do or suffer the same things which he would have done or suffered 
under the appellation first bestowed upon him. Nay, even if we translated into 
the Greek language the name of an individual who had been originally invoked in 
the Roman tongue, we could not produce the result which the incantation 
professed itself capable of accomplishing had it preserved the name first 
conferred upon him. And if these statements are true when spoken of the names of 
men, what are we to think of those which are transferred, for any cause 
whatever, to the Deity? For example, something is transferred from the name 
Abraham when translated into Greek, and something is signified by that of Isaac, 
and also by that of Jacob; and accordingly, if any one, either in an invocation 
or in swearing an oath, were to use the expression, "the God of Abraham," and 
"the God of Isaac," and "the God of Jacob," he would produce certain effects, 
either owing to the nature of these names or to their powers, since even demons 
are vanquiShed and become submissive to him who pronounces these names; whereas 
if we say, "the god of the chosen father of the echo, and the god of laughter, 
and the god of him who strikes with the heel," the mention of the name is 
attended with no result, as is the case with other names possessed of no power. 
And in the same way, if we translate the word "Israel" into Greek or any other 
language, we shall produce no result; but if we retain it as it is, and join it 
to those expressions to which such as are skilled in these matters think it 
ought to be united, there would then follow some result from the pronunciation 
of the word which would accord with the professions of those who employ such 
invocations. And we may say the same also of the pronunciation of "Sabaoth," a 
word which is frequently employed in incantations; for if we translate the term 
into "Lord of hosts," or "Lord of armies," or "Almighty" (different acceptation 
of it having been proposed by the interpreters), we shall accomplish nothing; 
whereas if we retain the original pronunciation, we shall, as those who are 
skilled in such matters maintain, produce some effect. And the same observation 
holds good of Adonai. If, then, neither "Sabaoth" nor "Adonai," when rendered 
into what appears to be their meaning in the Greek tongue, can accomplish 
anything, how much less would be the result among those who regard it as a 
matter of indifference whether the highest being be called Jupiter, or Zen, or 
Adonai, or Sabaoth! 

CHAP. XLVI. 
It was for these and similar mysterious reasons, with which Moses and the 
prophets were acquainted, that they forbade the name of other gods to be 
pronounced by him who bethought himself of praying to the one Supreme God alone, 
or to be remembered by a heart which had been taught to be pure from all foolish 
thoughts and words. And for these reasons we should prefer to endure all manner 
of suffering rather than acknowledge Jupiter to be God. For we do not consider 
Jupiter and Sabaoth to be the same, nor Jupiter to be at all divine, but that 
some demon, unfriendly to men and to the true God, rejoices under this title. 
And although the Egyptians were to hold Ammon before us under threat of death, 
we would rather die than address him as God, it being a name used in all 
probability in certain Egyptian incantations in which this demon is invoked. And 
although the Scythians may call Pappaeus the supreme God, vet we will not yield 
our assent to this; granting, indeed, that there is a Supreme Deity, although we 
do not give the name Pappaeus to Him as His proper title, but regard it as one 
which is agreeable to the demon to whom was allotted the desert of Scythia, with 
its people and its language. He, however, who gives God His title in the 
Scythian tongue, or in the Egyptian or in any language in which he has been 
brought up, will not be guilty of sin. 
CHAP. XLVII. 
Now the reason why circumcision is practised among the Jews is not the same 
as that which explains its existence among the Egyptians and Colchians, and 
therefore it is not to be considered the same circumcision. And as he who 
sacrifices does not sacrifice to the same god, although he appears to perform 
the rite of sacrifice in a similar manner, and he who offers up prayer does not 
pray to the same divinity, although he asks the same things in his supplication; 
so, in the same way, if one performs the rite of circumcision, it by no means 
follows that it is not a different act from the circumcision performed upon 
another. For the purpose, and the law, and the wish of him who performs the 
rite, place the act in a different category. But that the whole subject may be 
still better understood, we have to remark that the term for "righteousness" is 
the same among all the Greeks; but righteousness is shown to be one thing 
according to the view of Epicurus; and another according to the Stoics, who deny 
the threefold division of the soul; and a different thing again according to the 
followers of Plato, who hold that righteousness is the proper business of the 
parts of the soul. And so also the "courage" of Epicures is one thing, who would 
undergo some labours in order to escape from a greater number; and a different 
thing that of the philosopher of the Porch, who would choose all virtue for its 
own sake; and a different thing still that of Plato, who maintains that virtue 
itself is the act of the irascible part of the soul, and who assigns to it a 
place about the breast. And so circumcision will be a different thing according 
to the varying opinions of those who undergo it. But on such a subject it is 
unnecessary to speak on this occasion in a treatise like the present; for 
whoever desires to see what led us to the subject, can read what we have said 
upon it in the Epistle of Paul to the Romans. 
CHAP. XLVIII. 
Although the Jews, then, pride themselves on circumcision, they will separate 
it not only from that of the Colchians and Egyptians, but also from that of the 
Arabian Ishmaelites; and yet the latter was derived from their ancestor Abraham, 
the father of Ishmael, who underwent the rite of circumcision along with his 
father. The Jews say that the circumcision performed on the eighth day is the 
principal circumcision, and that which is performed according to circumstances 
is different; and probably it was performed on account of the hostility of some 
angel towards the Jewish nation, who had the power to injure such of them as 
were not circumcised, but was powerless against those who had undergone the 
rite. This may be said to appear from what is written in the book of Exodus, 
where the angel before the circumcision of Eliezer was able to work against 
Moses, but could do nothing after his son was circumcised. And when Zipporah had 
learned this, she took a pebble and circumcised her child, and is recorded, 
according to the reading of the common copies, to have said, "The blood of my 
child's circumcision is stayed," but according to the Hebrew text, "A bloody 
husband art thou to me." For she had known the story about a certain angel 
having power before the shedding of the blood, but who became powerless through 
the blood of circumcision. For which reason the words were addressed to Moses, 
"A bloody husband art thou to me." But these things, which appear rather of a 
curious nature, and not level to the comprehension of the multitude, I have 
ventured to treat at such length; and now I shall only add, as becomes a 
Christian, one thing more, and shall then pass on to what follows. I For this 
angel might have had power, I think, over those of the people who were not 
circumcised, and generally over all who worshipped only the Creator; and this 
power lasted so long as Jesus had not assumed a human body. But when He had done 
this, and had undergone the rite of circumcision in His own person, all the 
power of the angel over those who practise the same worship, but are not 
circumcised, was abolished; for Jesus reduced it to nought by (the power of) His 
unspeakable divinity. And therefore His disciples are forbidden to circumcise 
themselves, and are reminded (by the apostle): "If ye be circumcised, Christ 
shall profit you nothing." 
CHAP. XLIX. 
But neither do the Jews pride themselves upon abstaining from swine's flesh, 
as if it were some great thing; but upon their having ascertained the nature of 
clean and unclean animals, and the cause of the distinction, and of swine being 
classed among the unclean. And these distinctions were signs of certain things 
until the advent of Jesus; after whose coming it was said to His disciple, who 
did not yet comprehend the doctrine concerning these matters, but who said, 
"Nothing that is common or unclean hath entered into my mouth," "What God hath 
cleansed, call not thou common." It therefore in no way affects either the Jews 
or us that the Egyptian priests abstain not only from the flesh of swine, but 
also from that of goats, and sheep, and oxen, and fish. But since it is not that 
"which entereth into the mouth that defiles a man," and since "meat does not 
commend us to God," we do not set great store on refraining from eating, nor yet 
are we induced to eat from a gluttonous appetite. And therefore, so far as we 
are concerned, the followers of Pythagoras, who abstain from all things that 
contain life may do as they please; only observe the different reason for 
abstaining from things that have life on the part of the Pythagoreans and our 
ascetics. For the former abstain on account of the fable about the 
transmigration of souls, as the poet says: - "And some one, lifting up his 
beloved son, Will slay him after prayer; O how foolish he!" 
We, however, when we do abstain, do so because "we keep under our body, and 
bring it into subjection," and desire "to mortify our members that are upon the 
earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence;" and 
we use every effort to "mortify the deeds of the flesh." 
CHAP. L. 
Celsus, still expressing his opinion regarding the Jews, says: "It is not 
probable that they are in great favour with God, or are regarded by Him with 
more affection than others, or that angels are sent by Him to them alone, as if 
to them had been allotted some region of the blessed. For we may see both the 
people themselves, and the country of which they were deemed worthy." We shall 
refute this, by remarking that it is evident that this nation was in great 
favour with God, from the fact that the God who presides over all things was 
called the God of the Hebrews, even by those who were aliens to our faith. And 
because they were in favour with God, they were not abandoned by Him; but 
although few in number, they continued to enjoy the protection of the divine 
power, so that in the reign of Alexander of Macedon they sustained no injury 
from him, although they refused, on account of certain covenants and oaths, to 
take up arms against Darius. They say that on that occasion the Jewish high 
priest, clothed in his sacred robe, received obeisance from Alexander, who 
declared that he had beheld an individual arrayed in this fashion, who announced 
to him in his sleep that he was to be the subjugator of the whole of Asia. 
Accordingly, we Christians maintain that "it was the fortune of that people in a 
remarkable degree to enjoy God's favour, and to be loved by Him in a way 
different from others;" but that this economy of things and this divine favour 
were transferred to us, after Jesus had conveyed the power which had been 
manifested among the Jews to those who had become converts to Him from among the 
heathen. And for this reason, although the Romans desired to perpetrate many 
atrocities against the Christians, in order to ensure their extermination, they 
were unsuccessful; for there was a divine hand which fought on their behalf, and 
whose desire it was that the word of God should spread from one comer of the 
land of Judea throughout the whole human race. 

CHAP. LI. 
But seeing that we have answered to the best of our ability the charges 
brought by Celsus against the Jews and their doctrine, let us proceed to 
consider what follows, and to prove that it is no empty boast on our part when 
we make. a profession of knowing the great God, and that we have not been led 
away by any juggling tricks of Moses (as Celsus imagines), or even of our own 
Saviour Jesus; but that for a good end we listen to the God who speaks in Moses, 
and have accepted Jesus, whom he testifies to be God, as the Son of God, in hope 
of receiving the best rewards if we regulate our lives according to His word. 
And we shall willingly pass over what we have already stated by way of 
anticipation on the points, "whence we came and who is our leader, and what law 
proceeded from Him." And if Celsus would maintain that there is no difference 
between us and the Egyptians, who worship the goat, or the ram, or the 
crocodile, or the ox, or the river-horse, or the dog-faced baboon, or the cat, 
he can ascertain if it be so, and so may any other who thinks alike on the 
subject. We, however, have to the best of our ability defended ourselves at 
great length in the preceding pages on the subject of the honour which we render 
to our Jesus, pointing out that we have found the better part; and that in 
showing that the truth which is contained in the teaching of Jesus Christ is 
pure and unmixed with error, we are not commending ourselves, but our Teacher, 
to whom testimony was borne through many witnesses by the Supreme God and the 
prophetic writings among the Jews, and by the very clearness of the case itself, 
for it is demonstrated that He could not have accomplished such mighty works 
without the divine help. 
CHAP. LII. 
But the statement of Celsus which we wish to examine at present is the 
following: "Let us then pass over the refutations which might be adduced against 
the claims of their teacher, and let him be regarded as really an angel. But is 
he the first and only one who came (to men), or were there others before him? If 
they should say that he is the only one, they would be convicted of telling lies 
against themselves. For they assert that on many occasions others came, and 
sixty or seventy of them together, and that these became wicked, and were cast 
under the earth and punished with chains, and that from this source originate 
the warm springs, which are their tears; and, moreover, that there came an angel 
to the tomb of this said being--according to some, indeed, one, but according to 
others, two--who answered the women that he had arisen. For the Son of God could 
not himself, as it seems, open the tomb, but needed the help of another to roll 
away the stone. And again, on account of the pregnancy of Mary, there came an 
angel to the carpenter, and once more another angel, in order that they might 
take up the young Child and flee away (into Egypt). But what need is there to 
particularize everything, or to count up the number of angels said to have been 
sent to Moses, and others amongst them? If, then, others were sent, it is 
manifest that he also came from the same God. But he may be supposed to have the 
appearance of announcing something of greater importance (than those who 
preceded him), as if the Jews had been committing sin, or corrupting their 
religion, or doing deeds of impiety; for these things are obscurely hinted at." 
CHAP. LIII. 
The preceding remarks might suffice as an answer to the charges of Celsus, so 
far as regards those points in which our Saviour Jesus Christ is made the 
subject of special investigation. But that we may avoid the appearance of 
intentionally passing over any portion of his work, as if we were unable to meet 
him, let us, even at the risk of being tautological (since we are challenged to 
this by Celsus), endeavour as far as we can with all due brevity to continue our 
discourse, since perhaps something either more precise or more novel may occur 
to us upon the several topics. He says, indeed, that "he has omitted the 
refutations which have been adduced against the claims which Christians advance 
on behalf of their teacher," although he has not omitted anything which he was 
able to bring forward, as is manifest from his previous language, but makes this 
statement only as an empty rhetorical device. That we are not refuted, however, 
on the subject of our great Saviour, although the accuser may appear to refute 
us, will be manifest to those who peruse in a spirit of truth-loving 
investigation all that is predicted and recorded of Him. And, in the next place, 
since he considers that he makes a concession in saying of the Saviour, "Let him 
appear to be really an angel," we reply that we do not accept of such a 
concession from Celsus; but we look to the work of Him who came to visit the 
whole human race in His word and teaching, as each one of His adherents was 
capable of receiving Him. And this was the work of one who, as the prophecy 
regarding Him said, was not simply an angel, but the "Angel of the great 
counsel:" for He announced to men the great counsel of the God and Father of all 
things regarding them, (saying) of those who yield themselves up to a life of 
pure religion, that they ascend by means of their great deeds to God; but of 
those who do not adhere to Him, that they place themselves at a distance from 
God, and journey on to destruction through their unbelief of Him. He then 
continues: "If even the angel came to men, is he the first and only one who 
came, or did others come on former occasions?" And he thinks he can meet either 
of these dilemmas at great length, although there is not a single real Christian 
who asserts that Christ was the only being that visited the human race. For, as 
Celsus says, "If they should say the only one," there are others who appeared to 
different individuals. 
CHAP. LIV. 
In the next place, he proceeds to answer himself as he thinks fit in the 
following terms: "And so he is not the only one who is recorded to have visited 
the human race, as even those who, under pretext of teaching in the name of 
Jesus, have apostatized from the Creator as an inferior being, and have given in 
their adherence to one who is a superior God and father of him who visited (the 
world), assert that before him certain beings came from the Creator to visit the 
human race." Now, as it is in the spirit of truth that we investigate all that 
relates to the subject, we shall remark that it is asserted by Apelles, the 
celebrated disciple of Marcion, who became the founder of a certain sect, and 
who treated the writings of the Jews as fabulous, that Jesus is the only one 
that came to visit the human race. Even against him, then, who maintained that 
Jesus was the only one that came from God to men, it would be in vain for Celsus 
to quote the statements regarding the descent of other angels, seeing Apelles 
discredits, as we have already mentioned, the miraculous narratives of the 
Jewish Scriptures; and much more will he decline to admit what Celsus has 
adduced, from not understanding the contents of the book of Enoch. No one, then, 
convicts us of falsehood, or of making contradictory assertions, as if we 
maintained both that our Saviour was the only being that ever came to men, and 
yet that many others came on different occasions. And in a most confused manner, 
moreover, does be adduce, when examining the subject of the visits of angels to 
men, what he has derived, without seeing its meaning, from the contents of the 
book of Enoch; for he does not appear to have read the passages in question, nor 
to have been aware that the books which bear the name Enoch do not at all 
circulate in the Churches as divine, although it is from this source that he 
might be supposed to have obtained the statement, that "sixty or seventy angels 
descended at the same time, who fell into a state of wickedness." 
CHAP. LV. 
But, that we may grant to him in a spirit of candour what he has not 
discovered in the contents of the book of Genesis, that "the sons of God, seeing 
the daughters of men, that they were fair, took to them wives of all whom they 
chose," we shall nevertheless even on this point persuade those who are capable 
of understanding the meaning of the prophet, that even before us there was one 
who referred this narrative to the doctrine regarding souls, which became 
possessed with a desire for the corporeal life of men, and this in metaphorical 
language, he said, was termed "daughters of men." But whatever may be the 
meaning of the "sons of God desiring to possess the daughters of men," it will 
not at all contribute to prove that Jesus was not the only one who visited 
mankind as an angel, and who manifestly became the Saviour and benefactor of all 
those who depart from the flood of wickedness. Then, mixing up and confusing 
whatever he had at any time heard, or had anywhere found written--whether held 
to be of divine origin among Christians or not--he adds: 
"The sixty or seventy who descended together were cast under the earth, and 
were punished with chains." And he quotes (as from the book of Enoch, but 
without naming it) the following: "And hence it is that the tears of these 
angels are warm springs,"--a thing neither mentioned nor heard of in the 
Churches of God! For no one was ever so foolish as to materialize into human 
tears those which were shed by the angels who had come down from heaven. And if 
it were right to pass a jest upon what is advanced against us in a serious 
spirit by Celsus, we might observe that no one would ever have said that hot 
springs, the greater part of which are fresh water, were the tears of the 
angels, since tears are saltish in their nature, unless indeed the angels, in 
the opinion of Celsus, shed tears which are fresh. 
CHAP. LVI. 
Proceeding immediately after to mix up and compare with one another things 
that are dissimilar, and incapable of being united, he subjoins to his statement 
regarding the sixty or seventy angels who came down from heaven, and who, 
according to him, shed fountains of warm water for tears, the following: "It is 
related also that there came to the tomb of Jesus himself, according to some, 
two angels, accord ing to others, one;" having failed to notice, I think, that 
Matthew and Mark speak of one, and Luke and John of two, which statements are 
not contradictory. For they who mention "one," say that it was he who rolled 
away the stone from the sepulchre; while they who mention "two," refer to those 
who appeared in shining raiment to the women that repaired to the sepulchre, or 
who were seen within sitting in white garments. Each of these occurrences might 
now be demonstrated to have actually taken place, and to be indicative of a 
figurative meaning existing in these "phenomena," (and intelligible) to those 
who were prepared to behold the resurrection of the Word. Such a task, however, 
does not belong to our present purpose, but rather to an exposition of the 
Gospel. 
CHAP. LVII. 
Now, that miraculous appearances have sometimes been witnessed by human 
beings, is related by the Greeks; and not only by those of them who might be 
suspected of composing fabulous narratives, but also by those who have given 
every evidence of being genuine philosophers, and of having related with perfect 
truth what had happened to them. Accounts of this kind we have read in the 
writings of Chrysippus of Soli, and also some things of the same kind relating 
to Pythagoras; as well as in some of the more recent writers who lived a very 
short time ago, as in the treatise of Plutarch of Chaeronea "on the Soul," and 
in the second book of the work of Numenius the Pythagorean on the 
"Incorruptibility of the Soul." Now, when such accounts are related by the 
Greeks, and especially by the philosophers among them, they are not to be 
received with mockery and ridicule, nor to be regarded as fictions and fables; 
but when those who are devoted to the God of all things, and who endure all 
kinds of injury, even to death itself, rather than allow a falsehood to escape 
their lips regarding God, announce the appearances of angels which they have 
themselves witnessed, they are to be deemed unworthy of belief, and their words 
are not to be regarded as true! Now it is opposed to sound reason to judge in 
this way whether individuals are speaking truth or falsehood. For those who act 
honestly, only after a long and careful examination into the details of a 
subject, slowly and cautiously express their opinion of the veracity or 
falsehood of this or that person with regard to the marvels which they may 
relate; since it is the case that neither do all men show themselves worthy of 
belief, nor do all make it distinctly evident that they are relating to men only 
fictions and fables. Moreover, regarding the resurrection of Jesus from the 
dead, we have this remark to make, that it is not at all wonderful if, on such 
an occasion, either one or two angels should have appeared to announce that 
Jesus had risen from the dead, and to provide for the safety of those who 
believed in such an event to the advantage of their souls. Nor does it appear to 
me at all unreasonable, that those who believe in the resurrection of Jesus, and 
who manifest, as a fruit of their faith not to be lightly esteemed, their 
possession of a virtuous life, and their withdrawal from the flood of evils, 
should not be unattended by angels who lend their help in accomplishing their 
conversion to God. 
CHAP. LVIII. 
But Celsus challenges the account also that an angel rolled away the stone 
from the sepulchre where the body of Jesus lay, acting like a lad at school, who 
should bring a charge against any one by help of a string of commonplaces. 
And, as if he had discovered some clever objection to the narrative, he 
remarks: "The Son of God, then, it appears, could not open his tomb, but 
required the aid of another to roll away the stone." Now, not to overdo the 
discussion. of this matter, or to have the appearance of unreasonably 
introducing philosophical remarks, by explaining the figurative meaning at 
present, I shall simply say of the narrative alone, that it does appear in 
itself a more respectful proceeding, that the servant and inferior should have 
rolled away the stone, than that such an act should have been performed by Him 
whose resurrection was to be for the advantage of mankind. I do not speak of the 
desire of those who conspired against the Word, and who wished to put Him to 
death, and to show to all men that He was dead and non-existent, that His tomb 
should not be opened, in order that no one might behold the Word alive after 
their conspiracy; but the "Angel of God" who came into the world for the 
salvation of men, with the help of another angel, proved more powerful than the 
conspirators, and rolled away the weighty stone, that those who deemed the Word 
to be dead might be convinced that He is not with the "departed," but is alive, 
and precedes those who are willing to follow Him, that He may manifest to them 
those truths which come after those which He formerly showed them at the time of 
their first entrance (into the school of Christianity), when they were as yet 
incapable of receiving deeper instruction. In the next place, I do not 
understand what advantage he thinks will accrue to his purpose when he ridicules 
the account of "the angel's visit to Joseph regarding the pregnancy of Mary;" 
and again, that of the angel to warn the parents "to take up the new-born Child, 
whose life was in danger, and to flee with it into Egypt." Concerning these 
matters, however, we have in the preceding pages answered his statements. But 
what does Celsus mean by saying, that "according to the Scriptures, angels are 
recorded to have been sent to Moses, and others as well?" For it appears to me 
to contribute nothing to his purpose, and especially because none of them made 
any effort to accomplish, as far as in his power, the conversion of the human 
race from their sins. Let it be granted, however, that other angels were sent 
from God, but that he came to announce something of greater importance (than any 
others who preceded him); and when the Jews had fallen into sin, and corrupted 
their religion, and had done unholy deeds, transferred the kingdom of God to 
other husbandmen, who in all the Churches take special care of themselves, and 
use every endeavour by means of a holy life, and by a doctrine conformable 
thereto, to win over to the God of all things those who would rush away from the 
teaching of Jesus. 
CHAP. LIX. 
Celsus then continues: "The Jews accordingly, and these (clearly meaning the 
Christians), have the same God;" and as if advancing a proposition which would 
not be conceded, he proceeds to make the following assertion: "It is certain, 
indeed, that the members of the great Church admit this, and adopt as true the 
accounts regarding the creation of the world which are current among the Jews, 
viz., concerning the six days and the seventh;" on which day, as the Scripture 
says, God "ceased" from His works, retiring into the contemplation of Himself, 
but on which, as Celsus says (who does not abide by the letter of the history, 
and who does not understand its meaning), God "rested,"--a term which is not 
found in the record. With respect, however, to the creation of the world, and 
the "rest which is reserved after it for the people of God," the subject is 
extensive, and mystical, and profound, and difficult of explanation. In the next 
place, as it appears to me, from a desire to fill up his book, and to give it an 
appearance of importance, he recklessly adds certain statements, such as the 
following, relating to the first man, of whom he says: "We give the same 
account. as do the Jews, and deduce the same genealogy from him as they do." 
However, as regards "the conspiracies of brothers against one another," we know 
of none such, save that Cain conspired against Abel, and Esau against Jacob; but 
not Abel against Cain, nor Jacob against Esau: for if this had been the case, 
Celsus would have been correct in saying that we give the same accounts as do 
the Jews of "the conspiracies of brothers against one another." Let it be 
granted, however, that we speak of the same descent into Egypt as they, and of 
their return thence, which was not a "flight," as Celsus considers it to have 
been, what does that avail towards founding an accusation against us or against 
the Jews? Here, indeed, he thought to cast ridicule upon us, when, in speaking 
of the Hebrew people, he termed their exodus a "flight;" but when it was his 
business to investigate the account of the punishments inflicted by God upon 
Egypt, that topic he purposely passed by in silence. 
CHAP. LX. 
If, however, it be necessary to express ourselves with precision in our 
answer to Celsus, who thinks that we hold the same opinions on the matters in 
question as do the Jews, we would say that we both agree that the books (of 
Scripture) were written by the Spirit of God, but that we do not agree about the 
meaning of their contents; for we do not regulate our lives like the Jews, 
because we are of opinion that the literal acceptation of the laws is not that 
which conveys the meaning of the legislation. And we maintain, that "when Moses 
is read, the veil is upon their heart," because the meaning of the law of Moses 
has been concealed from those who have not welcomed the way which is by Jesus 
Christ. But we know that if one turn to the Lord (for "the Lord is that 
Spirit"), the veil being taken away, "he beholds, as in a mirror with unveiled 
face, the glory of the Lord" in those thoughts which are concealed in their 
literal expression, and to his own glory becomes a participator of the divine 
glory; the term "face" being used figuratively for the "understanding," as one 
would call it without a figure, in which is the face of the "inner man," filled 
with light and glory, flowing from the true comprehension of the contents of the 
law. 

CHAP. LXI. 
After the above remarks he proceeds as follows: "Let no one suppose that I am 
ignorant that some of them will concede that their God is the same as that of 
the Jews, while others will maintain that he is a different one, to whom the 
latter is in opposition, and that it was from the former that the Son came," 
Now, if he imagine that the existence of numerous heresies among the Christians 
is a ground of accusation against Christianity, why, in a similar way, should it 
not be a ground of accusation against philosophy, that the various sects of 
philosophers differ from each other, not on small and indifferent points, but 
upon those of the highest importance? Nay, medicine also ought to be a subject 
of attack, on account of its many conflicting schools. Let it be admitted, then, 
that there are amongst us some who deny that our God is the same as that of the 
Jews: nevertheless, on that account those are not to be blamed who prove from 
the same Scriptures that one and the same Deity is the God of the Jews and of 
the Gentiles alike, as Paul, too, distinctly says, who was a convert from 
Judaism to Christianity, "I thank my God, whom I serve from my forefathers with 
a pure conscience." And let it be admitted also, that there is a third class who 
call certain persons "carnal," and others "spiritual,"--I think he here means 
the followers of Valentinus,--yet what does this avail against us, who belong to 
the Church, and who make it an accusation against such as hold that certain 
natures are saved, and that others perish in consequence of their natural 
constitution? 
And let it be admitted further, that there are some who give themselves out 
as Gnostics, in the same way as those Epicureans who call themselves 
philosophers: yet neither will they who annihilate the doctrine of providence be 
deemed true philosophers, nor those true Christians who introduce monstrous 
inventions, which are disapproved of by those who are the disciples of Jesus. 
Let it be admitted, moreover, that there are some who accept Jesus, and who 
boast on that account of being Christians, and yet would regulate their lives, 
like the Jewish multitude, in accordance with the Jewish law,--and these are the 
twofold sect of Ebionites, who either acknowledge with us that Jesus was born of 
a virgin, or deny this, and maintain that He was begotten like other human 
beings,--what does that avail by way of charge against such as belong to the 
Church, and whom Celsus has styled "those of the multitude?" He adds, also, that 
certain of the Christians are believers in the Sibyl, having probably 
misunderstood some who blamed such as believed in the existence of a prophetic 
Sibyl, and termed those who held this belief Sibyllists. 
He next pours down Upon us a heap of names, saying that he knows of the 
existence of certain Simonians who worship Helene, or Helenus, as their teacher, 
and are called Helenians. But it has escaped the notice of Celsus that the 
Simonians do not at all acknowledge Jesus to be the Son of God, but term Simon 
the "power" of God, regarding whom they relate certain marvellous stories, 
saying that he imagined that if he could become possessed of similar powers to 
those with which be believed Jesus to be endowed, he too would become as 
powerful among men as Jesus was amongst the multitude. But neither Celsus nor 
Simon could comprehend how Jesus, like a good husbandman of the word of God, was 
able to sow the greater part of Greece, and of barbarian lands, with His 
doctrine, and to fill these countries with words which transform the soul from 
all that is evil, and bring it back to the Creator of all things. Celsus knows, 
moreover, certain Marcellians, so called from Marcellina, and Harpocratians from 
Salome, and others who derive their name from Mariamme, and others again from 
Martha. We, however, who from a love of learning examine to the utmost of our 
ability not only the contents of Scripture, and the differences to which they 
give rise, but have also, from love to the truth, investigated as far as we 
could the opinions of philosophers, have never at any time met with these sects. 
He makes mention also of the Marcionites, whose leader was Marcion. 
CHAP. LXIII. 
In the next place, that he may have the appearance of knowing still more than 
he has yet mentioned, he says, agreeably to his usual custom, that "there are 
others who have wickedly invented some being as their teacher and demon, and who 
wallow about in a great darkness, more unholy and accursed than that of the 
companions of the Egyptian Antinous." And he seems to me, indeed, in touching on 
these matters, to say with a certain degree of truth, that there are certain 
others who have wickedly invented another demon, and who have found him to be 
their lord, as they wallow about in the great darkness of their ignorance. With 
respect, however, to Antinous, who is compared with our Jesus, we shall not 
repeat what we have already said in the preceding pages. "Moreover," he 
continues, "these persons utter against one another dreadful blasphemies, saying 
all manner of things shameful to be spoken; nor will they yield in the slightest 
point for the sake of harmony, hating each other with a perfect hatred." Now, in 
answer to this, we have already said that in philosophy and medicine sects are 
to be found warring against sects. We, however, who are followers of the word of 
Jesus, and have exercised ourselves in thinking, and saying, and doing what is 
in harmony with His words, "when reviled, bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; 
being defamed, we entreat;" and we would not utter "all manner of things 
shameful to be spoken" against those who have adopted different opinions from 
ours, but, if possible, use every exertion to raise them to a better condition 
through adherence to the Creator alone, and lead them to perform every act as 
those who will (one day) be judged. And if those who hold different opinions 
will not be convinced, we observe the injunction laid down for the treatment of 
such: "A man that is a heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject, 
knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of 
himself." Moreover, we who know the maxim, "Blessed are the peacemakers," and 
this also, "Blessed are the meek," would not regard with hatred the corrupters 
of Christianity, nor term those who had fallen into error Circes and flattering 
deceivers. 
CHAP. LXIV. 
Celsus appears to me to have misunderstood the statement of the apostle, 
which declares that "in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, 
giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in 
hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry, 
and commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with 
thanksgiving of them who believe;" and to have misunderstood also those who 
employed these declarations of the apostle against such as had corrupted the 
doctrines of Christianity. And it is owing to this cause that Celsus has said 
that "certain among the Christians are called 'cauterized in the ears;' " and 
also that some are termed "enigmas,"--a term which we have never met. The 
expression "stumbling-block" is, indeed, of frequent occurrence in these 
writings,--an appellation which we are accustomed to apply to those who turn 
away simple persons, and those who are easily deceived, from sound doctrine. But 
neither we, nor, I imagine, any other, whether Christian or heretic, know of any 
who are styled Sirens, who betray and deceive, and stop their ears, and change 
into swine those whom they delude. And yet this man, who affects to know 
everything, uses such language as the following: "You may hear," he says, "all 
those who differ so widely, and who assail each other in their disputes with the 
most shameless language, uttering the words, 'The world is crucified to me, and 
I unto the world.'" And this is the only phrase which, it appears, Celsus could 
remember out of Paul's writings; and yet why should we not also employ 
innumerable other quotations from the Scriptures, such as, "For though we do 
walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; (for the weapons of our 
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of 
strongholds,) casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth 
itself against the knowledge of God?" 
CHAP. LXV. 
But since he asserts that "you may hear all those who differ so widely 
saying, 'The world is crucified to me, and I unto the world,'" we shall show the 
falsity of such a statement. For there are certain heretical sects which do not 
receive the Epistles of the Apostle Paul, as the two sects of Ebionites, and 
those who are termed Encratites. Those, then, who do not regard the apostle as a 
holy and wise man, will not adopt his language, and say, "The world is crucified 
to me, and I unto the world." And consequently in this point, too, Celsus is 
guilty of falsehood. He continues, moreover, to linger over the accusations 
which he brings against the diversity of sects which exist, but does not appear 
to me to be accurate in the language which he employs, nor to have carefully 
observed or understood how it is that those Christians who have made progress in 
their studies say that they are possessed of greater knowledge than the Jews; 
and also, whether they acknowledge the same Scriptures, but interpret them 
differently, or whether they do not recognise these books as divine. For we find 
both of these views prevailing among the sects. He then continues: "Although 
they have no foundation for the doctrine, let us examine the system itself; and, 
in the first place, let us mention the corruptions which they have made through 
ignorance and misunderstanding, when in the discussion of elementary principles 
they express their opinions in the most absurd manner on things which they do 
not understand, such as the following." And then, to certain expressions which 
are continu ally in the mouths of the believers in Christianity, he opposes 
certain others from the writings of the philosophers, with the object of making 
it appear that the noble sentiments which Celsus supposes to be used by 
Christians have been expressed in better and clearer language by the 
philosophers, in order that he might drag away to the study of philosophy those 
who are caught by opinions which at once evidence their noble and religious 
character. We shall, however, here terminate the fifth book, and begin the sixth 
with what follows. 


