
Origen












Origen. Commentary on John
Book I 
1. HOW CHRISTIANS ARE THE SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 
That people which was called of old the people of God was divided into twelve 
tribes, and over and above the other tribes it had the levitical order, which 
itself again carried on the service of God in various priestly and levitical 
suborders. In the same manner, it appears to me that the whole people of Christ, 
when we regard it in the aspect of the hidden man of the heart, that people 
which is called "Jew inwardly," and is circumcised in the spirit, has in a more 
mystic way the characteristics of the tribes. This may be more plainly gathered 
from John in his Apocalypse, though the other prophets also do not by any means 
conceal the state of matters from those who have the faculty of hearing them. 
John speaks as follows: 
And I saw another angel ascending from the sunrising, having the 
  seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels to 
  whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not either the 
  earth, or the sea, or the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God 
  on their foreheads. And I heard the number of them that were sealed, a hundred 
  and forty-four thousand who were sealed, out of every tribe of the children of 
  lsrael; of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of 
  Roubem twelve thousand. And he mentioned each of the tribes singly, 
with the exception of Dan. Then, some way further on, he continues: 
And I saw, and behold the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with 
  Him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having His name and the name of His 
  Father written on their foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven as the 
  voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder. 
  And the voice which I heard was as the voice of harpers harping with their 
  harps; and they sing a new song before the throne and before the four beasts 
  and the elders, and no one could learn the song but the hundred and forty-four 
  thousand who had been purchased from the earth. These are they which were not 
  defiled with women, for they are virgins. These are they who follow the Lamb 
  wherever He goes. These were purchased from among men, a first fruits to God 
  and to the Lamb; and in their mouth was found no lie, for they are without 
  blemish. Now this is said in John with reference to those who 
have believed in Christ, for they also, even if their bodily descent cannot be 
traced to the seed of the Patriarchs, are yet gathered out of the tribes. That 
this is so we may conclude from what is further said about them: "Hurt not," he 
says, "the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants 
of our God on their foreheads. And I heard the number of them that were sealed, 
a hundred and forty-four thousand, sealed from every tribe of the children of 
Israel." 
2. THE 144,000 SEALED IN THE APOCALYPSE ARE CONVERTS TO CHRIST FROM THE 
GENTILE WORLD. 
These, then, who are sealed on their foreheads from every tribe of the 
children of Israel, are a hundred and forty-four thousand in number; and these 
hundred and forty-four thousand are afterwards said in John to have the name of 
the Lamb and of His Father written on their foreheads, and to be virgins, not 
having defiled themselves with women. What else could the seal be which is on 
their foreheads but the name of the Lamb and the name of His Father? In both 
passages their foreheads are said to have the seal; In one the seal is spoken 
of, in the other it appears to contain the letters forming the name of the Lamb, 
and the name of His Father. Now these taken from the tribes are, as we showed 
before, the same persons as the virgins. But the number of believers is small 
who belong to Israel according to the flesh; one might venture to assert that 
they would not nearly make up the number of a hundred and forty-four thousand. 
It is clear, therefore, that the hundred and forty-four thousand who have not 
defiled themselves with women must be made up of those who have come to the 
divine word out of the Gentile world. In this way the truth of the statement may 
be upheld that the first fruits of each tribe are its virgins. For the passage 
goes on: "These were brought from among men to be a first fruits to God and to 
the Lamb; and in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without blemish." 
The statement about the hundred and forty-four thousand no doubt admits of 
mystical interpretation; But it is unnecessary at this point, and would divert 
us from our purpose, to compare with it those passages of the prophets in which 
the same lesson is taught regarding those who are called from among the 
Gentiles. 
3. IN THE SPIRITUAL ISRAEL THE HIGH PRIESTS ARE THOSE WHO DEVOTE THEMSELVES 
TO THE STUDY OF SCRIPTURE. 
But what is the bearing of all this for us? So you will ask when you read 
these words, Ambrosius, thou who art truly a man of God, a mall in Christ. and 
who seekest to be not a man only, but a spiritual man. The bearing is this. 
Those of the tribes offer to God, through the levites and priests, tithes and 
first fruits; not everything which they possess do they regard as tithe or first 
fruit. The levites and priests, on the other hand, have no possessions but 
tithes and first fruits; yet they also in turn offer tithes to God through the 
high-priests, and, I believe, first fruits too. The same is the case with those 
who approach Christian studies. Most of us devote most of our time to the things 
of this life, and dedicate to God only a few special acts, thus resembling those 
members of the tribes who had but few transactions with the priest, and 
discharged their religious duties with no great expense of time. But those who 
devote themselves to the divine word and have no other employment but the 
service of God may not unnaturally, allowing for the difference of occupation in 
the two cases, be called our levites and priests. And those who fulfil a more 
distinguished office than their kinsmen will perhaps be high-priests, according 
to the order of Aaron, not that of Melchisedek. Here some one may object that it 
is somewhat too bold to apply the name of high-priests to men, when Jesus 
Himself is spoken of in many a prophetic passage as the one great priest, as "We 
have a great high-priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus, the Son of 
God." But to this we reply that the Apostle clearly defined his meaning, and 
declared the prophet to have said about the Christ, "Thou art a priest for ever, 
according to the order of Melchisedek," and not according to the order of Aaron. 
We say accordingly that men can be high-priests according to the order of Aaron, 
but according to the order of Melchisedek only the Christ of God. 
4. THE STUDY OF THE GOSPELS IS THE FIRST FRUITS OFFERED BY THESE PRIESTS OF 
CHRISTIANITY. 
Now our whole activity is devoted to God, and our whole life, since we are 
bent on progress in divine things. If, then, it be our desire to have the whole 
of those first fruits spoken of above which are made up of the many first 
fruits, if we are not mistaken in this view, in what must our first fruits 
consist, after the bodily separation we have undergone from each other, but in 
the study of the Gospel? For we may venture to say that the Gospel is the first 
fruits of all the Scriptures. Where, then, could be the first fruits of our 
activity, since the time when we came to Alexandria, but in the first fruits of 
the Scriptures? It must not he forgotten, however, that the first fruits are not 
the same as the first growth. For the first fruits are offered after all the 
fruits (are ripe), but the first growth before them all. Now of the Scriptures 
which are current and are believed to be divine in all the churches, one would 
not be wrong in saying that the first growth is the law of Moses, but the first 
fruits the Gospel. For it was after all the fruits of the prophets who 
prophesied till the Lord Jesus, that the perfect word shot forth. 
5. ALL SCRIPTURE IS GOSPEL; BUT THE GOSPELS ARE DISTINGUISHED ABOVE OTHER 
SCRIPTURES. 
Here, however, some one may object, appealing to the notion just put forward 
of the unfolding of the first fruits last, and may say that the Acts and the 
letters of the Apostles came after the Gospels, and that this destroys our 
argument to the effect that the Gospel is the first fruits of all Scripture. To 
this we must reply that it is the conviction of men who are wise in Christ, who 
have profited by those epistles which are current, and who see them to be 
vouched for by the testimonies deposited in the law and the prophets, that the 
apostolic writings are to be pronounced wise and worthy of belief, and that they 
have great authority, but that they are not on the same level with that "Thus 
sayeth the Lord Almighty." Consider on this point the language of St. Paul. When 
he declares that "Every Scripture is inspired of God and profitable," does he 
include his own writings? Or does he not include his dictum, "I say, and not the 
Lord," and "So I ordain in all the churches," and "What things I suffered at 
Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra," and similar things which he writes in virtue of 
his own authority, and which do not quite possess the character of words flowing 
from divine inspiration. Must we also show that the old Scripture is not Gospel, 
since it does not point out the Coming One, but only foretells Him and heralds 
His coming at a future time; but that all the new Scripture is the Gospel. It 
not only says as in the beginning of the Gospel, "Behold the Lamb of God, which 
taketh away the sin of the world;" it also contains many praises of Him, and 
many of His teachings, on whose account the Gospel is a Gospel. Again, if God 
set in the Church apostles and prophets and evangelists (gospellers), pastors 
and teachers, we must first enquire what was the office of the evangelist, and 
mark that it is not only to narrate how the Saviour cured a man who was blind 
from his birth, or raised up a dead man who was already stinking, or to state 
what extraordinary works he wrought; and the office of the evangelist being thus 
defined, we shall not hesitate to find Gospel in such discourse also as is not 
narrative but hortatory and intended to strengthen belief in the mission of 
Jesus; and thus we shall arrive at the position that whatever was written by the 
Apostles is Gospel. As to this second definition, it might be objected that the 
Epistles are not entitled "Gospel," and that we are wrong in applying the name 
of Gospel to the whole of the New Testament. But to this we answer that it 
happens not unfrequently in Scripture when two or more persons or things are 
named by the same name, the name attaches itself most significantly to one of 
those things or persons. 
Thus the Saviour says, "Call no man Master upon the earth;" while the Apostle 
says that Masters have been appointed in the Church. These latter accordingly 
will not be Masters in the strict sense of the dictum of the Gospel. In the same 
way the Gospel in the Epistles will not extend to every word of them, when it is 
compared with the narrative of Jesus actions and sufferings and discourses. No: 
the Gospel is the first fruits of all Scripture, and to these first fruits of 
the Scriptures we devote the first fruits of all those actions of ours which we 
trust to see turn out as we desire. 
6. THE FOURFOLD GOSPEL. JOHN'S THE FIRST FRUITS OF THE FOUR. QUALIFICATIONS 
NECESSARY FOR INTERPRETING IT. 
Now the Gospels are four. These four are, as it were, the elements of the 
faith of the Church, out of which elements the whole world which is reconciled 
to God in Christ is put together; as Paul says, "God was in Christ, reconciling 
the world to Himself;" of which world Jesus bore the sin; for it is of the world 
of the Church that the word is written, "Behold the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world." The Gospels then being four, I deem the first fruits 
of the Gospels to be that which you s have enjoined me to search into according 
to my powers, the Gospel of John, that which speaks of him whose genealogy had 
already been set forth, but which begins to speak of him at a point before he 
had any genealogy. For Matthew, writing for the Hebrews who looked for Him who 
was to come of the line of Abraham and of David, says: "The book of the 
generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham." And Mark, 
knowing what he writes, narrates the beginning of the Gospel; we may perhaps 
find what he aims at in John; in the beginning the Word, God the Word. But Luke, 
though he says at the beginning of Acts, "The former treatise did I make about 
all that Jesus began to do and to teach," yet leaves to him who lay on Jesus' 
breast the greatest and completest discourses about Jesus. For none of these 
plainly declared His Godhead, as John does when he makes Him say, "I am the 
light of the world," "I am the way and the truth and the life," "I am the 
resurrection, "I am the door," "I am the good shepherd;" and in the Apocalypse, 
"I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the 
last." We may therefore make bold to say that the Gospels are the first fruits 
of all the Scriptures, but that of the Gospels that of John is the first fruits. 
No one can apprehend the meaning of it except he have lain on Jesus' breast and 
received from Jesus Mary to be his mother also. Such an one must he become who 
is to be another John, and to have shown to him, like John, by Jesus Himself 
Jesus as He is. For if Mary, as those declare who with sound mind extol her, had 
no other son but Jesus, and yet Jesus says to His mother, "Woman, behold thy 
son," and not "Behold you have this son also," then He virtually said to her, 
"Lo, this is Jesus, whom thou didst bear." Is it not the case that every one who 
is perfect lives himself no longer, but Christ lives in him; and if Christ lives 
in him, then it is said of him to Mary, "Behold thy son Christ." What a mind, 
then, must we have to enable us to interpret in a worthy manner this work, 
though it be committed to the earthly treasure-house of common speech, of 
writing which any passer-by can read, and which can be heard when read aloud by 
any one who lends to it his bodily ears? What shall we say of this work? He who 
is accurately to apprehend what it contains should be able to say with truth, 
"We have the mind of Christ, that we may know those things which are bestowed on 
us by God." It is possible to quote one of Paul's sayings in support of the 
contention that the whole of the New Testament is Gospel. He writes in a certain 
place: "According to my Gospel." Now we have no written work of Paul which is 
commonly called a Gospel. But all that he preached and said was the Gospel; and 
what he preached and said he was also in the habit of writing, and what he wrote 
was therefore Gospel. But if what Paul wrote was Gospel, it follows that what 
Peter wrote was also Gospel, and in a word all that was said or written to 
perpetuate the knowledge of Christ's sojourn on earth, and to prepare for His 
second coming, or to bring it about as a present reality in those souls which 
were willing to receive the Word of God as He stood at the door and knocked and 
sought to come into them. 
7. WHAT GOOD THINGS ARE ANNOUNCED IN THE GOSPELS. 
But it is time we should inquire what is the meaning of the designation 
"Gospel," and why these books have this title. Now the Gospel is a discourse 
containing a promise of things which naturally, and on account of the benefits 
they bring, rejoice the hearer as soon as the promise is heard and believed. Nor 
is such a discourse any the less a Gospel that we define it with reference to 
the position of the hearer. A Gospel is either a word which implies the actual 
presence to the believer of something that is good, or a word promising the 
arrival of a good which is expected. Now all these definitions apply to those 
books which are named Gospels. For each of the Gospels is a collection of 
announcements which are useful to him who believes them and does not 
misinterpret them; it brings him a benefit and naturally makes him glad because 
it tells of the sojourn with men, on account of men, and for their salvation, of 
the first-born of all creation, Christ Jesus. And again each Gospel tells of the 
sojourn of the good Father in the Son with those minded to receive Him, as is 
plain to every believer; and moreover by these books a good is announced which 
had been formerly expected, as is by no means hard to see. For John the Baptist 
spoke in the name almost of the whole people when he sent to Jesus and asked, 
"Art thou He that should come or do we look for another?" For to the people the 
Messiah was an expected good, which the prophets had foretold, and they all 
alike, though under the law and the prophets, fixed their hopes on Him, as the 
Samaritan woman bears witness when she says: "I know that the Messiah comes, who 
is called Christ; when He comes He will tell us all things." Simon and Cleopas 
too, when talking to each other about all that had happened to Jesus Christ 
Himself, then risen, though they did not know that He had risen, from the dead, 
speak thus, "Dost thou sojourn alone in Jerusalem, and knowest not the things 
which have taken place there in these days? And when he said what things? they 
answered, The things concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet, mighty 
in deed and in word before God and all the people, and how the chief priests and 
our rulers delivered Him up to be sentenced to death and crucified Him. But we 
hoped that it was He which should redeem Israel." Again, Andrew the brother of 
Simon Peter found his own brother Simon and said to him, "We have found the 
Messiah, which is, being interpreted, Christ." And a little further on Philip 
finds Nathanael and says to him, "We have found Him of whom Moses in the law, 
and the prophets, wrote, Jesus the son of Joseph, from Nazareth." 
8. HOW THE GOSPELS CAUSE THE OTHER BOOKS OF SCRIPTURE ALSO TO BE GOSPEL. 
Now an objection might be raised to our first definition, because it would 
embrace books which are not entitled Gospels. For the law and the prophets also 
are to our eyes books containing the promise of things which, from the benefit 
they will confer on him, naturally rejoice the hearer as soon as he takes in the 
message. To this it may be said that before the sojourn of Christ, the law and 
the prophets, since He had not come who interpreted the mysteries they 
contained, did not convey such a promise as belongs to our definition of the 
Gospel; but the Saviour, when He sojourned with men and caused the Gospel to 
appear in bodily form, by the Gospel caused all things to appear as Gospel. Here 
I would not think it beside the purpose to quote the example of Him who . . . a 
few things . . . and yet all. For when he had taken away the veil which was 
present in the law and the prophets, and by His divinity had proved the sons of 
men that the Godhead was at work, He opened the way for all those who desired it 
to be disciples of His wisdom, and to understand what things were true and real 
in the law of Moses, of which things those of old worshipped the type and the 
shadow, and what things were real of the things narrated in the histories which 
"happened to them in the way of type," but these things "were written for our 
sakes, upon whom the ends of the ages have come." With whomsoever, then, Christ 
has sojourned, he worships God neither at Jerusalem nor on the mountain of the 
Samaritans; he knows that God is a spirit, and worships Him spiritually, in 
spirit and in truth; no longer by type does he worship the Father and Maker of 
all. Before that Gospel, therefore, which came into being by the sojourning of 
Christ, none of the older works was a Gospel. But the Gospel, which is the new 
covenant, having delivered us from the oldness of the letter, lights up for us, 
by the light of knowledge, the newness of the spirit, a thing which never grows 
old, which has its home in the New Testament, but is also present in all the 
Scriptures. It was fitting, therefore, that that Gospel, which enables us to 
find the Gospel present, even in the Old Testament, should itself receive, in a 
special sense, the name of Gospel. 
9. THE SOMATIC AND THE SPIRITUAL GOSPEL. 
We must not, however, forget that the sojourning of Christ with men took 
place before His bodily sojourn, in an intellectual fashion, to those who were 
more perfect and not children, and were not under pedagogues and governors. In 
their minds they saw the fulness of the time to be at hand--the patriarchs, and 
Moses the servant, and the prophets who beheld the glory of Christ. And as 
before His manifest and bodily coming He came to those who were perfect, so 
also, after His coming has been announced to all, to those who are still 
children, since they are under pedagogues and governors and have not yet arrived 
at the fulness of the time, forerunners of Christ have come to sojourn, 
discourses (logoi) suited for minds still in their childhood, and rightly, 
therefore, termed pedagogues. But the Son Himself, the glorified God, the Word, 
has not yet come; He waits for the preparation which must take place on the part 
of men of God who are to admit His deity. And this, too, we must bear in mind, 
that as the law contains a shadow of good things to come, which are indicated by 
that law which is announced according to truth, so the Gospel also teaches a 
shadow of the mysteries of Christ, the Gospel which is thought to be capable of 
being understood by any one. What John calls the eternal Gospel, and what may 
properly be called the spiritual Gospel, presents clearly to those who have the 
will to understand, all matters concerning the very Son of God, both the 
mysteries presented by His discourses and those matters of which His acts were 
the enigmas. In accordance with this we may conclude that, as it is with Him who 
is a Jew outwardly and circumcised in the flesh, so it is with the Christian and 
with baptism. Paul and Peter were, at an earlier period, Jews outwardly and 
circumcised, but later they received from Christ that they should be so in 
secret, too; so that outwardly they were Jews for the sake of the salvation of 
many, and by an economy they not only confessed in words that they were Jews, 
but showed it by their actions. And the same is to be said about their 
Christianity. As Paul could not benefit those who were Jews according to the 
flesh, without, when reason shows it to be necessary, circumcising Timothy, and 
when it appears the natural course getting himself shaved and making a vow, and, 
in a word, being to the Jews a Jew that he might gain the Jews--so also it is 
not possible for one who is responsible for the good of many to operate as he 
should by means of that Christianity only which is in secret. That will never 
enable him to improve those who are following the external Christianity, or to 
lead them on to better and higher things. We must, therefore, be Christians both 
somatically and spiritually, and where there is a call for the somatic (bodily) 
Gospel, in which a man says to those who are carnal that he knows nothing but 
Jesus Christ and Him crucified, so we must do. But should we find those who are 
perfected in the spirit, and bear fruit in it, and are enamoured of the heavenly 
wisdom, these must he made to partake of that Word which, after it was made 
flesh, rose again to what it was in the beginning, with God. 
10. HOW JESUS HIMSELF IS THE GOSPEL. 
The foregoing inquiry into the nature of the Gospel cannot be regarded as 
useless; it has enabled us to see what distinction there is between a sensible 
Gospel and all intellectual and spiritual one. What we have now to do is to 
transform the sensible Gospel into a spiritual one. For what would the narrative 
of the sensible Gospel amount to if it were not developed to a spiritual one? It 
would be of little account or none; any one can read it and assure himself of 
the facts it tells--no more. But our whole energy is now to be directed to the 
effort to penetrate to the deep things of the meaning of the Gospel and to 
search out the truth that is ill it when divested of types. 
Now what the Gospels say is to be regarded in the light of promises of good 
things; and we must say that the good things the Apostles announce in this 
Gospel are simply Jesus. one good thing which they are said to announce is the 
resurrection; but the resurrection is in a manner Jesus, for Jesus says: "I am 
the resurrection." Jesus preaches to the poor those things which are laid up for 
the saints, calling them to the divine promises. And the holy Scriptures bear 
witness to the Gospel announcements made by the Apostles and to that made by our 
Saviour. David says of the Apostles, perhaps also of the evangelists: "The Lord 
shall give the word to those that preach with great power; the King of the 
powers of the beloved;" teaching at the same time that it is not skilfully 
composed discourse, nor the mode of delivery, nor well practised eloquence that 
produces conviction, but the communication of divine power. Hence also Paul 
says: "I will know not the word that is puffed up, but the power; for the 
kingdom of God is not in word but in power." And in another passage: "And my 
word and my preaching were not persuasive words of wisdom, but in demonstration 
of the spirit and of power." To this power Simon and Cleophas bear witness when 
they say: "Was not our heart burning within us by the way, as he opened to us 
the Scriptures?" And the Apostles, since the quantity of the power is great 
which God supplies to the speakers, had great power, according to the word of 
David: "The Lord will give the word to the preachers with great power." Isaiah 
too says: "How beautiful are the feet of them that proclaim good tidings;" he 
sees how beautiful and how opportune was the announcement of the Apostles who 
walked in Him who said, "I am the way," and praises the feet of those who walk 
in the intellectual way of Christ Jesus, and through that door go in to God. 
They announce good tidings, those whose feet are beautiful, namely, Jesus. 
11. JESUS IS ALL GOOD THINGS; HENCE THE GOSPEL IS MANIFOLD. 
Let no one wonder if we have understood Jesus to be announced in the Gospel 
under a plurality of names of good things. If we look at the things by the names 
of which the Son of God is called, we shall understand how many good things 
Jesus is, whom those preach whose feet are beautiful. One good thing is life; 
but Jesus is the life. Another good thing is the light of the world, when it is 
true light, and the light of men; and all these things the Son of God is said to 
be. And another good thing which one may conceive to be in addition to life or 
light is the truth. And a fourth in addition to time is the way which leads to 
the truth. And all these things our Saviour teaches that He is, when He says: "I 
am the way and the truth and the life." Ah, is not that good, to shake off earth 
and mortality, and to rise again, obtaining this boon from the Lord, since He is 
the resurrection, as He says: "I am the resurrection." But the door also is a 
good, through which one enters into the highest blessedness. Now Christ says: "I 
am the door." And what need is there to speak of wisdom, which "the Lord created 
the first principle of His ways, for His works," in whom the father of her 
rejoiced. delighting in her manifold intellectual beauty, seen by the eyes of 
the mind alone, and provoking him to love who discerns her divine and heavenly 
charm? A good indeed is the wisdom of God, proclaimed along with the other good 
foresaid by those whose feet are beautiful. And the power of God is the eighth 
good we enumerate, which is Christ. Nor must we omit to mention the Word, who is 
God after the Father of all. For this also is a good, less than no other. Happy, 
then, are those who accept these goods and receive them from those who announce 
the good tidings of them, those whose feet are beautiful. Indeed even one of the 
Corinthians to whom Paul declared that he knew nothing but Jesus Christ and Him 
crucified, should he learn Him who for our sakes became man, and so receive Him, 
he would become identified with the beginning of the good things we have spoken 
of; by the man Jesus he would be made a man of God, and by His death he would 
die to sin. For "Christ, in that He died, died unto sin once." But from His 
life, since "in that He liveth, He liveth unto God," every one who is conformed 
to His resurrection receives that living to God. 
But who will deny that righteousness, essential righteousness, is a good, and 
essential sanctification, and essential redemption? And these things those 
preach who preach Jesus, saying that He is made to be of God righteousness and 
sanctification and redemption. Hence we shall have writings about Him without 
number, showing that Jesus is a multitude of goods; for from the things which 
can scarcely be numbered and which have been written we may make some conjecture 
of those things which actually exist in Him in whom "it pleased God that the 
whole fulness of the Godhead should dwell bodily." and which are not contained 
in writings. Why should I say, "are not contained in writings"? For John speaks 
of the whole world in this connection, and says: "I suppose that not even the 
world itself would contain the books which would be written." Now to say that 
the Apostles preach the Saviour is to say that they preach these good things. 
For this is He who received from the good Father that He Himself should be these 
good things, so that each man receiving from Jesus the thing or things he is 
capable of receiving may enjoy good things. But the Apostles, whose feet were 
beautiful, and those imitators of them who sought to preach the good tidings, 
could not have done so had not Jesus Himself first preached the good tidings to 
them, as Isaiah says: "I myself that speak am here, as the opportunity on the 
mountains, as the feet of one preaching tidings of peace, as one preaching good 
things; for I will make My salvation to be heard, saying, God shall reign over 
thee, O Zion!" For what are the mountains on which the speaker declares that He 
Himself is present, but those who are less than none of the highest and the 
greatest of the earth? 
And these must be sought by the able ministers of the New Covenant, in order 
that they may observe the injunction which says: Go up into a high mountain, 
thou that preachest good tidings to Zion; thou that preachest good tidings to 
Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with strength!" Now it is not wonderful if to those 
who are to preach good tidings Jesus Himself preaches good tidings of good 
things, which are no other than Himself; for the Son of God preaches the good 
tidings of Himself to those who cannot come to know Him through others. And He 
who goes up into the mountains and preaches good things to them, being Himself 
instructed by His good Father, who "makes His sun to rise on the evil and on the 
good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust," He does not despise those 
who are poor in soul. To them He preaches good tidings, as He Himself bears 
witness to us when He takes Isaiah and reads: "The spirit of the Lord is upon 
me, for the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor, He hath 
sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives, and sight to the blind. For closing 
the book He handed it to the minister and sat down. And when the eyes of all 
were fastened upon Him, He said, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your 
ears." 
12. THE GOSPEL CONTAINS THE ILL DEEDS ALSO WHICH WERE DONE TO JESUS. 
It ought not to be forgotten that in such a Gospel as this there is embraced 
every good deed which was done to Jesus; as, for example, the story of the woman 
who had been a stalker and had repented, and who, having experienced a genuine 
recovery from her evil state, had grace to pour her ointment over Jesus so that 
every one in the house smelt the sweet savour. Hence, too, the words, "Wherever 
this Gospel shall be preached among all the nations, there also this that she 
has done shall be spoken of, for a memorial of her." And it is clear that 
whatever is done to the disciples of Jesus is done to Him. Pointing to those of 
them who met with kind treatment, He says to those who were kind to them? "What 
ye did to these, ye did to Me." So that every good deed we do to our neighbours 
is entered ill the Gospel, that Gospel which is written on the heavenly tablets 
and read by all who are worthy of the knowledge of the whole of things. But on 
the other side, too, there is a part of the Gospel which is for the condemnation 
of the doers of the ill deeds which have been done to Jesus. The treachery of 
Judas and the shouts of the wicked crowd when it said, "Away with such a one 
from the earth," and "Crucify Him, crucify Him," the mockings of those who 
crowned Him with thorns, and everything of that kind, is included ill the 
Gospels. And as a consequence of this we see that every one who betrays the 
disciples of Jesus is reckoned as betraying Jesus Himself. To Saul, when still a 
persecutor it is said, "Saul Saul, why persecutest thou Me?" and, "I am Jesus 
whom thou persecutest." There are those who still have thorns with which they 
crown and dishonour Jesus, those, namely, who are choked by the cares, and 
riches, and pleasures of life, and though they have received the word of God, do 
not bring it to perfection. We must beware, therefore, lest we also, as crowning 
Jesus with thorns of our own, should be entered in the Gospel and read of in 
this character by those who learn the Jesus, who is in all and is present in all 
rational and holy lives, learn how He is anointed with ointment, is entertained, 
is glorified, or how, on the other side, He is dishonoured, and mocked, and 
beaten. All this had to be said; it is part of our demonstration that our good 
actions, and also the sins of those who stumble, are embodied in the Gospel, 
either to everlasting life or to reproach and everlasting shame. 
13. THE ANGELS ALSO ARE EVANGELISTS. 
Now if there are those among men who are honoured with the ministry of 
evangelists, and if Jesus Himself brings tidings of good things, and preaches 
the Gospel to the poor, surely those messengers who were made spirits by God, 
those who are a flame of fire, ministers of the Father of all, cannot have been 
excluded from being evangelists also. Hence an angel standing over the shepherds 
made a bright light to shine round about them, and said: "Fear not; behold I 
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all tile people; for 
there is born to you, this day, a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord, in the city 
of David." And at a time when there was no knowledge among men of the mystery of 
the Gospel, those who were greater than men and inhabitants of heaven, the army 
of God, praised God, saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, 
good will among men." And having said this, the angels go away from the 
shepherds into heaven, leaving us to gather how the joy preached to us through 
the birth of Jesus Christ is glory in the highest to God; they humbled 
themselves even to the ground, and then returned to their place of rest, to 
glorify God in the highest through Jesus Christ. But the angels also wonder at 
the peace which is to be brought about on account of Jesus on the earth, that 
seat of war, on which Lucifer, star of the morning, fell from heaven, to be 
warred against and destroyed by Jesus. 
14. THE OLD TESTAMENT, TYPIFIED BY JOHN, IS THE BEGINNING OF THE GOSPEL. 
In addition to what we have said, there is also this to be considered about 
the Gospel, that in the first instance it is that of Christ Jesus, the head of 
the whole body of the saved; as Mark says, "The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ." Then also it is the Gospel of the Apostles; whence Paul says, 
"According to my Gospel." But the beginning of the Gospel--for in respect of its 
extent it has a beginning, a continuation, a middle, and an end--is nothing but 
the whole Old Testament. John is, in this respect, a type of the Old Testament, 
or, if we regard the connection of the New Testament with the Old, John 
represents the termination of the Old. For the same Mark says: "The beginning of 
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is written in Isaiah the prophet, Behold I 
send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way. The voice of one 
crying m the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths 
straight." And here I must wonder how the dissentients can connect the two 
Testaments with two different Gods. These words, were there no others, are 
enough to convict them of their error. For how can John be the beginning of the 
Gospel if they suppose he belongs to a different God, if he belongs to the 
demiurge, and, as they hold, is not acquainted with the new deity? And the 
angels are not entrusted with but one evangelical ministry, and that a short 
one, not only with that addressed to the shepherds. For at the end an exalted 
and flying angel, having the Gospel, will preach it to every nation, for the 
good Father has not entirely deserted those who have fallen away from Him. John, 
son of Zebedee, says in his Apocalypse: "And I saw an angel flying in the midst 
of heaven, having the Eternal Gospel, to preach it to those who dwell upon the 
earth, and to every nation, and tribe, and tongue, and people, saying, with a 
loud voice, Fear God and give Him glory, for the hour of His judgment hath come, 
and worship Him that made the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and the 
fountains of waters." 
15. THE GOSPEL IS IN THE OLD TESTAMENT, AND INDEED IN THE WHOLE UNIVERSE. 
PRAYER FOR AID TO UNDERSTAND THE MYSTICAL SENSE OF THE WORK IN HAND. 
As, then, we have shown that the beginning of the Gospel, according to one 
interpretation, is the whole Old Testament, and is signified by the person of 
John, we shall add, lest this should be called a mere unsupported assertion, 
what is said in the Acts about the eunuch of the queen of the Ethiopians and 
Philip. Philip, it is said, began at the passage of Isaiah: "He was led as a 
lamb to the slaughter, and as a lamb before his shearer is dumb," and so 
preached to him the Lord Jesus. How can he begin with the prophet and preach 
Jesus, if Isaiah was not a part of the beginning of the Gospel? From this we may 
derive a proof of the assertion made at the outset, that every divine Scripture 
is Gospel. If he who preaches the Gospel preaches good things, and all those who 
spoke before the sojourn of Jesus in the flesh preach Christ, who is as we saw 
good things, then the words spoken by all of them alike are in a sense a part of 
the Gospel. And when the Gospel is said to be declared throughout the whole 
world, we infer that it is actually preached in the whole world, not, that is to 
say, in this earthly district only, but in the whole system of heaven and earth, 
or from heaven and earth. And why should we discuss any further what the Gospel 
is? What we have said is enough. Besides the passages we have adduced,passages 
by no means inept or unsuited for our purpose,--much to the same effect might be 
collected from the Scriptures, so that it is clearly seen what is the glory of 
the good things in Jesus Christ shed forth by the Gospel, the Gospel ministered 
by men and angels, and, I believe, also by authorities and powers, and thrones 
and dominions, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in 
the world to come, and indeed even by Christ Himself. Here, then, let us bring 
to a close what has to be said before proceeding to read the work itself. And 
now let us ask God to assist us through Jesus Christ by the Holy Spirit, so that 
we may be able to unfold the mystical sense which is treasured up in the words 
before us. 
16. MEANING OF "BEGINNING." IN SPACE. 
"In the beginning was the Word." It is not only the Greeks who consider the 
word "beginning" to have many meanings. Let any one collect the Scripture 
passages in which the word occurs, and with a view to an accurate interpretation 
of it note what it stands for in each passage, and he will find that the word 
has many meanings in sacred discourse also. We speak of a beginning in reference 
to a transition. Here it has to do with a road and with length. This appears in 
the saying: "The beginning of a good way is to do justice." For since the good 
way is long, there have first to be considered in reference to it the question 
connected with action, and this side is presented in the words "to do justice;" 
the contemplative side comes up for consideration afterwards. In the latter the 
end of it comes to rest at last in the so-called restoration of all things, 
since no enemy is left them to fight against, if that be true which is said: 
"For He must reign until He have placed His enemies under His feet. But the last 
enemy to be destroyed is death." For then but one activity will be left for 
those who have come to God on account of His word which is with Him, that, 
namely, of knowing God, so that, being found by the knowledge of the Father, 
they may all be His Son, as now no one but the Son knows the Father. For should 
any one enquire carefully at what time those are to know the Father to whom He 
who knows the Father reveals Him, and should he consider how a man now sees only 
through a glass and in a riddle, never having learned to know as he ought to 
know, he would be justified in saying that no one, no apostle even, and no 
prophet had known the Father, but when he became one with Him as a son and a 
father are one. And if any one says that it is a digression which has led us to 
this point, our consideration of that one meaning of the word beginning, we must 
show that the digression is necessary and useful for the end we have in view. 
For if we speak of a beginning in the case of a transition, and of a way and its 
length, and if we are told that the beginning of a good way is to do justice, 
then it concerns us to know in what manner every good way has for its beginning 
to do justice, and how after such beginning it arrives at contemplation, and in 
what manner it thus arrives at contemplation. 
17. IN TIME. THE BEGINNING OF CREATION. 
Again, there is a beginning in a matter of origin, as might appear in the 
saying: "In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth." This meaning, 
however, appears more plainly in the Book of Job in the passage: "This is the 
beginning of God's creation, made for His angels to mock at." One would suppose 
that the heavens and the earth were made first, of all that was made at the 
creation of the world. But the second passage suggests a better view, namely, 
that as many beings were framed with a body, the first made of these was the 
creature called dragon, but called in another passage the great whale 
(leviathan) which the Lord tamed. We must ask about this; whether, when the 
saints were living a blessed life apart from matter and from any body, the 
dragon, falling from the pure life, became fit to be bound in matter and in a 
body, so that the Lord could say, speaking through storm and clouds, "This is 
the beginning of the creation of God, made for His angels to mock at." It is 
possible, however, that the dragon is not positively the beginning of the 
creation of the Lord, but that there were many creatures made with a body for 
the angels to mock at, and that the dragon was the first of these, while others 
could subsist in a body without such reproach. But it is not so. For the soul of 
the sun is placed in a body, and the whole creation, of which the Apostle says: 
"The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now," and 
perhaps the following is about the same: "The creation was made subject to 
vanity, not willingly, but on account of Him who subjected it for hope;" so that 
bodies might be in vanity, and doing the things of the body, as he who is in the 
body must . . . . One who is in the body does the things of the body, though 
unwillingly. Wherefore the creation was made subject to vanity, not willingly, 
but he who does unwillingly the things of the body does what he does for the 
sake of hope, as if we should say that Paul desired to remain in the flesh, not 
willingly, but on account of hope. For though he thought it better to be 
dissolved and to be with Christ, it was not unreasonable that he should wish to 
remain in the flesh for the sake of the benefit to others and of advancement in 
the things hoped for, not only by him, but also by those benefited by him. This 
meaning of the term" beginning," as of origin, will serve us also in the passage 
in which Wisdom speaks in the Proverbs. "God," we read, "created me the 
beginning of His ways, for His works." Here the term could be interpreted as in 
the first application we spoke of, that of a way: "The Lord," it says, "created 
me the beginning of His ways." One might assert, and with reason, that God 
Himself is the beginning of all things, and might go on to say, as is plain, 
that the Father is the beginning of the Son; and the demiurge the beginning of 
the works of the demiurge, and that God in a word is the beginning of all that 
exists. This view is supported by our: "In the beginning was the Word." In the 
Word one may see the Son, and because He is in the Father He may be said to be 
in the beginning. 
18. OF SUBSTANCE. 
In the third place a beginning may be that out of which a thing comes, the 
underlying matter from which things are formed. This, however, is the view of 
those who hold matter itself to be uncreated, a view which we believers cannot 
share, since we believe God to have made the things that are out of the things 
which are not, as the mother of the seven martyrs in the Maccabees teaches, and 
as the angel of repentance in the Shepherd inculcated. 
19. OF TYPE AND COPY. 
In addition to these meanings there is that in which we speak of an arche, 
according to form; thus if the first-born of every creature is the image of the 
invisible God, then the Father is his arche. In the same way Christ is the arche 
of those who are made according to the image of God. For if men are according to 
the image, but the image according to the Father; in the first case the Father 
is the arche of Christ, and in the other Christ is the arche of men, and men are 
made, not according to that of which he is the image, but according to the 
image. With this example our passage will agree: "In the arche was the Word." 
20. OF ELEMENTS AND WHAT IS FORMED FROM THEM. 
There is also an arche in a matter of learning, as when we say that the 
letters are the arche of grammar. The Apostle accordingly says: "When by reason 
of the time you ought to be teachers, you have need again that some one teach 
you what are the elements of the arche of the oracles of God." Now the arche 
spoken of in connection with learning is twofold; first in respect of its 
nature, secondly in its relation to us; as we might say of Christ, that by 
nature His arche is deity, but that in relation to us who cannot, for its very 
greatness, command the whole truth about Him, His arche is His manhood, as He is 
preached to babes, "Jesus Christ and Him crucified." In this view, then, Christ 
is the arche of learning in His own nature, because He is the wisdom and power 
of God; but for us, the Word was made flesh, that He might tabernacle among us 
who could only thus at first receive Him. And perhaps this is the reason why He 
is not only the firstborn of all creation, but is also designated the man, Adam. 
For Paul says He is Adam: "The last Adam was made a life-giving spirit." 
21. OF DESIGN AND EXECUTION. 
Again we speak of the arche of an action, in which there is a design which 
appears after the beginning. It may be considered whether wisdom is to be 
regarded as the arche of the works of God because it is in this way the 
principle of them. 
22. THE WORD WAS IN THE BEGINNING, I.E., IN WISDOM, WHICH CONTAINED ALL 
THINGS. IN IDEA, BEFORE THEY EXISTED. CHRIST'S CHARACTER AS WISDOM IS PRIOR TO 
HIS OTHER CHARACTERS. 
So many meanings occur to us at once of the word arche. We have now to ask 
which of them we should adopt for our text, "In the beginning was the Word." It 
is plain that we may at once dismiss the meaning which connects it with 
transition or with a road and its length. Nor, it is pretty plain, will the 
meaning connected with an origin serve our purpose. One might, however, think of 
the sense in which it points to the author, to that which brings about the 
effect, if, as we read, "God commanded and they were created." For Christ is, in 
a manner, the demiurge, to whom the Father says, "Let there be light," and "Let 
there be a firmament." But Christ is demiurge as a beginning (arche), inasmuch 
as He is wisdom. It is in virtue of His being wisdom that He is called arche. 
For Wisdom says in Solomon: "God created me the beginning of His ways, for His 
works," so that the Word might be in an arche, namely, in wisdom. Considered in 
relation to the structure of contemplation and thoughts about the whole of 
things, it is regarded as wisdom; but in relation to that side of the objects of 
thought, in which reasonable beings apprehend them, it is considered as the 
Word. And there is no wonder, since, as we have said before, the Saviour is many 
good things, if He comprises in Himself thoughts of the first order, and of the 
second, and of the third. This is what John suggested when he said about the 
Word: "That which was made was life in Him." Life then came in the Word. And on 
the one side the Word is no other than the Christ, the Word, He who was with the 
Father, by whom all things were made; while, on the other side, the Life is no 
other than the Son of God, who says: "I am the way and the truth and the life." 
As, then, life came into being in the Word, so the Word in the arche. Consider, 
however, if we are at liberty to take this meaning of arche for our text: "In 
the beginning was the Word," so as to obtain the meaning that all things came 
into being according to wisdom and according to the models of the system which 
are present in his thoughts. For I consider that as a house or a ship is built 
and fashioned in accordance with the sketches of the builder or designer, the 
house or the ship having their beginning (arche) in the sketches and reckonings 
in his mind, so all things came into being in accordance with the designs of 
what was to be, clearly laid down by God in wisdom. And we should add that 
having created, so to speak, ensouled wisdom, He left her to hand over, from the 
types which were in her, to things existing and to matter, the actual emergence 
of them, their moulding and their forms. But I consider, if it be permitted to 
say this, that the beginning (arche) of real existence was the Son of God, 
saying: "I am the beginning and the end, the Alpha and the Omega, the first and 
the last." We must, however, remember that He is not the arche in respect of 
every name which is applied to Him. For how can He be the beginning in respect 
of His being life, when life came in the Word, and the Word is manifestly the 
arche of life? It is also tolerably evident that He cannot be the arche in 
respect of His being the first-born from the dead. And if we go through all His 
titles carefully we find that He is the arche only in respect of His being 
wisdom. Not even as the Word is He the arche, for the Word was in the arche. And 
so one might venture to say that wisdom is anterior to all the thoughts that are 
expressed in the titles of the first-born of every creature. Now God is 
altogether one and simple; but our Saviour, for many reasons, since God set Him 
forth a propitiation and a first fruits of the whole creation, is made many 
things, or perhaps all these things; the whole creation, so far as capable of 
redemption, stands in need of Him. And, hence, He is made the light of men, 
because men, being darkened by wickedness, need the light that shines in 
darkness, and is not overtaken by the darkness; had not men been in darkness, He 
would not have become the light of men. The same thing may be observed in 
respect of His being the first-born of the dead. For supposing the woman had not 
been deceived, and Adam had not fallen, and man created for incorruption had 
obtained it, then He would not have descended into the grave, nor would He have 
died, there being no sin, nor would His love of men have required that He should 
die, and if He had not died, He could not have been the first-born of the dead. 
We may also ask whether He would ever have become a shepherd, had man not been 
thrown together with the beasts which are devoid of reason, and made like to 
them. For if God saves man and beasts, He saves those beasts which He does save, 
by giving them a shepherd, since they cannot have a king. Thus if we collect the 
titles of Jesus, the question arises which of them were conferred on Him later, 
and would never have assumed such importance if the saints had begun and had 
also persevered in blessedness. Perhaps Wisdom would be the only remaining one, 
or perhaps the Word would remain too, or perhaps the Life, or perhaps the Truth, 
not the others, which He took for our sake. And happy indeed are those who in 
their need for the Son of God have yet become such persons as not to need Him in 
His character as a physician healing the sick, nor in that of a shepherd, nor in 
that of redemption, but only in His characters as wisdom, as the word and 
righteousness, or if there be any other title suitable for those who are so 
perfect as to receive Him in His fairest characters. So much for the phrase "In 
the beginning." 
23. THE TITLE "WORD" IS TO BE INTERPRETED BY THE SAME METHOD AS THE OTHER. 
TITLES OF CHRIST. THE WORD OF GOD IS NOT A MERE ATTRIBUTE OF GOD, BUT A SEPARATE 
PERSON. WHAT IS MEANT WHEN HE IS CALLED THE WORD. 
Let us consider, however, a little more carefully what is the Word which is 
in the beginning. I am often led to wonder when I consider the things that are 
said about Christ, even by those who are in earnest in their belief in Him. 
Though there is a countless number of names which can be applied to our Saviour, 
they omit the most of them, and if they should remember them, they declare that 
these titles are not to be understood in their proper sense, but tropically. But 
when they come to the title Logos (Word), and repeat that Christ alone is the 
Word of God, they are not consistent, and do not, as in the case of the other 
titles, search out what is behind the meaning of the term "Word." I wonder at 
the stupidity of the general run of Christians in this matter. I do not mince 
matters; it is nothing but stupidity. The Son of God says in one passage, "I am 
the light of the world," and in another, "I am the resurrection," and again, "I 
am the way and the truth and the life." It is also written, "I am the door," and 
we have the saying, "I am the good shepherd," and when the woman of Samaria 
says, "We know the Messiah is coming, who is called Christ; when He comes, He 
will tell us all things," Jesus answers, "I that speak unto thee am He." Again, 
when He washed the disciples' feet, He declared Himself in these words to be 
their Master and Lord: "You call Me Master and Lord, and you say well, for so I 
am." He also distinctly announces Himself as the Son of God, when He says, "He 
whom the Father sanctified and sent unto the world, to Him do you say, Thou 
blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God?" and "Father, the hour is 
come; glorify Thy Son, that the Son also may glorify Thee." We also find Him 
declaring Himself to be a king, as when He answers Pilate's question, "Art Thou 
the King of the Jews?" by saying, "My kingdom is not of this world; if My 
kingdom were of this world, then would My servants fight, that I should not be 
delivered to the Jews, but now is My kingdom not from hence." We have also read 
the words, "I am the true vine and My Father is the husbandman," and again, "I 
am the vine, ye are the branches." Add to these testimonies also the saying, "I 
am the bread of life, that came down from heaven and giveth life to the world." 
These texts will suffice for the present, which we have picked up out of the 
storehouse of the Gospels, and in all of which He claims to be the Son of God. 
But in the Apocalypse of John, too, He says, "I am the first and the last, and 
the living One, and I was dead. Behold, I am alive for evermore." And again, "I 
am the Alpha and the Omega, and the first and the last, the beginning and the 
end." The careful student of the sacred books, moreover, may gather not a few 
similar passages from the prophets, as where He calls Himself a chosen shaft, 
and a servant of God, and a light of the Gentiles. Isaiah also says," "From my 
mother's womb hath He called me by my name, and He made my mouth as a sharp 
sword, and under the shadow of His hand did He hide me, and He said to me, Thou 
art My servant, O Israel, and in thee will I be glorified." And a little farther 
on: "And my God shall be my strength, and He said to me, This is a great thing 
for thee to be called My servant, to set up the tribes of Jacob and to turn 
again the diaspora of Israel. Behold I have set thee for a light of the 
Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation to the end of the earth." And in 
Jeremiah too He likens Himself to a lamb, as thus: "I was as a gentle lamb that 
is led to the slaughter." These and other similar sayings He applies to Himself. 
In addition to these one might collect in the Gospels and the Apostles and in 
the prophets a countless number of titles which are applied to the Son of God, 
as the writers of the Gospels set forth their own views of what He is, or the 
Apostles extol Him out of what they had learned, or the prophets proclaim in 
advance His coining advent and announce the things concerning Him under various 
names. Thus John calls Him the Lamb of God, saying, "Behold the Lamb of God 
which taketh away the sins of the world," and in these words he declares Him as 
a man, "This is He about whom I said, that there cometh after me a man who is 
there before me; for He was before me." And in his Catholic Epistle John says 
that He is a Paraclete for our souls with the Father, as thus: "And if any one 
sin, we have a Paraclete with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous," and he 
adds that He is a propitiation for our sins, and similarly Paul says He is a 
propitiation: "Whom God set forth as a propitiation through faith in His blood, 
on account of forgiveness of the forepast sins, in the forbearance of God." 
According to Paul, too, He is declared to be the wisdom and the power of God, as 
in the Epistle to the Corinthians: "Christ the power of God and the wisdom of 
God." It is added that He is also sanctification and redemption: "He was made to 
us of God," he says, "wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and 
redemption." But he also teaches us, writing to the Hebrews, that Christ is a 
High-Priest: "Having, therefore, a great High-Priest, who has passed through the 
heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession." And the 
prophets have other names for Him besides these. Jacob in his blessing of his 
sons says, "Judah, thy brethren shall extol thee; thy hands are on the necks of 
thine enemies. A lion's whelp is Judah, from a shoot, my son, art thou sprung 
up; thou hast lain down and slept as a lion; who shall awaken him?" We cannot 
now linger over these phrases, to show that what is said of Judah applies to 
Christ. What may be quoted against this view, viz., "A ruler shall not part from 
Judah nor a leader from his loins, until He come for whom it is reserved;" this 
can better be cleared up on another occa sion. But Isaiah knows Christ to be 
spoken of under the names of Jacob and Israel, when he says,' "Jacob is my 
servant, I will help Him; Israel is my elect, my soul hath accepted Him. He 
shall declare judgment to the Gentiles. 
He shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any one hear His voice on the 
streets. A bruised rod shall He not break. and smoking flax shall He not quench, 
till He bring forth judgment from victory, and in His name shall the nations 
hope." That it is Christ about whom such prophecies are made, Matthew shows in 
his Gospel, where he quotes from memory and says: "That the saying might be 
fulfilled, He shall not strive nor cry," etc. David also is called Christ, as 
where Ezekiel in his prophecy to the shepherds adds as from the mouth of God: "I 
will raise up David my servant, who shall be their shepherd." For it is not the 
patriarch David who is to rise and be the shepherd of the saints, but Christ. 
Isaiah also called Christ the rod and the flower: "There shall come forth a rod 
out of the root of Jesse, and a flower shall spring out of tits root, and the 
spirit of God shall rest upon Him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the 
spirit of counsel slid of might, the spirit of knowledge and of godliness, and 
He shall be full of the spirit of the fear of the Lord." And in the Psalms our 
Lord is called the stone, as follows: "The stone which the builders rejected is 
made the head of the comer. It is from the Lord, and it is wonderful in our 
eyes." And the Gospel shows, as also does Luke in the Acts, that the stone is no 
other than Christ; the Gospel as follows: "Have ye never read, the stone which 
the builders rejected is made the head of the corner. Whosoever falls on this 
stone shall be broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will scatter him as 
dust." And Luke writes in Acts: "This is the stone, which was set at naught of 
you the builders, which has become the head of the corner." And one of the names 
applied to the Saviour is that which He Himself does not utter, but which John 
records;--the Word who was in the beginning with God, God the Word. 
And it is worth our while to fix our attention for a moment on those scholars 
who omit consideration of most of the great names we have mentioned and regard 
this as the most important one. As to the former titles, they look for any 
account of them that any one may offer, but in the case of this one they proceed 
differently and ask, What is the Son of God when called the Word? The passage 
they employ most is that in the Psalms, "My heart hath produced a good Word;" 
and they imagine the Son of God to be the utterance of the Father deposited, as 
it were, in syllables, and accordingly they do not allow Him, if we examine them 
farther, any independent hypostasis, nor are they clear about His essence. I do 
not mean that they confuse its qualities, but the fact of His having an essence 
of His own. For no one can understand how that which is said to be "Word" can be 
a Son. And such an animated Word, not being a separate entity from the Father, 
and accordingly as it, having no subsistence. is not a Son, or if he is a Son, 
let them say that God the Word is a separate being and has an essence of His 
own. We insist, therefore, that as in the case of each of the titles spoken of 
above we turn from the title to the concept it suggests slid apply it and 
demonstrate how the Son of God is suitably described by it, the same course must 
be followed when we find Him called the Word. What caprice it is, in all these 
cases, not to stand upon the term employed, but to enquire in what sense Christ 
is to be understood to be the door, and in what way the vine, and why He is the 
way; but in the one case of His being called the Word, to follow a different 
course. To add to the authority, therefore, of what we have to say on the 
question, how the Son of God is the Word, we must begin with those names of 
which we spoke first as being applied to Him. This, we cannot deny, will seem to 
some to be superfluous and a digression, but the thoughtful reader will not 
think it useless to ask as to the concepts for which the titles are used; to 
observe these matters will clear the way for what is coming. And once we have 
entered upon the theology concerning the Saviour, as we seek with what diligence 
we can and find the various things that are taught about Him, we shall 
necessarily understand more about Him not only in His character as the Word, but 
in His other characters also. 
24. CHRIST AS LIGHT; HOW HE, AND HOW HIS DISCIPLES ARE THE LIGHT OF THE 
WORLD. 
He said, then, that He was the light of the world; and we have to examine, 
along with this title, those which are parallel to it; and, indeed, are thought 
by some to be not merely parallel, but identical with it. He is the true light, 
and the light of the Gentiles. In the opening of the Gospel now before us He is 
the light of men: "That which was made," it says, "was life in Him, and the life 
was the light of men; and the light shines in darkness, and the darkness did not 
overtake it." A little further on, in the same passage, He is called the true 
light: "The true light, which lightens every man, was coming into the world." In 
Isaiah, He is the light of the Gentiles, as we said before. "Behold, I have set 
Thee for a light of the Gentiles, that Thou shouldest be for salvation to the 
end of the earth." Now the sensible light of the world is the sun, and after it 
comes very worthily the moon, and the same title may be applied to the stars; 
but those lights of the world are said in Moses to have come into existence on 
the fourth day, and as they shed light on the things on the earth, they are not 
the true light. But the Saviour shines on creatures which have intellect and 
sovereign reason, that their minds may behold their proper objects of vision, 
and so he is the light of the intellectual world, that is to say, of the 
reasonable souls which are in the sensible world, and if there be any beings 
beyond these in the world from which He declares Himself to be our Saviour. He 
is, indeed, the most determining and distinguished part of that world, and, as 
we may say, the sun who makes the great day of the Lord. In view of this day He 
says to those who partake of His light, "Work while it is day; the night cometh 
when no man can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the 
world." Then He says to His disciples, "Ye are the light of the world," and "Let 
your light shine before men." Thus we see the Church, the bride, to present an 
analogy to the moon and stars, and the disciples have a light, which is their 
own or borrowed from the true sun, so that they are able to illuminate those who 
have no command of any spring of light in themselves. We may say that Paul and 
Peter are the light of the world, and that those of their disciples who are 
enlightened themselves, but are not able to enlighten others, are the world of 
which the Apostles were the light. But the Saviour, being the light of the 
world, illuminates not bodies, but by His incorporeal power the incorporeal 
intellect, to the end that each of us, enlightened as by the sun, may be able to 
discern the rest of the things of the mind. And as when the sun is shining the 
moon and the stars lose their power of giving light, so those who are irradiated 
by Christ and receive His beams have no need of the ministering apostles and 
prophets--we must have courage to declare this truth--nor of the angels; I will 
add that they have no need even of the greater powers when they are disciples of 
that first-born light. To those who do not receive the solar beams of Christ. 
the ministering saints do afford an illumination much less than the former; this 
illumination is as much as those persons can receive, and it completely fills 
them. Christ, again, the light of the world, is the true light as distinguished 
from the light of sense; nothing that is sensible is true. Yet though the 
sensible is other than the true, it does not follow that the sensible is false, 
for the sensible may have an analogy with the intellectual, and not everything 
that is not true can correctly be called false. Now I ask whether the light of 
the world is the same thing with the light of men, and I conceive that a higher 
power of light is intended by the former phrase than by the latter, for the 
world in one sense is not only men. Paul shows that the world is something more 
than men when he writes to the Corinthians in his first Epistle: "We are made a 
spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men." In one sense, too, it may 
be considered, the world is the creation which is being delivered from the 
bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God, 
whose earnest expectation is waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God. 
We also draw attention to the comparison which may be drawn between the 
statement, "I am the light of the world," and the words addressed to the 
disciples, "Ye are the light of the world." Some suppose that the genuine 
disciples of Jesus are greater than other creatures, some seeking the reason of 
this ill the natural growth of these disciples, others inferring it from their 
harder struggle. For those beings which are in flesh and blood have greater 
labours and a life more full of dangers than those which are in an ethereal 
body, and the lights of heaven might not, if they had put on bodies of earth, 
have accomplished this life of ours free from danger and from error. Those who 
incline to this argument may appeal to those texts of Scripture which say the 
most exalted things about men, and to the fact that the Gospel is addressed 
directly to men; not so much is said about the creation, or, as we understand 
it, about the world. We read, "As I and Thou are one, that they also may be one 
in Us," and "Where I am, there will also My servant be." These sayings, plainly, 
are about men; while about the creation it is said that it is delivered from the 
bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. It 
might be added that not even when it is delivered will it take part in the glory 
of the sons of God. Nor will those who hold this view forget that the first-born 
of every creature, honouring man above all else, became man, and that it was not 
any of the constellations existing in the sky, but one of another order, 
appointed for this purpose and in the service of the knowledge of Jesus, that 
was made to be the Star of the East, whether it was like the other stars or 
perchance better than they, to be the sign of Him who is the most excellent of 
all. And if the boasting of the saints is in their tribulations, since 
"tribulation worketh patience, and patience probation, and probation hope, and 
hope maketh not ashamed," then the afflicted creation cannot have the like 
patience with man, nor the like probation, nor the like hope, but another degree 
of these, since "the creation was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but on 
account of Him who subjected it. for hope." Now he who shrinks from conferring 
such great attributes on man will turn to another direction and say that the 
creature being subjected to vanity groans and suffers greater affliction than 
those who groan in this tabernacle, for has she not suffered for the utmost 
extent of time in her service of vanity--nay, many times as long as man? For why 
does she do this not willingly, but that it is against her nature to be subject 
to vanity, and not to have the best arrangement of her life, that which she 
shall receive when she is set free, when the world is destroyed and released 
even from the vanity of bodies. Here, however, we may appear to be stretching 
too far, and aiming at more than the question now before us requires. We may 
return, therefore, to the point from which we set out, and ask for what reason 
the Saviour is called the light of the world, the true light, and the light of 
men. Now we saw that He is called the true light with reference to the sensible 
light of the world, and that the light of the world is the same thing as the 
light of men, or that we may at least enquire whether they are the same. This 
discussion is not superfluous. Some students do not take anything at all out of 
the statement that the Saviour is the Word; and it is important for us to assure 
ourselves that we are not chargeable with caprice in fixing our attention on 
that notion. If it admits of being taken in a metaphorical sense we ought not to 
take it literally. When we apply the mystical and allegorical method to the 
expression "light of the world" and the many analogous terms mentioned above, we 
should surely do so with this expression also. 
25. CHRIST AS THE RESURRECTION. 
Now He is called the light of men and the true light and the light of the 
word, because He brightens and irradiates the higher parts of men, or, in a 
word, of all reasonable beings. And similarly it is from and because of the 
energy with which He causes the old deadness to be put aside and that which is 
par excellence life to be put on, so that those who have truly received Him rise 
again from the dead, that He is called the resurrection. And this He does not 
only at the moment at which a man says, "We are buried with Christ through 
baptism and have risen again with Him," but much rather when a man, having laid 
off all about him that belongs to death, walks in the newness of life which 
belongs to Him, the Son, while here. We always "carry about in our body the 
dying of the Lord Jesus," and thus we reap the vast advantage, "that the life of 
the Lord Jesus might be made manifest in our bodies." 
26. CHRIST AS THE WAY. 
But that progress too, which is in wisdom and which is found by those who 
seek their salvation in it to do for them what they require both in respect of 
exposition of truth in the divine word and in respect of conduct according to 
true righteousness, it lets us understand how Christ is the way. In this way we 
have to take nothing with us, neither wallet nor coat; we must travel without 
even a stick, nor must we have shoes on our feet. For this road is itself 
sufficient for all the supplies of our journey; and every one who walks on it 
wants nothing. He is clad with a garment which is fit for one who is setting out 
in response to an invitation to a wedding; and on this road he cannot meet 
anything that can annoy him. "No one," Solomon says, "can find out the way of a 
serpent upon a rock." I would add, or that of any other beast. Hence there is no 
need of a staff on this road, on which there is no trace of any hostile 
creature, and the hardness of which, whence also it is called rock (petra), 
makes it incapable of harbouring anything hurtful. 
27. CHRIST AS THE TRUTH. 
Further, the Only-begotten is the truth, because He embraces in Himself 
according to the Father's will the whole reason of all things, and that with 
perfect clearness, and being the truth communicates to each creature in 
proportion to its worthiness. And should any one enquire whether all that the 
Father knows, according to the depth of His riches and His wisdom and His 
knowledge, is known to our Saviour also, and should he, imagining that he will 
thereby glorify the Father, show that some things known to the Father are 
unknown to the Son, although He might have had an equal share of the 
apprehensions of the unbegotten God, we must remind him that it is from His 
being the truth that He is Saviour, and add that if He is the truth complete, 
then there is nothing true which He does not know; truth must not limp for the 
want of the things which, according to those persons, are known to the Father 
only. Or else let it be shown that some things are known to which the name of 
truth does not apply, but which are above the truth. 
28. CHRIST AS LIFE. 
It is clear also that the principle of that life which is pure and unmixed 
with any other element, resides in Him who is the first-born of all creation, 
taking from which those who have a share in Christ live the life which is true 
life, while all those who are thought to live apart from this, as they have not 
the true light, have not the true life either. 
29. CHRIST AS THE DOOR AND AS THE SHEPHERD. 
But as one cannot be in the Father or with the Father except by ascending 
from below upwards and coming first to the divinity of the Son, through which 
one may be led by the hand and brought to the blessedness of the Father Himself, 
so the Saviour has the inscription "The Door." And as He is a lover of men, and 
approves the impulse of human souls to better things, even of those who do not 
hasten to reason (the Logos), but like sheep have a weakness and gentleness 
apart from all accuracy and reason, so He is the Shepherd. For the Lord saves 
men and beasts, and Israel and Juda are sowed with the seed not of men only but 
also of beasts. 
30. CHRIST AS ANOINTED (CHRIST) AND AS KING. 
In addition to these titles we must consider at the outset of our work that 
of Christ, and we must also consider that of King, and compare these two so as 
to find out the difference between them. Now it is said in the forty-fourth 
Psalm, "Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity, whence Thou art 
anointed (Christ) above Thy fellows." His loving righteousness and hating 
iniquity were thus added claims in Him; His anointing was not contemporary with 
His being nor inherited by Him from the first. Anointing is a symbol of entering 
on the kingship, and sometimes also on the priesthood; and must we therefore 
conclude that the kingship of the Son of God is not inherited nor congenital to 
Him? But how is it conceivable that the First-born of all creation was not a 
king and became a king afterwards because He loved righteousness, when, 
moreover, He Himself was righteousness? We cannot fail to see that it is as a 
man that He is Christ, in respect of His soul, which was human and liable to be 
troubled and sore vexed, but that He is conceived as king in respect of the 
divine in Him. I find support for this in the seventy-first Psalm, which says, 
"Give the king Thy judgment, O God, and Thy righteousness to the king's Son, to 
judge Thy people in righteousness and Thy poor in judgment." This Psalm, though 
addressed to Solomon, is evidently a prophecy of Christ, and it is worth while 
to ask to what king the prophecy desires judgment to be given by God, and to 
what king's Son, and what king's righteousness is spoken of. I conceive, then, 
that what is called the King is the leading nature of the First-born of all 
creation, to which judgment is given on account of its eminence; and that the 
man whom He assumed, formed and moulded by that nature, according to 
righteousness, is the King's Son. I am the more led to think that this is so, 
because the two beings are here brought together in one sentence, and are spoken 
of as if they were not two but one. For the Saviour made both one, that is, He 
made them according to the prototype of the two which had been made one in 
Himself before all things. The two I refer to human nature, since each man's 
soul is mixed with the Holy Spirit, and each of those who are saved is thus made 
spiritual. Now as there are some to whom Christ is a shepherd, as we said 
before, because of their meek and composed nature, though they are less guided 
by reason; so there are those to whom He is a king, those, namely, who are led 
in their approach to religion rather by the reasonable part of their nature. And 
among those who are under a king there are differences; some experience his rule 
in a more mystic and hidden and more divine way, others in a less perfect 
fashion. I should say that those who, led by reason, apart from all agencies of 
sense, have beheld incorporeal things, the things which Paul speaks of as 
"invisible," or "not seen," that they are ruled by the leading nature of the 
Only-begotten, but that those who have only advanced as far as the reason which 
is conversant with sensible things, and on account of these glorify their Maker, 
that these also are governed by the Word, by Christ. No offence need be taken at 
our distinguishing these notions in the Saviour; we draw the same distinctions 
in His substance. 
31. CHRIST AS TEACHER AND MASTER. 
It is plain to all how our Lord is a teacher and an interpreter for those who 
are striving towards godliness, and on the other hand a master of those servants 
who have the spirit of bondage to fear, who make progress and hasten towards 
wisdom, and are found worthy to possess it. For "the servant knoweth not what 
the master wills," since he is no longer his master, but has become his friend. 
The Lord Himself teaches this, for He says to hearers who were still servants: 
"You call Me Master and Lord, and you say well, for so I am," but in another 
passage, "I call you no longer servants, for the servant knoweth not what is the 
will of his master, but I call you friends," because "you have continued with Me 
in all My temptations." They, then, who live according to fear, which God exacts 
from those who are not good servants, as we read in Malachi, "If I am a Master, 
where is My fear?" are servants of a master who is called their Saviour. 
32. CHRIST AS SON. 
None of these testimonies, however, sets forth distinctly the Saviour's 
exalted birth; but when the words are addressed to Him, "Thou art My Son, this 
day have I begotten Thee," this is spoken to Him by God, with whom all time is 
to-day, for there is no evening with God, as I consider, and there is no 
morning, nothing but time that stretches out, along with His unbeginning and 
unseen life. The day is to-day with Him in which the Son was begotten, and thus 
the beginning of His birth is not found, as neither is the day of it. 
33. CHRIST. THE TRUE VINE, AND AS BREAD. 
To what we have said must be added how the Son is the true vine. Those will 
have no difficulty in apprehending this who understand, in a manner worthy of 
the prophetic grace, the saying: "Wine maketh glad the heart of man." For if the 
heart be the intellectual part, and what rejoices it is the Word most pleasant 
of all to drink which takes us off human things, makes us feel ourselves 
inspired, and intoxicates us with an intoxication which is not irrational but 
divine, that, I conceive, with which Joseph made his brethren merry, then it is 
very clear how He who brings wine thus to rejoice the heart of man is the true 
vine. He is the true vine, because the grapes He bears are the truth, the 
disciples are His branches, and they, also, bring forth the truth as their 
fruit. It is somewhat difficult to show the difference between the vine and 
bread, for He says, not only that He is the vine, but that He is the bread of 
life. May it be that as bread nourishes and makes strong, and is said to 
strengthen the heart of man, but wine, on the contrary, pleases and rejoices and 
melts him, so ethical studies, bringing life to him who learns them and reduces 
them to practice, are the bread of life, but cannot properly be called the fruit 
of the vine, while secret and mystical speculations, rejoicing the heart and 
causing those to feel inspired who take them in, delighting in the Lord, and who 
desire not only to be nourished but to be made happy, are called the juice of 
the true vine, because they flow from it. 
34. CHRIST AS THE FIRST AND THE LAST; HE IS. ALSO WHAT LIES BETWEEN THESE. 
Further, we have to ask in what sense He is called in the Apocalypse the 
First and the Last, and how, in His character as the First, He is not the same 
as the Alpha and the beginning, while in His character as the Last He is not the 
same as the Omega and the end. It appears to me, then, that the reason able 
beings which exist are characterized by many forms, and that some of them are 
the first, some the second, some the third, and so on to the last. To pronounce 
exactly, however, which is the first, what kind of a being the second is, which 
may truly be designated third, and to carry this out to the end of the series, 
this is not a task for man, but transcends our nature. We shall yet venture, 
such as we are, to stand still a little at this point, and to make some 
observations on the matter. There are some gods of whom God is god, as we hear 
in prophecy, "Thank ye the God of gods," and "The God of gods hath spoken, and 
called the earth." Now God, according to the Gospel, "is not the God of the dead 
but of the living." Those gods, then, are living of whom God is god. The 
Apostle, too, writing to the Corinthians, says: "As there are gods many and 
lords many," and so we have spoken of these gods as really existing. Now there 
are, besides the gods of whom God is god, certain others, who are called 
thrones, and others called dominions, lordships, also, and powers in addition to 
these. The phrase, "above every name that is named, not only in this world, but 
also in that which is to come," leads us to believe that there are yet others 
besides these which are less familiar to us; one kind of these the Hebrews 
called Sabai, from which Sabaoth was formed, who is their ruler, and is none 
other than God. Add to all these the reasonable being who is mortal, man. Now 
the God of all things made first in honour some race of reasonable beings; this 
I consider to be those who are called gods, and the second order, let us say, 
for the present, are the thrones, and the third, undoubtedly, the dominions. And 
thus we come down in order to the last reasonable race, which, perhaps, cannot 
be any other than man. The Saviour accordingly became, in a diviner way than 
Paul, all things to all, that He might either gain all or perfect them; it is 
clear that to men He became a man, and to the angels an angel. As for His 
becoming man no believer has any doubt, but as to His becoming an angel, we 
shall find reason for believing it was so, if we observe carefully the 
appearances and the words of the angels, in some of which the powers of the 
angels seem to belong to Him. In several passages angels speak in such a way as 
to suggest this, as when "the angel of the Lord appeared in a flame of fire. And 
he said. I am the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob." But Isaiah also 
says: "His name is called Angel of Great Counsel." The Saviour, then, is the 
first and the last, not that He is not what lies between, but the extremities 
are named to show that He became all things. Consider, however, whether the last 
is man, or the things said to be under the earth, of which are the demons, all 
of them or some. We must ask, too, about those things which the Saviour became 
which He speaks of through the prophet David, "And I became as a man without any 
to help him, free among the dead." His birth from the Virgin and His life so 
admirably lived showed Him to be more than man, and it was the same among the 
dead. He was the only free person there, and His soul was not left in hell. 
Thus, then, He is the first and the last. Again, if there be letters of God, as 
such there are, by reading which the saints may say they have read what is 
written on the tablets of heaven, these letters, by which heavenly things are to 
be read, are the notions, divided into small parts, into Alpha and so on to 
Omega, the Son of God. Again, He is the beginning and the end, but He is this 
not in all His aspects equally. For He is the beginning, as the Proverbs teach 
us, inasmuch as He is wisdom; it is written: "The Lord rounded Me in the 
beginning of His ways. for His works." In the respect of His being the Logos He 
is not the beginning. "The Word was in the beginning." Thus in His aspects one 
comes first and is the beginning, and there is a second after the beginning, and 
a third, and so on to the end, as if He had said, I am the beginning. inasmuch 
as I am wisdom, and the second, perhaps, inasmuch as I am invisible, and the 
third in that I am life, for "what was made was life in Him." One who was 
qualified to examine and to discern the sense of Scripture might, no doubt, find 
many members of the series; I cannot say if he could find them all. "The 
beginning and the end" is a phrase we usually apply to a thing that is a 
completed unity; the beginning of a house is its foundation and the end the 
parapet. We cannot but think of this figure. since Christ is the stone which is 
the head of the corner, to the great unity of the body of the saved. For Christ 
the only-begotten Son is all and in all, He is as the beginning in the man He 
assumed, He is present as the end in the last of the saints, and He is also in 
those between, or else He is present as the beginning in Adam, as the end in His 
life on earth, according to the saying: "The last Adam was made a quickening 
spirit." This saying harmonizes well with the interpretation we have given of 
the first and the last. 
35. CHRIST AS THE LIVING AND THE DEAD. 
In what has been said about the first and the last, and about the beginning 
and the end, we have referred these words at one point to the different forms of 
reasonable beings, at another to the different conceptions of the Son of God. 
Thus we have gained a distinction between the first and the beginning, and 
between the last and the end, and also the distinctive meaning of Alpha and 
Omega. It is not hard to see why he is called "the Living and the Dead," and 
after being dead He that is alive for evermore. For since we were not helped by 
His original life, sunk as we were in sin, He came down into our deadness in 
order that, He having died to sin, we, bearing about in our body the dying of 
Jesus. might then receive that life of His which is for evermore. For those who 
always carry about in their body the dying of Jesus shall obtain the life of 
Jesus also, manifested in their bodies. 
36. CHRIST AS A SWORD. 
The texts of the New Testament, which we have discussed, are things said by 
Himself about Himself. Isaiah, however, He said that His mouth had been set by 
His Father as a sharp sword, and that He was hidden under the shadow of His 
hand, made like to a chosen shaft and kept close in the Father's quiver, called 
His servant by the God of all things, and Israel, and Light of the Gentiles. The 
mouth of the Son of God is a sharp sword, for "The word of God is living, and 
active, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing to the dividing of 
soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and quick to discern the thoughts 
and intents of the heart." And indeed He came not to bring peace on the earth, 
that is, to corporeal and sensible things, but a sword, and to cut through, if I 
may say so, the disastrous friendship of soul and body, so that the soul, 
committing herself to the spirit which was against the flesh, may enter into 
friendship with God. Hence, according to the prophetic word, He made His mouth 
as a sword, as a sharp sword. Can any one behold so many wounded by the divine 
love, like her in the Song of Songs, who complained that she was wounded: "I am 
wounded with love," and find the dart that wounded so many souls for the love of 
God, in any but Him who said, "He hath made Me as a chosen shaft." 
37. CHRIST AS A SERVANT, AS THE LAMB OF GOD, AND AS THE MAN WHOM. JOHN DID 
NOT KNOW. 
Again, let any one consider how Jesus was to His disciples, not as He who 
sits at meat, but as He who serves, and how though the Son of God He took on Him 
the form of a servant for the sake of the freedom of those who were enslaved in 
sin, and he will be at no loss to account for the Father's saying to Him: "Thou 
art My servant," and a little further on: "It is a great thing that thou 
shouldst be called My servant." For we do not hesitate to say that the goodness 
of Christ appears in a greater and more divine light, and more according to the 
image of the Father, because "He humbled Himself, becoming obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross," than if He had judged it a thing to be grasped to 
be equal with God, and had shrunk from becoming a servant for the salvation of 
the world. Hence He says, desiring to teach us that in accepting this state of 
servitude He had received a great gift from His Father: "And My God shall be My 
strength. And He said to Me, It is a great thing for Thee to be called My 
servant." For if He had not become a servant, He would not have raised up the 
tribes of Jacob, nor have turned the heart of the diaspora of Israel, and 
neither would He have become a light of the Gentiles to be for salvation to the 
ends of the earth. And it is no great thing for Him to become a servant, even if 
it is called a great thing by His Father, for this is in comparison with His 
being called with an innocent sheep and with a lamb. For the Lamb of God became 
like an innocent sheep being led to the slaughter, that He may take away the sin 
of the world. He who supplies reason (logos) to all is made like a lamb 
which is dumb before her shearer, that we might be purified by His death, which 
is given as a sort of medicine against the opposing power, and also against the 
sin of those who open their minds to the truth. For the death of Christ reduced 
to impotence those powers which war against the human race, and it set free from 
sin by a power beyond our words the life of each believer. Since, then, He takes 
away sin until every enemy shall be destroyed and death last of all, in order 
that the whole world may be free from sin, therefore John points to Him and 
says: "Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world." It is not 
said that He will take it away in the future, nor that He is at present taking 
it, nor that He has taken it, but is not taking it away now. His taking away sin 
is still going on, He is taking it away from every individual in the world, till 
sin be taken away from the whole world, and the Saviour deliver the kingdom 
prepared and completed to the Father, a kingdom in which no sin is left at all, 
and which, therefore, is ready to accept the Father as its king, and which on 
the other hand is waiting to receive all God has to bestow, fully, and in every 
part, at that time when the saying is fulfilled, "That God may be all in all." 
Further, we hear of a man who is said to be coming after John, who was made 
before him and was before him. This is to teach us that the man also of the Son 
of God, the man who was mixed with His divinity, was older than His birth from 
Mary. John says he does not know this man, but must he not have known Him when 
he leapt for joy when yet a babe unborn in Elisabeth's womb, as soon as the 
voice of Mary's salutation sounded in the ears of the wife of Zacharias? 
Consider, therefore, if the words "I know Him not" may have reference to the 
period before the bodily existence. Though he did not know Him before He assumed 
His body, yet he knew Him when yet in his mother's womb, and perhaps he is here 
learning something new about Him beyond what was known to him before, namely, 
that on whomsoever the Holy Spirit shall descend and abide on him, that is he 
who is to baptize with the Holy Spirit and with fire. He knew him from his 
mother's womb, but not all about Him. He did not know perhaps that this is He 
who baptizes with the Holy Spirit and with fire, when he saw the Spirit 
descending and abiding on Him. Yet that He was indeed a man, and the first man, 
John did not know. 
38. CHRIST AS PARACLETE, AS PROPITIATION, AND AS THE POWER OF GOD. 
But none of the names we have mentioned expresses His representation of us 
with the Father, as He pleads for human nature, and makes atonement for it; the 
Paraclete, and the propitiation, and the atonement. He has the name Paraclete in 
the Epistle of John: "If any man sin, we have a Paraclete with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the righteous." And He is said in the same epistle to be the atonement 
for our sins. Similarly, in the Epistle to the Romans, He is called a 
propitiation: "Whom God set forth to be a propitiation through faith." Of this 
proportion there was a type in the inmost part of the temple, the Holy of 
Holies, namely, the golden mercy-seat placed upon the two cherubim. But how 
could He ever be the Paraclete, and the atonement, and the propitiation without 
the power of God, which makes an end of our weakness, flows over the souls of 
believers, and is administered by Jesus, who indeed is prior to it and Himself 
the power of God, who enables a man to say: "I can do all things through Jesus 
Christ who strengtheneth me." Whence we know that Simon Magus, who gave himself 
the title of "The power of God, which is called great," was consigned to 
perdition and destruction, he and his money with him. We, on the contrary, who 
confess Christ as the true power of God, believe that we share with Him, 
inasmuch as He is that power, all things in which any energy resides. 
39. CHRIST AS WISDOM AND SANCTIFICATION AND REDEMPTION. 
We must not, however, pass over in silence that He is of right the wisdom of 
God, and hence is called by that name. For the wisdom of the God and Father of 
all things does not apprehend His substance in mere visions, like the phantasms 
of human thoughts. Whoever is able to conceive a bodiless existence of manifold 
speculations which extend to the rationale of existing things, living and, as it 
were, ensouled, he will see how well the Wisdom of God which is above every 
creature speaks of herself, when she says: "God created me the beginning of His 
ways, for His works." By this creating act the whole creation was enabled to 
exist, not being unreceptive of that divine wisdom according to which it was 
brought into being; for God, according to the prophet David, made all things in 
wisdom. But many things came into being by the help of wisdom, which do not lay 
hold of that by which they were created: and few things indeed there are which 
lay hold not only of that wisdom which con cerns themselves, but of that which 
has to do with many things besides, namely, of Christ who is the whole of 
wisdom. But each of the sages, in proportion as he embraces wisdom, partakes to 
that extent of Christ, in that He is wisdom; just as every one who is greatly 
gifted with power, in proportion as he has power, in that proportion also has a 
share in Christ, inasmuch as He is power. The same is to be thought about 
sanctification and redemption; for Jesus Himself is made sanctification to us 
and redemption. Each of us is sanctified with that sanctification, and redeemed 
with that redemption. Consider, moreover, if the words "to us," added by the 
Apostle, have any special force. Christ, he says, "was made to us of God, 
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption." In other 
passages, he speaks about Christ as being wisdom, without any such 
qualification, and of His being power, saying that Christ is the power of God 
and the wisdom of God, though we might have conceived that He was not the wisdom 
of God or the power of God, absolutely, but only for us. Now, in respect of 
wisdom and power, we have both forms of the statement, the relative and the 
absolute; but in respect of sanctification and redemption, this is not the case. 
Consider, therefore, since "He that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are 
all of one," whether the Father is the sanctification of Him who is our 
sanctification, as, Christ being our head, God is His head. But Christ is our 
redemption because we had become prisoners and needed ransoming. I do not 
enquire as to His own redemption, for though He was tempted in all things as we 
are, He was without sin, and His enemies never reduced Him to captivity. 
40. CHRIST AS RIGHTEOUSNESS; AS THE DEMIURGE, THE AGENT OF THE GOOD GOD, AND 
AS HIGH-PRIEST. 
Having expiscated the "to us" and the "absolutely"--santification and 
redemption being "to us" and not absolute, wisdom and redemption both to us and 
absolute--we must not omit to enquire into the position of righteousness in the 
same passage. That Christ is righteousness relatively to us appears clearly from 
the words: "Who was made to us of God wisdom and righteousness and 
sanctification and redemption." And if we do not find Him to be righteousness 
absolutely as He is the wisdom and the power of God absolutely, then we must 
enquire whether to Christ Himself, as the Father is santification, so the Father 
is also righteousness. There is, we know, no unrighteousness with God; He is a 
righteous and holy Lord, and His judgments are in righteousness, and being 
righteous, He orders all things righteously. 
The heretics drew a distinction for purposes of their own between the just 
and the good. They did not make the matter very clear, but they considered that 
the demiurge was just, while the Father of Christ was good. That distinction 
may, I think, if carefully examined, be applied to the Father and the Son; the 
Son being righteousness, and having received powers to execute judgment, because 
He is the Son of Man and will judge the world in righteousness, but the Father 
doing good to those who have been disciplined by the righteousness of the Son. 
This is after the kingdom of the Son; then the Father will manifest in His works 
His name the Good, when God becomes all in all. And perhaps by His righteousness 
the Saviour prepares everything at the fit times, and by His word, by His 
ordering, by His chastisements, and, if I may use such an expression, by His 
spiritual healing aids, disposes all things to receive at the end the goodness 
of the Father. It was from His sense of that goodness that He answered him who 
addressed the Only-begotten with the words "Good Master," and said, "Why callest 
thou Me good? None is good but one, God, the Father." This we have treated of 
elsewhere, especially in dealing with the question of the greater than the 
demiurge; Christ we have taken to be the demiurge, and the Father the greater 
than He. Such great things, then, He is, the Paraclete, the atonement, the 
propitiation, the sympathizer with our weaknesses, who was tempted in all human 
things, as we are, without sin; and in consequence He is a great High-Priest, 
having offered Himself as the sacrifice which is offered once for all, and not 
for men only but for every rational creature. For without God He tasted death 
for every one. In some copies of the Epistle to the Hebrews the words are "by 
the grace of God." Now, whether He tasted death for every one without God. He 
died not for men only but for all other intellectual beings too, or whether He 
tasted death for every one by the grace of God, He died for all without God, for 
by the grace of God He tasted death for every one. It would surely be absurd to 
say that He tasted death for human sins and not for any other being besides man 
which had fallen into sin, as for example for the stars. For not even the stars 
are clean in the eyes of God, as we read in Job, "The stars are not clean in His 
sight," unless this is to be regarded as a hyperbole. Hence he is a great 
High-Priest, since He restores all things to His Father's kingdom, and arranges 
that whatever defects exist in each part of creation shall be filled up so as to 
be full of the glory of the Father. This High-Priest is called, from some other 
notion of him than those we have noticed, Judas, that those who are Jews 
secretly may take the name of Jew not froth Judah, son of Jacob, but from Him, 
since they are His brethren, and praise Him for the freedom they have attained. 
For it is He who sets them free, saving them from their enemies on whose backs 
He lays His hand to subdue them. When He has put under His feet the opposing 
power, and is alone in presence of His Father, then He is Jacob and Israel; and 
thus as we are made light by Him, since He is the light of the world, so we are 
made Jacob since He is called Jacob, and Israel since He is called Israel. 
41. CHRIST AS THE ROD, THE FLOWER, THE STONE. 
Now He receives the kingdom from the king whom the children of Israel 
appointed, beginning the monarchy not at the divine command and without even 
consulting God. He therefore fights the battles of the Lord and so prepares 
peace for His Son, His people, and this perhaps is the reason why He is called 
David. Then He is called a rod; such He is to those who need a harder and 
severer discipline, and have not submitted to the love and gentleness of God. On 
this account, if He is a rod, He has to "go forth;" He does not remain in 
Himself, but appears to go beyond His earlier state. Going forth, then, and 
becoming a rod, He does not remain a rod, but after the rod He becomes a flower 
that rises up, and after being a rod He is made known as a flower to those who, 
by His being a rod, have met with visitation. For "God will visit their 
iniquities with a red," that is, Christ. But "His mercy He will not take from 
him," for He will have mercy on him, for on whom the Son has mercy the Father 
has mercy also. An interpretation may be given which makes Him a rod and a 
flower in respect of different persons, a rod to those who have need of 
chastisement, a flower to those who are being saved; but I prefer the account of 
the matter given above. We must add here, however, that, perhaps, looking to the 
end, if Christ is a rod to any man He is also a flower to him, while it is not 
the case that he who receives Him as a flower must also know Him as a rod. And 
yet as one flower is more perfect than another and plants are said to flower, 
even though they bring forth no perfect fruit, so the perfect receive that of 
Christ which transcends the flower. Those, on the other hand, who have known Him 
as a rod will partake along with it, not in His perfection, but in the flower 
which comes before the fruit. Last of all, before we come to the word Logos, 
Christ was a stone, set at naught by the builders but placed on the head of the 
corner, for the living stones are built up as on a foundation on the other 
stones of the Apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus Himself our Lord being the 
chief corner-stone, because He is a part of the building made of living stones 
in the land of the living; therefore He is called a stone. All this we have said 
to show how capricious and baseless is the procedure of those who, when so many 
names are given to Christ, take the mere appellation "the Word," without 
enquiring, as in the case of His other titles, in what sense it is used; surely 
they ought to ask what is meant when it is said of the Son of God that He was 
the Word, and God, and that He was in the beginning with the Father, and that 
all things were made by Him. 
42. OF THE VARIOUS WAYS IN WHICH CHRIST IS THE LOGOS. 
As, then, from His activity in enlightening the world whose light He is, 
Christ is named the Light of the World, and as from His making those who 
sincerely attach themselves to Him put away their deadness and rise again and 
put on newness of life, He is called the Resurrection, so from an activity of 
another kind He is called Shepherd and Teacher, King and Chosen Shaft, and 
Servant, and in addition to these Paraclete and Atonement and Propitiation. And 
after the same fashion He is also called the Logos, because He takes away from 
us all that is irrational, and makes us truly reasonable, so that we do all 
things, even to eating and drinking, to the glory of God, and discharge by the 
Logos to the glory of God both the commoner functions of life and those which 
belong to a more advanced stage. For if, by having part in Him, we are raised up 
and enlightened, herded also it may be and ruled over, then it is clear that we 
become in a divine manner reasonable, when He drives away from us what in us is 
irrational and dead, since He is the Logos (reason) and the 
Resurrection.Consider, however, whether all men have in some way part in Him in 
His character as Logos. On this point tile Apostle teaches us that He is to be 
sought not outside the seeker, and that those find Him in themselves who set 
their heart on doing so; "Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? 
That is to bring Christ down; or, Who shall descend into the abyss? That is to 
bring Christ up from the dead. But what saith the Scripture? The Word is very 
nigh thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart," as if Christ Himself were the same 
thing as the Word said to be sought after. But when the Lord Himself says "If I 
had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin but now they have no 
cloak for their sin," the only sense we can find in His words is that the Logos 
Himself says that those are not chargeable with sin to whom He (reason) has not 
fully come, but that those, if they sin, are guilty who, having had part in Him, 
act contrary to the ideas by which He declares His full presence in us. Only 
when thus read is the saying true: "If I had not come and spoken to them, they 
had not had sin." Should the words be applied, as many are of opinion that they 
should, to the visible Christ, then how is it true that those had no sin to whom 
He did not come? In that case all who lived before the advent of the Saviour 
will be free from sin, since Jesus, as seen in flesh, had not yet come. And 
more--all those to whom He has never been preached will have no sin, and if they 
have no sin, then it is clear they are not liable to judgment. But the Logos in 
man, in which we have said that our whole race had part, is spoken of in two 
senses; first, in that of the filling up of ideas which takes place, prodigies 
excepted, in every one who passes beyond the age of boyhood, but secondly, in 
that of the consummation, which takes place only in the perfect. The words, 
therefore, "If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin, 
but now they have no cloak for their sin," are to be understood in the former 
sense; but the words, "All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers, and 
the sheep did not hear them," in the latter. For before the consummation of 
reason comes, there is nothing in man but what is blameworthy; all is imperfect 
and defective, and can by no means command the obedience of those irrational 
elements in us which are tropically spoken of as sheep. And perhaps the former 
meaning is to be recognized in the words "The Logos was made flesh," but the 
second in "The Logos was God." We must accordingly look at what there is to be 
seen in human affairs between the saying, "The Word (reason) was made flesh" and 
"The Word was God." When the Word was made flesh can we say that it was to some 
extent broken up and thinned out, and can we say that it recovered from that 
point onward till it became again what it was at first, God the Word, the Word 
with the Father; the Word whose glory John saw, the verily only-begotten, as 
from the Father. But the Son may also be the Logos (Word), because He reports 
the secret things of His Father who is intellect in the same way as the Son who 
is called the Word. For as with us the word is a messenger of those things which 
tile mind perceives, so the Word of God, knowing the Father, since no created 
being can approach Him without a guide, reveals the Father whom He knows. For no 
one knows the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son reveals Him, and 
inasmuch as He is the Word He is the Messenger of Great Counsel, who has the 
government upon His shoulders; for He entered on His kingdom by enduring the 
cross. In the Apocalypse, moreover, the Faithful and True (the Word), is said to 
sit on a white horse, the epithets indicating, I consider, the clearness of the 
voice with which the Word of truth speaks to us when He sojourns among us. This 
is scarcely the place to show how the word "horse" is often used in passages 
spoken for our encouragement in sacred learning. I only cite two of these: "A 
horse is deceitful for safety," and "Some trust in chariots and some in horses, 
but we will rejoice in the name of the Lord our God." Nor must we leave 
unnoticed a passage in the forty-fourth Psalm, frequently quoted by many writers 
as if they understood it: "My heart hath belched forth a good word, I speak my 
works to the King." Suppose it is God the Father who speaks thus; what is His 
heart, that the good word should appear in accordance with His heart? If, as 
these writers suppose, the Word (Logos) needs no interpretation, then the heart 
is to be taken in the natural sense too. But it is quite absurd to suppose God's 
heart to be a part of Him as ours is of our body. We must remind such writers 
that as when the hand of God is spoken of, and His arm and His finger, we do not 
read the words literally but enquire in what sound sense we may take them so as 
to be worthy of God, so His heart is to be understood of His rational power, by 
which He disposes all things, and His word of that which announces what is in 
this heart of His. But who is it that announces the counsel of the Father to 
those of His creatures who are worthy and who have risen above themselves, who 
but the Saviour? That "belched forth" is not, perhaps, without significance; a 
hundred other terms might have been employed; "My heart has produced a good 
word," it might have been said, or "My heart has spoken a good word." But in 
belching, some wind that was hidden makes its way out to the world, and so it 
may be that the Father gives out views of truth not continuously, but as it were 
after the fashion of belching, and the word has the character of the things thus 
produced, and is called, therefore, the image of the invisible God. We may enter 
our agreement, therefore, with the ordinary acceptation of these words, and take 
them to be spoken by the Father. It is not, however, a matter of course, that it 
is God Himself who announces these things. Why should it not be a prophet? 
Filled with the Spirit and unable to contain himself, he brings forth a word 
about his prophecy concerning Christ: "My heart hath belched forth a good word, 
I speak my works to the King, my pen is the tongue of a ready writer. Excellent 
in beauty is He beyond the sons of men." Then to the Christ Himself: "Grace is 
poured out on Thy lips." If the Father were the speaker, how could He go on 
after the words, "Grace is poured out on thy lips," to say, "Therefore God hath 
blessed thee for ever," and a little further on, "Therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." Some of those who 
wish to make the Father the speaker may appeal to the words, "Hear, O daughter, 
and behold and incline thine ear, and forget thy people and thy father." The 
prophet, it may be said, could not address the Church in the words, "Hear, O 
daughter." It is not difficult, however, to show that changes of person occur 
frequently in the Psalms, so that these words, "Hear, O daughter," might be from 
the Father, in this passage, though the Psalm as a whole is not. To our 
discussion of the Word we may here add the passage, "By the word of the Lord 
were the heavens rounded, and all the power of them by the breath of His mouth." 
Some refer this to the Saviour and the Holy Spirit. The passage, however, does 
not necessarily imply any more than that the heavens were founded by the reason 
(logos) of God, as when we say that a house is built by the plan (logos) of the 
architect, or a ship by the plan (logos) of the shipbuilder. In the same way the 
heavens were founded (made solid) by the Word of God, for they are of a more 
divine substance, which on this account is called solid; it has little fluidity 
for the most part, nor is it easily melted like other parts of the world, and 
specially the lower parts. On account of this difference the heavens are said in 
a special manner to be constituted by the Word of God. 
The saying then stands, first, "In the beginning was the Logos;" we are to 
place that full in our view; but the testimonies we cited from the Proverbs led 
us to place wisdom first, and to think of wisdom as preceding the Word which 
announces her. We must observe, then, that the Logos is in the beginning, that 
is, in wisdom, always. Its being in wisdom, which is called the beginning, does 
not prevent it from being with God and from being God, and it is not simply with 
God, but is in the beginning, in wisdom, with God. For he goes on: "He was in 
the beginning with God." He might have said, "He was with God;" but as He was in 
the beginning, so He was with God in the beginning, and "All things were made by 
Him," being in the beginning, for God made nil things, as David tells us, in 
wisdom. And to let us understand that the Word has His own definite place and 
sphere as one who has life in Himself (and is a distinct person), we must also 
speak about powers, not about power. "Thus saith the Lord of powers, (A.V. 
hosts)" we frequently read; there are certain creatures, rational and divine, 
which are called powers: anti of these Christ was the highest and best. and is 
called not only the wisdom of God but also His power. As, then, there are 
several powers of God, each of them in its own form, and the Saviour is 
different from these, so also Christ, even if that which is Logos in us is not 
in respect of form outside of us, will be understood from our discussion up to 
this point to be the Logos, who has His being in the beginning, in wisdom. This 
for the present may suffice, on the word: "In the beginning was the Logos." 

