
Tertullian












TERTULLIAN 
Tertullian 
Against PraxeasIn which he defends, in all essential points, the 
doctrine of the Holy Trinity
CHAPTER 1 -- SATAN'S WILES AGAINST THE TRUTH. HOW THEY TAKE THE FORM OF 
THE PRAXEAN HERESY. ACCOUNT OF THE PUBLICATION OF THIS HERESY.
In various ways has the devil rivalled and resisted the truth. Sometimes his 
aim has been to destroy the truth by defending it. He maintains that there is 
one only Lord, the Almighty Creator of the world, in order that out of this 
doctrine of the unity he may fabricate a heresy. He says that the Father Himself 
came down into the Virgin, was Himself born of her, Himself suffered, indeed was 
Himself Jesus Christ. Here the old serpent has fallen out with himself, since, 
when he tempted Christ after John's baptism, he approached Him as "the Son of 
God;" surely intimating that God had a Son, even on the testimony of the very 
Scriptures, out of which he was at the moment forging his temptation: "If you 
are the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread." Again: "If you are 
the Son of God, cast yourself down from here; for it is written, He shall give 
His angels charge concerning you" -- referring no doubt, to the Father -- "and 
in their hands they shall bear you up, that you not hurt your foot against a 
stone." Or perhaps, after all, he was only reproaching the Gospels with a lie, 
saying in fact: "Away with Matthew; away with Luke! Why heed their words? In 
spite of them, I declare that it was God Himself that I approached; it was the 
Almighty Himself that I tempted face to face; and it was for no other purpose 
than to tempt Him that I approached Him. If, on the contrary, it had been only 
the Son of God, most likely I should never have condescended to deal with Him." 
However, he is himself a liar from the beginning, and whatever man he instigates 
in his own way; as, for instance, Praxeas. For he was the first to import into 
Rome from Asia this kind of heretical pravity, a man in other respects of 
restless disposition, and above all inflated with the pride of confessorship 
simply and solely because he had to bear for a short time the annoyance of a 
prison; on which occasion, even "if he had given his body to be burned, it would 
have profited him nothing," not having the love of God, whose very gifts he has 
resisted and destroyed. For after the Bishop of Rome had acknowledged the 
prophetic gifts of Montanus, Prisca, and Maximilla, and, in consequence of the 
acknowledgment, had bestowed his peace on the churches of Asia and Phrygia, he, 
by importunately urging false accusations against the prophets themselves and 
their churches, and insisting on the authority of the bishop's predecessors in 
the see, compelled him to recall the pacific letter which he had issued, as well 
as to desist from his purpose of acknowledging the said gifts. By this Praxeas 
did a twofold service for the devil at Rome: he drove away prophecy, and he 
brought in heresy; he put to flight the Paraclete, and he crucified the Father. 
Praxeas' tares had been moreover sown, and had produced their fruit here also, 
while many were asleep in their simplicity of doctrine; but these tares actually 
seemed to have been plucked up, having been discovered and exposed by him whose 
agency God was pleased to employ. Indeed, Praxeas had deliberately resumed his 
old (true) faith, teaching it after his renunciation of error; and there is his 
own handwriting in evidence remaining among the carnally-minded, in whose 
society the transaction then took place; afterwards nothing was heard of him. We 
indeed, on our part, subsequently withdrew from the carnally-minded on our 
acknowledgment and maintenance of the Paraclete. But the tares of Praxeas had 
then everywhere shaken out their seed, which having lain hid for some while, 
with its vitality concealed under a mask, has now broken out with fresh life. 
But again shall it be rooted up, if the Lord will, even now; but if not now, in 
the day when all bundles of tares shall be gathered together, and along with 
every other stumbling-block shall be burnt up with unquenchable fire. 
CHAPTER 2 -- THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY AND UNITY, SOMETIMES 
CALLED THE DIVINE ECONOMY, OR DISPENSATION OF THE PERSONAL RELATIONS OF THE 
GODHEAD.
In the course of time, then, the Father forsooth was born, and the Father 
suffered,God Himself, the Lord Almighty, whom in their preaching they declare to 
be Jesus Christ. We, however, as we indeed always have done and more especially 
since we have been better instructed by the Paraclete, who leads men indeed into 
all truth), believe that there is one only God, but under the following 
dispensation, or oikonomia, as it is called, that this one only God has 
also a Son, His Word, who proceeded from Himself, by whom all things were made, 
and without whom nothing was made. Him we believe to have been sent by the 
Father into the Virgin, and to have been born of her -- being both Man and God, 
the Son of Man and the Son of God, and to have been called by the name of Jesus 
Christ; we believe Him to have suffered, died, and been buried, according to the 
Scriptures, and, after He had been raised again by the Father and taken back to 
heaven, to be sitting at the right hand of the Father, and that He will come to 
judge the quick and the dead; who sent also from heaven from the Father, 
according to His own promise, the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, the sanctifier of 
the faith of those who believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy 
Ghost. That this rule of faith has come down to us from the beginning of the 
gospel, even before any of the older heretics, much more before Praxeas, a 
pretender of yesterday, will be apparent both from the lateness of date which 
marks all heresies, and also from the absolutely novel character of our 
new-fangled Praxeas. In this principle also we must henceforth find a 
presumption of equal force against all heresies whatsoever -- that whatever is 
first is true, whereas that is spurious which is later in date. But keeping this 
prescriptive rule inviolate, still some opportunity must be given for reviewing 
(the statements of heretics), with a view to the instruction and protection of 
divers persons; were it only that it may not seem that each perversion of the 
truth is condemned without examination, and simply prejudged; especially in the 
case of this heresy, which supposes itself to possess the pure truth, in 
thinking that one cannot believe in One Only God in any other way than by saying 
that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are the very selfsame Person. As if 
in this way also one were not All, in that All are of One, by unity (that is) of 
substance; while the mystery of the dispensation is still guarded, which 
distributes the Unity into a Trinity, placing in their order the three Persons 
-- the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: three, however, not in condition, 
but in degree; not in substance, but in form; not in power, but in aspect; yet 
of one substance, and of one condition, and of one power, inasmuch as He is one 
God, from whom these degrees and forms and aspects are reckoned, under the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. How they are susceptible 
of number without division, will be shown as our treatise proceeds. 
CHAPTER 3 -- SUNDRY POPULAR FEARS AND PREJUDICES. THE DOCTRINE OF THE 
TRINITY IN UNITY RESCUED FROM THESE MISAPPREHENSIONS.
The simple, indeed, (I will not call them unwise and unlearned,) who always 
constitute the majority of believers, are startled at the dispensation (of the 
Three in One), on the ground that their very rule of faith withdraws them from 
the world's plurality of gods to the one only true God; not understanding that, 
although He is the one only God, He must yet be believed in with His own 
oikonomia. The numerical order and distribution of the Trinity they 
assume to be a division of the Unity; whereas the Unity which derives the 
Trinity out of its own self is so far from being destroyed, that it is actually 
supported by it. They are constantly throwing out against us that we are 
preachers of two gods and three gods, while they take to themselves 
pre-eminently the credit of being worshippers of the One God; just as if the 
Unity itself with irrational deductions did not produce heresy, and the Trinity 
rationally considered constitute the truth. We, say they, maintain the Monarchy 
(or, sole government of God). And so, as far as the sound goes, do even Latins 
(and ignorant ones too) pronounce the word m such a way that you would suppose 
their understanding of the monarkia (or Monarchy) was as complete as 
their pronunciation of the term. Well, then Latins take pains to pronounce the 
monarkia (or Monarchy), while Greeks actually refuse to understand the 
oikonomia, or Dispensation (of the Three in One). As for myself, however, 
if I have gleaned any knowledge of either language, I am sure that 
monarkia (or Monarchy) has no other meaning than single and individual 
rule; but for all that, this monarchy does not, because it is the government of 
one, preclude him whose government it is, either from having a son, or from 
having made himself actually a son to himself, or from ministering his own 
monarchy by whatever agents he will. Nay more, I contend that no dominion so 
belongs to one only, as his own, or is in such a sense singular, or is in such a 
sense a monarchy, as not also to be administered through other persons most 
closely connected with it, and whom it has itself provided as officials to 
itself. If, moreover, there be a son belonging to him whose monarchy it is, it 
does not forthwith become divided and cease to be a monarchy, if the son also be 
taken as a sharer in it; but it is as to its origin equally his, by whom it is 
communicated to the son; and being his, it is quite as much a monarchy (or sole 
empire), since it is held together by two who are so inseparable. 
Therefore, inasmuch as the Divine Monarchy also is administered by so many 
legions and hosts of angels, according as it is written, "Yousand thousands 
ministered to Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before Him;" and 
since it has not from this circumstance ceased to be the rule of one (so as no 
longer to be a monarchy), because it is administered by so many thousands of 
powers; how comes it to pass that God should be thought to suffer division and 
severance in the Son and in the Holy Ghost, who have the second and the third 
places assigned to them, and who are so closely joined with the Father in His 
substance, when He suffers no such (division and severance) in the multitude of 
so many angels? Do you really suppose that Those, who are naturally members of 
the Father's own substance, pledges of His love, instruments of His might, nay, 
His power itself and the entire system of His monarchy, are the overthrow and 
destruction thereof? You are not right in so thinking. I prefer your exercising 
yourself on the meaning of the thing rather than on the sound of the word. Now 
you must understand the overthrow of a monarchy to be this, when another 
dominion, which has a framework and a state peculiar to itself (and is therefore 
a rival), is brought in over and above it: when, e.g., some other god is 
introduced in opposition to the Creator, as in the opinions of Marcion; or when 
many gods are introduced, according to your Valentinuses and your Prodicuses. 
Then it amounts to an overthrow of the Monarchy, since it involves the 
destruction of the Creator. 
CHAPTER 4 -- THE UNITY OF THE GODHEAD AND THE SUPREMACY AND SOLE 
GOVERNMENT OF THE DIVINE BEING. THE MONARCHY NOT AT ALL IMPAIRED BY THE CATHOLIC 
DOCTRINE.
But as for me, who derive the Son from no other source but from the substance 
of the Father, and (represent Him) as doing nothing without the Father's will, 
and as having received all power from the Father, how can I be possibly 
destroying the Monarchy from the faith, when I preserve it in the Son just as it 
was committed to Him by the Father? The same remark (I wish also to be formally) 
made by me with respect to the third degree in the Godhead, because I believe 
the Spirit to proceed from no other source than from the Father through the Son. 
Look to it then, that it be not you rather who are destroying the Monarchy, when 
you overthrow the arrangement and dispensation of it, which has been constituted 
in just as many names as it has pleased God to employ. But it remains so firm 
and stable in its own state, notwithstanding the introduction into it of the 
Trinity, that the Son actually has to restore it entire to the Father; even as 
the apostle says in his epistle, concerning the very end of all: "When He shall 
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; for He must reign till He 
has put all enemies under His feet;" following of course the words of the Psalm: 
"Sit You on my right hand, until I make Your enemies Your footstool." "When, 
however, all things shall be subdued to Him, (with the exception of Him who did 
put all things under Him,) then shall the Son also Himself be subject to Him who 
put all things under Him, that God may be all in all." We thus see that the Son 
is no obstacle to the Monarchy, although it is now administered by the Son; 
because with the Son it is still in its own state, and with its own state will 
be restored to the Father by the Son. No one, therefore, will impair it, on 
account of admitting the Son (to it), since it is certain that it has been 
committed to Him by the Father, and by and by has to be again delivered up by 
Him to the Father. Now, from this one passage of the epistle of the inspired 
apostle, we have been already able to show that the Father and the Son are two 
separate Persons, not only by the mention of their separate names as Father and 
the Son, but also by the fact that He who delivered up the kingdom, and He to 
whom it is delivered up -- and in like manner, He who subjected (all things), 
and He to whom they were subjected -- must necessarily be two different Beings. 
CHAPTER 5 -- THE EVOLUTION OF THE SON OR WORD OF GOD FROM THE FATHER BY A 
DIVINE PROCESSION. ILLUSTRATED BY THE OPERATION OF THE HUMAN THOUGHT AND 
CONSCIOUSNESS.
But since they will have the Two to be but One, so that the Father shall be 
deemed to be the same as the Son, it is only right that the whole question 
respecting the Son should be examined, as to whether He exists, and who He is 
and the mode of His existence. Thus shall the truth itself secure its own 
sanction from the Scriptures, and the interpretations which guard them. There 
are some who allege that even Genesis opens thus in Hebrew: "In the beginning 
God made for Himself a Son." As there is no ground for this, I am led to other 
arguments derived from God's own dispensation, in which He existed before the 
creation of the world, up to the generation of the Son. For before all things 
God was alone -- being in Himself and for Himself universe, and space, and all 
things. Moreover, He was alone, because there was nothing external to Him but 
Himself. Yet even not then was He alone; for He had with Him that which He 
possessed in Himself, that is to say, His own Reason. For God is rational, and 
Reason was first in Him; and so all things were from Himself. This Reason is His 
own Yought (or Consciousness) which the Greeks call logos, by which term 
we also designate Word or Discourse and therefore it is now usual with our 
people, owing to the mere simple interpretation of the term, to say that the 
Word was in the beginning with God; although it would be more suitable to regard 
Reason as the more ancient; because God had not Word from the beginning, but He 
had Reason even before the beginning; because also Word itself consists of 
Reason, which it thus proves to have been the prior existence as being its own 
substance. Not that this distinction is of any practical moment. For although 
God had not yet sent out His Word, He still had Him within Himself, both in 
company with and included within His very Reason, as He silently planned and 
arranged within Himself everything which He was afterwards about to utter 
through His Word. Now, whilst He was thus planning and arranging with His own 
Reason, He was actually causing that to become Word which He was dealing with in 
the way of Word or Discourse. And that you may the more readily understand this, 
consider first of all, from your own self, who are made "in the image and 
likeness of God," for what purpose it is that you also possess reason in 
yourself, who are a rational creature, as being not only made by a rational 
Artificer, but actually animated out of His substance. Observe, then, that when 
you are silently conversing with yourself, this very process is carried on 
within you by your reason, which meets you with a word at every movement of your 
thought, at every impulse of your conception. Whatever you think, there is a 
word; whatever you conceive, there is reason. You must needs speak it in your 
mind; and while you are speaking, you admit speech as an interlocutor with you, 
involved in which there is this very reason, whereby, while in thought you are 
holding converse with your word, you are (by reciprocal action) producing 
thought by means of that converse with your word. Thus, in a certain sense, the 
word is a second person within you, through which in thinking you utter speech, 
and through which also, (by reciprocity of process,) in uttering speech you 
generate thought. The word is itself a different thing from yourself. Now how 
much more fully is all this transacted in God, whose image and likeness even you 
are regarded as being, inasmuch as He has reason within Himself even while He is 
silent, and involved in that Reason His Word! I may therefore without rashness 
first lay this down (as a fixed principle) that even then before the creation of 
the universe God was not alone, since He had within Himself both Reason, and, 
inherent in Reason, His Word, which He made second to Himself by agitating it 
within Himself. 
CHAPTER 6 -- THE WORD OF GOD IS ALSO THE WISDOM OF GOD. THE GOING FORTH OF 
WISDOM TO CREATE THE UNIVERSE, ACCORDING TO THE DIVINE PLAN.
This power and disposition of the Divine Intelligence is set forth also in 
the Scriptures under the name of Sofia, Wisdom; for what can be better 
entitled to the name of Wisdom than the Reason or the Word of God? Listen 
therefore to Wisdom herself, constituted in the character of a Second Person: 
"At the first the Lord created me as the beginning of His ways, with a view to 
His own works, before He made the earth, before the mountains were settled; 
moreover, before all the hills did He beget me;" that is to say, He created and 
generated me in His own intelligence. Then, again, observe the distinction 
between them implied in the companionship of Wisdom with the Lord. "When He 
prepared the heaven," says Wisdom, "I was present with Him; and when He made His 
strong places upon the winds, which are the clouds above; and when He secured 
the fountains, (and all things) which are beneath the sky, I was by, arranging 
all things with Him; I was by, in whom He delighted; and daily, too, did I 
rejoice in His presence." Now, as soon as it pleased God to put forth into their 
respective substances and forms the things which He had planned and ordered 
within Himself, in conjunction with His Wisdom's Reason and Word, He first put 
forth the Word Himself, having within Him His own inseparable Reason and Wisdom, 
in order that all things might be made through Him through whom they had been 
planned and disposed, yea, and already made, so far forth as (they were) in the 
mind and intelligence of God. This, however, was still wanting to them, that 
they should also be openly known, and kept permanently in their proper forms and 
substances. 
CHAPTER 7 -- THE SON BY BEING DESIGNATED WORD AND WISDOM, (ACCORDING TO 
THE IMPERFECTION OF HUMAN THOUGHT AND LANGUAGE) LIABLE TO BE DEEMED A MERE 
ATTRIBUTE. HE IS SHOWN TO BE A PERSONAL BEING.
Then, therefore, does the Word also Himself assume His own form and glorious 
garb, His own sound and vocal utterance, when God says, "Let there be light." 
This is the perfect nativity of the Word, when He proceeds forth from God -- 
formed by Him first to devise and think out all thinks under the name of Wisdom 
-- "The Lord created or formed me as the beginning of His ways;" then afterward 
begotten, to carry all into effect -- "When He prepared the heaven, I was 
present with Him." Thus does He make Him equal to Him: for by proceeding from 
Himself He became His first-begotten Son, because begotten before all things; 
and His only-begotten also, because alone begotten of God, m a way peculiar to 
Himself, from the womb of His own heart -- even as the Father Himself testifies: 
"My heart," says He, "has emitted my most excellent Word." The father took 
pleasure evermore in Him, who equally rejoiced with a reciprocal gladness in the 
Father's presence: "You art my Son, today have I begotten You;" even before the 
morning star did I beget You. The Son likewise acknowledges the Father, speaking 
in His own person, under the name of Wisdom: "The Lord formed Me as the 
beginning of His ways, with a view to His own works; before all the hills did He 
beget Me." For if indeed Wisdom in this passage seems to say that She was 
created by the Lord with a view to His works, and to accomplish His ways, yet 
proof is given in another Scripture that "all things were made by the Word, and 
without Him was there nothing made;" as, again, in another place (it is said), 
"By His word were the heavens established, and all the powers thereof by His 
Spirit" -- that is to say, by the Spirit (or Divine Nature) which was in the 
Word: thus is it evident that it is one and the same power which is in one place 
described under the name of Wisdom, and in another passage under the appellation 
of the Word, which was initiated for the works of God? which "strengthened the 
heavens;" "by which all things were made," "and without which nothing was made." 
Nor need we dwell any longer on this point, as if it were not the very Word 
Himself, who is spoken of under the name both of Wisdom and of Reason, and of 
the entire Divine Soul and Spirit. 
He became also the Son of God, and was begotten when He proceeded forth from 
Him. Do you then, (you ask,) grant that the Word is a certain substance, 
constructed by the Spirit and the communication of Wisdom? Certainly I do. But 
you will not allow Him to be really a substantive being, by having a substance 
of His own; in such a way that He may be regarded as an objective thing and a 
person, and so be able (as being constituted second to God the Father,) to make 
two, the Father and the Son, God and the Word. For you will say, what is a word, 
but a voice and sound of the mouth, and (as the grammarians teach) air when 
struck against, intelligible to the ear, but for the rest a sort of void, empty, 
and incorporeal thing. I, on the contrary, contend that nothing empty and void 
could have come forth from God, seeing that it is not put forth from that which 
is empty and void; nor could that possibly be devoid of substance which has 
proceeded from so great a substance, and has produced such mighty substances: 
for all things which were made through Him, He Himself (personally) made. How 
could it be, that He Himself is nothing, without whom nothing was made? How 
could He who is empty have made things which are solid, and He who is void have 
made things which are full, and He who is incorporeal have made things which 
have body? For although a thing may sometimes be made different from him by whom 
it is made, yet nothing can be made by that which is a void and empty thing. Is 
that Word of God, then, a void and empty thing, which is called the Son, who 
Himself is designated God? "The Word was with God, and the Word was God." It is 
written, "You shalt not take God's name in vain." This for certain is He "who, 
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God." In what 
form of God? Of course he means in some form, not in none. For who will deny 
that God is a body, although "God is a Spirit?" For Spirit has a bodily 
substance of its own kind, in its own form. Now, even if invisible things, 
whatsoever they be, have both their substance and their form in God, whereby 
they are visible to God alone, how much more shall that which has been sent 
forth from His substance not be without substance! Whatever, therefore, was the 
substance of the Word that I designate a Person, I claim for it the name of Son; 
and while I recognize the Son, I assert His distinction as second to the Father. 

CHAPTER 8 -- THOUGH THE SON OR WORD OF GOD EMANATES FROM THE FATHER, HE IS 
NOT, LIKE THE EMANATIONS OF VALENTINUS, SEPARABLE FROM THE FATHER. NOR IS THE 
HOLY GHOST SEPARABLE FROM EITHER. ILLUSTRATIONS FROM NATURE.
If any man from this shall think that I am introducing some probolh -- 
that is to say, some prolation of one thing out of another, as Valentinus does 
when he sets forth AEon from AEon, one after another -- then this is my first 
reply to you: Truth must not therefore refrain from the use of such a term, and 
its reality and meaning, because heresy also employs it. The fact is, heresy has 
rather taken it from Truth, in order to mould it into its own counterfeit. Was 
the Word of God put forth or not? Here take your stand with me, and flinch not. 
If He was put forth, then acknowledge that the true doctrine has a prolation; 
and never mind heresy, when in any point it mimics the truth. The question now 
is, in what sense each side uses a given thing and the word which expresses it. 
Valentinus divides and separates his prolations from their Author, and places 
them at so great a distance from Him, that the AEon does not know the Father: he 
longs, indeed, to know Him, but cannot; nay, he is almost swallowed up and 
dissolved into the rest of matter. With us, however, the Son alone knows the 
Father, and has Himself unfolded "the Father's bosom." He has also heard and 
seen all things with the Father; and what He has been commanded by the Father, 
that also does He speak. And it is not His own will, but the Father's, which He 
has accomplished, which He had known most intimately, even from the beginning. 
"For what man knows the things which be in God, but the Spirit which is in Him?" 
But the Word was formed by the Spirit, and (if I may so express myself) the 
Spirit is the body of the Word. The Word, therefore, is both always in the 
Father, as He says, "I am in the Father;" and is always with God, according to 
what is written, "And the Word was with God;" and never separate from the 
Father, or other than the Father, since "I and the Father are one." This will be 
the prolation, taught by the truth, the guardian of the Unity, wherein we 
declare that the Son is a prolation from the Father, without being separated 
from Him. For God sent forth the Word, as the Paraclete also declares, just as 
the root puts forth the tree, and the fountain the river, and the sun the ray. 
For these are probolai, or emanations, of the substances from which they 
proceed. I should not hesitate, indeed, to call the tree the son or offspring of 
the root, and the river of the fountain, and the ray of the sun; because every 
original source is a parent, and everything which issues from the origin is an 
offspring. Much more is (this true of) the Word of God, who has actually 
received as His own peculiar designation the name of Son. But still the tree is 
not severed from the root, nor the river from the fountain, nor the ray from the 
sun; nor, indeed, is the Word separated from God. Following, therefore, the form 
of these analogies, I confess that I call God and His Word -- the Father and His 
Son -- two. For the root and the tree are distinctly two things, but 
correlatively joined; the fountain and the river are also two forms, but 
indivisible; so likewise the sun and the ray are two forms, but coherent ones. 
Everything which proceeds from something else must needs be second to that from 
which it proceeds, without being on that account separated: Where, however, 
there is a second, there must be two; and where there is a third, there must be 
three. Now the Spirit indeed is third from God and the Son; just as the fruit of 
the tree is third from the root, or as the stream out of the river is third from 
the fountain, or as the apex of the ray is third from the sun. Nothing, however, 
is alien from that original source whence it derives its own properties. In like 
manner the Trinity, flowing down from the Father through intertwined and 
connected steps, does not at all disturb the Monarchy, whilst it at the same 
time guards the state of the Economy. 
CHAPTER 9 -- THE CATHOLIC RULE OF FAITH EXPOUNDED IN SOME OF ITS POINTS. 
ESPECIALLY IN THE UNCONFUSED DISTINCTION OF THE SEVERAL PERSONS OF THE BLESSED 
TRINITY.
Bear always in mind that this is the rule of faith which I profess; by it I 
testify that the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit are inseparable from each 
other, and so will you know in what sense this is said. Now, observe, my 
assertion is that the Father is one, and the Son one, and the Spirit one, and 
that They are distinct from Each Other. This statement is taken in a wrong sense 
by every uneducated as well as every perversely disposed person, as if it 
predicated a diversity, in such a sense as to imply a separation among the 
Father, and the Son, and the Spirit. I am, moreover, obliged to say this, when 
(extolling the Monarchy at the expense of the Economy) they contend for the 
identity of the Father and Son and Spirit, that it is not by way of diversity 
that the Son differs from the Father, but by distribution: it is not by division 
that He is different, but by distinction; because the Father is not the same as 
the Son, since they differ one from the other in the mode of their being. For 
the Father is the entire substance, but the Son is a derivation and portion of 
the whole,x as He Himself acknowledges: "My Father is greater than I." In the 
Psalm His inferiority is described as being "a little lower than the angels." 
Thus the Father is distinct from the Son, being greater than the Son, inasmuch 
as He who begets is one, and He who is begotten is another; He, too, who sends 
is one, and He who is sent is another; and He, again, who makes is one, and He 
through whom the thing is made is another. 
Happily the Lord Himself employs this expression of the person of the 
Paraclete, so as to signify not a division or severance, but a disposition (of 
mutual relations in the Godhead); for He says, "I will pray the Father, and He 
shall send you another Comforter. ... even the Spirit of truth," thus making the 
Paraclete distinct from Himself, even as we say that the Son is also distinct 
from the Father; so that He showed a third degree in the Paraclete, as we 
believe the second degree is in the Son, by reason of the order observed in the 
Economy. Besides, does not the very fact that they have the distinct names of 
Father and San amount to a declaration that they are distinct in personality? 
For, of course, all things will be what their names represent them to be; and 
what they are and ever will be, that will they be called; and the distinction 
indicated by the names does not at all admit of any confusion, because there is 
none in the things which they designate. "Yes is yes, and no is no; for what is 
more than these, comes of evil." 
CHAPTER 10 -- THE VERY NAMES OF FATHER AND SON PROVE THE PERSONAL 
DISTINCTION OF THE TWO. THEY CANNOT POSSIBLY BE IDENTICAL, NOR IS THEIR IDENTITY 
NECESSARY TO PRESERVE THE DIVINE MONARCHY.
So it is either the Father or the Son, and the day is not the same as the 
night; nor is the Father the same as the Son, in such a way that Both of them 
should be One, and One or the Other should be Both, -- an opinion which the most 
conceited "Monarchians" maintain. He Himself, they say, made Himself a Son to 
Himself. Now a Father makes a Son, and a Son makes a Father; and they who thus 
become reciprocally related out of each other to each other cannot in any way by 
themselves simply become so related to themselves, that the Father can make 
Himself a Son to Himself, and the Son render Himself a Father to Himself. And 
the relations which God establishes, them does He also guard. A father must 
needs have a son, in order to be a father; so likewise a son, to be a son, must 
have a father. It is, however, one thing to have, and another thing to be. For 
instance, in order to be a husband, I must have a wife; I can never myself be my 
own wife. In like manner, in order to be a father, I have a son, for I never can 
be a son to myself; and in order to be a son, I have a father, it being 
impossible for me ever to be my own father. And it is these relations which make 
me (what I am), when I come to possess them: I shall then be a father, when I 
have a son; and a son, when I have a father. Now, if I am to be to myself any 
one of these relations, I no longer have what I am myself to be: neither a 
father, because I am to be my own father; nor a son, because I shall be my own 
son. Moreover, inasmuch as I ought to leave one of these relations in order to 
be the other; so, if I am to be both together, I shall fail to be one while I 
possess not the other. For if I must be myself my son, who am also a father, I 
now cease to have a son, since I am my own son. But by reason of not having a 
son, since I am my own son, how can I be a father? For I ought to have a son, in 
order to be a father. Therefore I am not a son, because I have not a father, who 
makes a son. In like manner, if I am myself my father, who am also a son, I no 
longer have a father, but am myself my father. By not having a father, however, 
since I am my own father, how can I be a son? For I ought to have a father, in 
order to be a son. I cannot therefore be a father, because I have not a son, who 
makes a father. Now all this must be the device of the devil -- this excluding 
and severing one from the other -- since by including both together in one under 
pretence of the Monarchy, he causes neither to be held and acknowledged, so that 
He is not the Father, since indeed He has not the Son; neither is He the Son, 
since in like manner He has not the Father: for while He is the Father, He will 
not be the Son. In this way they hold the Monarchy, but they hold neither the 
Father nor the Son. Well, but "with God nothing is impossible." True enough; who 
can be ignorant of it? Who also can be unaware that "the things which are 
impossible with men are possible with God?" The foolish things also of the world 
has God chosen to confound the things which are wise." We have read it all. 
Therefore, they argue, it was not difficult for God to make Himself both a 
Father and a Son, contrary to the condition of things among men. For a barren 
woman to have a child against nature was no difficulty with God; nor was it for 
a virgin to conceive. Of course nothing is "too hard for the Lord." But if we 
choose to apply this principle so extravagantly and harshly in our capricious 
imaginations, we may then make out God to have done anything we please, on the 
ground that it was not impossible for Him to do it. We must not, however, 
because He is able to do all things suppose that He has actually done what He 
has not done. But we must inquire whether He has really done it. 
God could, if He had liked, have furnished man with wings to fly with, just 
as He gave wings to kites. We must not, however, run to the conclusion that He 
did this because He was able to do it. He might also have extinguished Praxeas 
and all other heretics at once; it does not follow, however, that He did, simply 
because He was able. For it was necessary that there should be both kites and 
heretics; it was necessary also that the Father should be crucified. In one 
sense there will be something difficult even for God -- namely, that which He 
has not done -- -not because He could not, but because He would not, do it. For 
with God, to be willing is to be able, and to be unwilling is to be unable; all 
that He has willed, however, He has both been able to accomplish, and has 
displayed His ability. Since, therefore, if God had wished to make Himself a Son 
to Himself, He had it in His power to do so; and since, if He had it in His 
power, He effected His purpose, you will then make good your proof of His power 
and His will (to do even this) when you shall have proved to us that He actually 
did it. 
CHAPTER 11 -- THE IDENTITY OF THE FATHER AND THESON, AS PRAXEAS HELD IT, 
SHOWN TO BE FULL OF PERPLEXITY AND ABSURDITY. MANY SCRIPTURES QUOTED IN PROOF OF 
THE DISTINCTION OF THE DIVINE PERSONS OF THE TRINITY.
It will be your duty, however, to adduce your proofs out of the Scriptures as 
plainly as we do, when we prove that He made His Word a Son to Himself. For if 
He calls Him Son, and if the Son is none other than He who has proceeded from 
the other Himself, and if the Word has proceeded from the Father Himself, He 
will then be the Son, and not Himself from whom He proceeded. For the Father 
Himself did not proceed from Himself. Now, you who say that the Father is the 
same as the Son, do really make the same Person both to have sent forth from 
Himself (and at the same time to have gone out from Himself as) that Being which 
is God. If it was possible for Him to have done this, He at all events did not 
do it. You must bring forth the proof which I require of you -- one like my own; 
that is, (you must prove to me) that the Scriptures show the Son and the Father 
to be the same, just as on our side the Father and the Son are demonstrated to 
be distinct; I say distinct, but not separate: for as on my part I produce the 
words of God Himself, "My heart has emitted my most excellent Word," so you in 
like manner ought to adduce in opposition to me some text where God has said, 
"My heart has emitted Myself as my own most excellent Word," in such a sense 
that He is Himself both the Emitter and the Emitted, both He who sent forth and 
He who was sent forth, since He is both the Word and God. I bid you also 
observe, that on my side I advance the passage where the Father said to the Son, 
"You art my Son, this day have I begotten You." If you want me to believe Him to 
be both the Father and the Son, show me some other passage where it is declared, 
"The Lord said to Himself, I am my own Son, today have I begotten myself;" or 
again, "Before the morning did I beget myself;" and likewise, "I the Lord 
possessed Myself the beginning of my ways for my own works; before all the 
hills, too, did I beget myself;" and whatever other passages are to the same 
effect. Why, moreover, could God the Lord of all things, have hesitated to speak 
thus of Himself, if the fact had been so? Was He afraid of not being believed, 
if He had m so many words declared Himself to be both the Father and the Son? Of 
one thing He was at any rate afraid -- of lying. Of Himself, too, and of His own 
truth, was He afraid. Believing Him, therefore, to be the true God, I am sure 
that He declared nothing to exist in any other way than according to His own 
dispensation and arrangement, and that He had arranged nothing in any other way 
than according to His own declaration. On your side, however, you must make Him 
out to be a liar, and an impostor, and a tamperer with His word, if, when He was 
Himself a Son to Himself, He assigned the part of His Son to be played by 
another, when all the Scriptures attest the clear existence of, and distinction 
in (the Persons of) the Trinity, and indeed furnish us with our Rule of faith, 
that He who speaks; and He of whom He speaks, and to whom He speaks, cannot 
possibly seem to be One and the Same. So absurd arid misleading a statement 
would be unworthy of God, that, widen it was Himself to whom He was speaking, He 
speaks rather to another, and not to His very self. Hear, then, other utterances 
also of the Father concerning the Son by the mouth of Isaiah: "Behold my Son, 
whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom I am well pleased: I will put my Spirit 
upon Him, and He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles." Hear also what He 
says to the Son: "Is it a great thing for You, that You shouldest be called my 
Son to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the dispersed of Israel? I 
have given You for a light to the Gentiles, that You mayest be their salvation 
to the end of the earth." Hear now also the Son's utterances respecting the 
Father: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He has anointed me to preach 
the gospel to men." He speaks of Himself likewise to the Father in the Psalm: 
"Forsake me not until I have declared the might of Your arm to all the 
generation that is to come." Also to the same purport in another Psalm: "O Lord, 
how are they increased that trouble me!" But almost all the Psalms which 
prophesy of the person of Christ, represent the Son as conversing with the 
Father -- that is, represent Christ (as speaking) to God. Observe also the 
Spirit speaking of the Father and the Son, in the character of a third Person: 
"The Lord said to my Lord, Sit You on my right hand, until I make Your enemies 
Your footstool." Likewise in the words of Isaiah: "Thus saith the Lord to the 
Lord mine Anointed." Likewise, in the same prophet, He says to the Father 
respecting the Son: "Lord, who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm 
of the Lord revealed? We brought a report concerning Him, as if He were a little 
child, as if He were a root in a dry ground, who had no form nor comeliness." 
These are a few testimonies out of many; for we do not pretend to bring up all 
the passages of Scripture, because we have a tolerably large accumulation of 
them in the various heads of our subject, as we in our several chapters call 
them in as our witnesses in the fulness of their dignity and authority. Still, 
in these few quotations the distinction of Persons in the Trinity is clearly set 
forth. For there is the Spirit Himself who speaks, and the Father to whom He 
speaks, and the Son of whom He speaks. In the same manner, the other passages 
also establish each one of several Persons in His special character -- addressed 
as they in some cases are to the Father or to the Son respecting the Son, in 
other cases to the Son or to the Father concerning the Father, and again in 
other instances to the (Holy) Spirit. 
CHAPTER 12 -- OTHER QUOTATIONS FROM HOLY SCRIPTURE ADDUCED IN PROOF OF THE 
PLURALITY OF PERSONS IN THE GODHEAD.
If the number of the Trinity also offends you, as if it were not connected in 
the simple Unity, I ask you how it is possible for a Being who is merely and 
absolutely One and Singular, to speak in plural phrase, saying, "Let us make man 
in our own image, and after our own likeness;" whereas He ought to have said, 
"Let me make man in my own image, and after my own likeness," as being a unique 
and singular Being? In the following passage, however, "Behold the man is become 
as one of us," He is either deceiving or amusing us in speaking plurally, if He 
is One only and singular. Or was it to the angels that He spoke, as the Jews 
interpret the passage, because these also acknowledge not the Son? Or was it 
because He was at once the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, that He spoke to 
Himself in plural terms, making Himself plural on that very account? Nay, it was 
because He had already His Son close at His side, as a second Person, His own 
Word, and a third Person also, the Spirit in the Word, that He purposely adopted 
the plural phrase, "Let us make;" and, "in our image;" and, "become as one of 
us." For with whom did He make man? and to whom did He make him like? (The 
answer must be), the Son on the one hand, who was one day to put on human 
nature; and the Spirit on the other, who was to sanctify man. With these did He 
then speak, in the Unity of the Trinity, as with His ministers and witnesses In 
the following text also He distinguishes among the Persons: "So God created man 
in His own image; in the image of God created He him." Why say "image of God?" 
Why not "His own image" merely, if He was only one who was the Maker, and if 
there was not also One in whose image He made man? But there was One in whose 
image God was making man, that is to say, Christ's image, who, being one day 
about to become Man (more surely and more truly so), had already caused the man 
to be called His image, who was then going to be formed of clay -- the image and 
similitude of the true and perfect Man. But in respect of the previous works of 
the world what says the Scripture? Its first statement indeed is made, when the 
Son has not yet appeared: "And God said, Let there be light, and there was 
light." Immediately there appears the Word, "that true light, which lights man 
on his coming into the world," and through Him also came light upon the world. 
From that moment God willed creation to be effected in the Word, Christ being 
present and ministering to Him: and so God created. And God said, "Let there be 
a firmament, ... and God made the firmament;" and God also said. "Let there be 
lights (in the firmament); and so God made a greater and a lesser light." But 
all the rest of the created things did He in like manner make, who made the 
former ones -- I mean the Word of God. "through whom all things were made, and 
without whom nothing was made." Now if He too is God, according to John, (who 
says.) "The Word was God," then you have two Beings -- One that commands that 
the thing be made. and the Other that executes the order and creates. In what 
sense, however, you ought to understand Him to be another. I have already 
explained, on the ground of Personality, not of Substance -- in the way of 
distinction, not of division. But although I must everywhere hold one only 
substance in three coherent and inseparable (Persons), yet I am bound to 
acknowledge, from the necessity of the case, that He who issues a command is 
different from Him who executes it. For, indeed, He would not be issuing a 
command if He were all the while doing the work Himself, while ordering it to be 
done by the second. But still He did issue the command, although He would not 
have intended to command Himself if He were only one; or else He must have 
worked without any command, because He would not have waited to command Himself. 

CHAPTER 13 -- THE FORCE OF SUNDRY PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE ILLUSTRATED IN 
RELATION TO THE PLURALITY OF PERSONS AND UNITY OF SUBSTANCE. THERE IS NO 
POLYTHEISM HERE, SINCE THE UNITY IS INSISTED ON AS A REMEDY AGAINST 
POLYTHEISM.
Well then, you reply, if He was God who spoke, and He was also God who 
created, at this rate, one God spoke and another created; (and thus) two Gods 
are declared. If you are so venturesome and harsh, reflect a while; and that you 
may think the better and more deliberately, listen to the psalm in which Two are 
described as God: "Your throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the sceptre of Your 
kingdom is a sceptre of righteousness. You have loved righteousness, and hated 
iniquity: therefore God, even Your God, has anointed You or made You His 
Christ." Now, since He here speaks to God, and affirms that God is anointed by 
God, He must have affirmed that Two are God, by reason of the sceptre's royal 
power. Accordingly, Isaiah also says to the Person of Christ: "The Sabaeans, men 
of stature, shall pass over to You; and they shall follow after You, bound in 
fetters; and they shall worship You, because God is in You: for You art our God, 
yet we knew it not; You art the God of Israel." For here too, by saying, "God is 
in You, and "You art God," he sets forth Two who were God: (in the former 
expression in You, he means) in Christ, and (in the other he means) the Holy 
Ghost. That is a still grander statement which you will find expressly made in 
the Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the 
Word was God." There was One "who was," and there was another "with whom" He 
was. But I find in Scripture the name LORD also applied to them Both: "The Lord 
said to my Lord, Sit You on my right hand." And Isaiah says this: "Lord, who has 
believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?" Now he would 
most certainly have said Your Arm, if he had not wished us to understand that 
the Father is Lord, and the Son also is Lord. A much more ancient testimony we 
have also in Genesis: "Then the Lord rained upon Sodore and upon Gomorrah 
brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven." Now, either deny that this is 
Scripture; or else (let me ask) what sort of man you are, that you do not think 
words ought to be taken and understood in the sense in which they are written, 
especially when they are not expressed in allegories and parables, but in 
determinate and simple declarations? If, indeed, you follow those who did not at 
the time endure the Lord when showing Himself to be the Son of God, because they 
would not believe Him to be the Lord, then (I ask you)call to mind along with 
them the passage where it is written, "I have said, You are gods, and ye are 
children of the Most High;" and again, "God stands in the congregation of gods;" 
in order that, if the Scripture has not been afraid to designate as gods human 
beings, who have become sons of God by faith, you may be sure that the same 
Scripture has with greater propriety conferred the name of the Lord on the true 
and one-only Son of God. Very well! you say, I shall challenge you to preach 
from this day forth (and that, too, on the authority of these same Scriptures) 
two Gods and two Lords, consistently with your views. God forbid, (is my reply.) 
For we, who by the grace of God possess an insight into both the times and the 
occasions of the Sacred Writings, especially we who are followers of the 
Paraclete, not of human teachers, do indeed definitively declare that Two Beings 
are God, the Father and the Son, and, with the addition of the Holy Spirit, even 
Three, according to the principle of the divine economy, which introduces 
number, in order that the Father may not, as you perversely infer, be Himself 
believed to have been born and to have suffered, which it is not lawful to 
believe, forasmuch as it has not been so handed down. That there are, however, 
two Gods or two Lords, is a statement which at no time proceeds out of our 
mouth: not as if it were untrue that the Father is God, and the Son is God, and 
the Holy Ghost is God, and each is God; but because in earlier times Two were 
actually spoken of as God, and two as Lord, that when Christ should come He 
might be both acknowledged as God and designated as Lord, being the Son of Him 
who is both God and Lord. Now, if there were found in the Scriptures but one 
Personality of Him who is God and Lord, Christ would justly enough be 
inadmissible to the title of God and Lord: for (in the Scriptures) there was 
declared to be none other than One God and One Lord, and it must have followed 
that the Father should Himself seem to have come down (to earth), inasmuch as 
only One God and One Lord was ever read of (in the Scriptures), and His entire 
Economy would be involved in obscurity, which has been planned and arranged with 
so clear a foresight in His providential dispensation as matter for our faith. 
As soon, however, as Christ came, and was recognised by us as the very Being who 
had from the beginning caused plurality (in the Divine Economy), being the 
second from the Father, and with the Spirit the third, and Himself declaring and 
manifesting the Father more fully (than He had ever been before), the title of 
Him who is God and Lord was at once restored to the Unity (of the Divine 
Nature), even because the Gentiles would have to pass from the multitude of 
their idols to the One Only God, in order that a difference might be distinctly 
settled between the worshippers of One God and the votaries of polytheism. For 
it was only right that Christians should shine in the world as "children of 
light," adoring and invoking Him who is the One God and Lord as "the light of 
the world." Besides, if, from that perfect knowledge which assures us that the 
title of God and Lord is suitable both to the Father, and to the Son, and to the 
Holy Ghost, we were to invoke a plurality of gods and lords, we should quench 
our torches, and we should become less courageous to endure the martyr's 
sufferings, from which an easy escape would everywhere lie open to us, as soon 
as we swore by a plurality of gods and lords, as sundry heretics do, who hold 
more gods than One. I will therefore not speak of gods at all, nor of lords, but 
I shall follow the apostle; so that if the Father and the Son, are alike to be 
invoked, I shall call the Father "God," and invoke Jesus Christ as "Lord." But 
when Christ alone (is mentioned), I shall be able to call Him "God," as the same 
apostle says: "Of whom is Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever." For I 
should give the name of" sun" even to a sunbeam, considered in itself; but if I 
were mentioning the sun from which the ray emanates, I certainly should at once 
withdraw the name of sun from the mere beam. For although I make not two suns, 
still I shall reckon both the sun and its ray to be as much two things and two 
forms of one undivided substance, as God and His Word, as the Father and the 
Son. 
CHAPTER 14 -- THE NATURAL INVISIBILITY OF THE FATHER, AND THE VISIBILITY 
OF THE SON WITNESSED IN MANY PASSAGES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. ARGUMENTS OF THEIR 
DISTINCTNESS, THUS SUPPLIED.
Moreover, there comes to our aid, when we insist upon the Father and the Son 
as being Two, that regulating principle which has determined God to be 
invisible. When Moses in Egypt desired to see the face of the Lord, saying, "If 
therefore I have found grace in Your sight, manifest Yourself to me, that I may 
see You and know You," God said, "You canst not see my face; for there shall no 
man see me, and live:" in other words, he who sees me shall die. Now we find 
that God has been seen by many persons, and yet that no one who saw Him died (at 
the sight). The truth is, they saw God according to the faculties of men, but 
not in accordance with the full glory of the Godhead. For the patriarchs are 
said to have seen God (as Abraham and Jacob), and the prophets (as, for instance 
Isaiah and Ezekiel), and yet they did not die. Either, then, they ought to have 
died, since they had seen Him -- for (the sentence runs), "No man shall see God, 
and live ;" or else if they saw God, and yet did not die, the Scripture is false 
in stating that God said, "If a man see my face, he shall not live." Either way, 
the Scripture misleads us, when it makes God invisible, and when it produces Him 
to our sight. Now, then, He must be a different Being who was seen, because of 
one who was seen it could not be predicated that He is invisible. It will 
therefore follow, that by Him who is invisible we must understand the Father in 
the fulness of His majesty, while we recognise the Son as visible by reason of 
the dispensation of His derived existence; even as it is not permitted us to 
contemplate, the sun, in the full amount of his substance which is in the 
heavens, but we can only endure with our eyes a ray, by reason of the tempered 
condition of this portion which is projected from him to the earth. Here some 
one on the other side may be disposed to contend that the Son is also invisible 
as being the Word, and as being also the Spirit; and, while claiming one nature 
for the Father and the Son, to affirm that the Father is rather One and the Same 
Person with the Son. But the Scripture, as we have said, maintains their 
difference by the distinction it makes between the Visible and the Invisible. 
They then go on to argue to this effect, that if it was the Son who then spake 
to Moses, He must mean it of Himself that His face was visible to no one, 
because He was Himself indeed the invisible Father in the name of the Son. And 
by this means they will have it that the Visible and the Invisible are one and 
the same, just as the Father and the Son are the same; (and this they maintain) 
because in a preceding passage, before He had refused (the sight of) His face to 
Moses, the Scripture informs us that "the Lord spake face to face with Moses, 
even as a man speaks to his friend;" just as Jacob also says, "I have seen God 
face to face." Therefore the Visible and the Invisible are one and the same; and 
both being thus the same, it follows that He is invisible as the Father, and 
visible as the Son. As if the Scripture, according to our exposition of it, were 
inapplicable to the Son, when the Father is set aside in His own invisibility. 
We declare, however, that the Son also, considered in Himself (as the Son), is 
invisible, in that He is God, and the Word and Spirit of God; but that He was 
visible before the days of His flesh, in the way that He says to Aaron and 
Miriam, "And if there shall be a prophet amongst you, I will make myself known 
to him in a vision, and will speak to him in a dream; not as with Moses, with 
whom I shall speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, that is to say, in truth, 
and not enigmatically" that is to say, in image; as the apostle also expresses 
it, "Now we see through a glass, darkly (or enigmatically), but then face to 
face." Since, therefore, He reserves to some future time His presence and speech 
face to face with Moses -- a promise which was afterwards fulfilled in the 
retirement of the mount (of transfiguration), when as we read in the Gospel," 
Moses appeared talking with Jesus" -- it is evident that in early times it was 
always in a glass, (as it were,)and an enigma, in vision and dream, that God, I 
mean the Son of God, appeared -- to the prophets and the patriarchs, as also to 
Moses indeed himself. And even if the Lord did possibly speak with him face to 
face, yet it was not as man that he could behold His face, unless indeed it was 
in a glass, (as it were,) and by enigma. Besides, if the Lord so spake with 
Moses, that Moses actually discerned His face, eye to eye, how comes it to pass 
that immediately afterwards, on the same occasion, he desires to see His face, 
which he ought not to have desired, because he had already seen it? And how, in 
like manner, does the Lord also Say that His face cannot be seen, because He had 
shown it, if indeed He really had, (as our opponents suppose.) Or what is that 
fade of God, the sight of which is refused, if there was one which was visible 
to man? "I have seen God," says Jacob, "face to face, and my life is preserved." 
There ought to be some other face which kills if it be only seen. Well, then, 
was the Son visible? (Certainly not, ) although He was the face of God, except 
only in vision and dream, and in a glass and enigma, because the Word and Spirit 
(of God) cannot be seen except in an imaginary form. But, (they say,) He calls 
the invisible Father His face. For who is the Father? Must He not be the face of 
the Son, by reason of that authority which He obtains as the begotten of the 
Father? For is there not a natural propriety in saying of some personage greater 
(than yourself), That man is my face; he gives me his countenance? "My Father," 
says Christ, "is greater than I." Therefore the Father must be the face of the 
Son. For what does the Scripture say? "The Spirit of His person is Christ the 
Lord." As therefore Christ is the Spirit of the Father's person, there is good 
reason why, in virtue indeed of the unity, the Spirit of Him to whose person He 
belonged -- that is to say, the Father -- pronounced Him to be His "face." Now 
this, to be sure, is an astonishing thing, that the Father can be taken to be 
the face of the Son, when He is His head; for "the head of Christ is God." 
CHAPTER 15 -- NEW TESTAMENT PASSAGES QUOTED. THEY ATTEST THE SAME TRUTH OF 
THE SON'S VISIBILITY CONTRASTED WITH THE FATHER'S INVISIBILITY.
If I fail in resolving this article (of our faith) by passages which may 
admit of dispute out of the Old Testament, I will take out of the New Testament 
a confirmation of our view, that you may not straightway attribute to the Father 
every possible (relation and condition) which I ascribe to the Son. Behold, 
then, I find both in the Gospels and in the (writings of the) apostles a visible 
and an invisible God (revealed to us), under a manifest and personal distinction 
in the condition of both. There is a certain emphatic saying by John: "No man 
has seen God at any time;" meaning, of course, at any previous time But he has 
indeed taken away all question of time, by saying that God had never been seen. 
The apostle confirms this statement; for, speaking of God, he says, "Whom no man 
has seen, nor can see;" because the man indeed would die who should see Him. But 
the very same apostles testify that they had both seen and "handled" Christ." 
Now, if Christ is Himself both the Father and the Son, how can He be both the 
Visible and the Invisible? In order, however, to reconcile this diversity 
between the Visible and the Invisible, will not some one on the other side argue 
that the two statements are quite correct: that He was visible indeed in the 
flesh, but was invisible before His appearance in the flesh; so that He who as 
the Father was invisible before the flesh, is the same as the Son who was 
visible in the flesh? If, however, He is the same who was invisible before the 
incarnation, how comes it that He was actually seen in ancient times before 
(coming in) the flesh? And by parity of reasoning, if He is the same who was 
visible after (coming in) the flesh, how happens it that He is now declared to 
be invisible by the apostles? How, I repeat, can all this be, unless it be that 
He is one, who anciently was visible only in mystery and enigma, and became more 
clearly visible by His incarnation, even the Word who was also made flesh; 
whilst He is another whom no man has seen at any time, being none else than the 
Father, even Him to whom the Word belongs? Let us, in short, examine who it is 
whom the apostles saw. "That," says John, "which we have seen with our eyes, 
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life." Now 
the Word of life became flesh, and was heard, and was seen, and was handled, 
because He was flesh who, before He came in the flesh, was the "Word in the 
beginning with God" the Father, and not the Father with the Word. For although 
the Word was God, yet was He with God, because He is God of God; and being 
joined to the Father, is with the Father. "And we have seen His glory, the glory 
as of the only begotten of the Father;" that is, of course, (the glory) of the 
Son, even Him who was visible, and was glorified by the invisible Father. And 
therefore, inasmuch as he had said that the Word of God was God, in order that 
he might give no help to the presumption of the adversary, (which pretended) 
that he had seen the Father Himself and in order to draw a distinction between 
the invisible Father and the visible Son, he makes the additional assertion, ex 
abundanti as it were: "No man has seen God at any time." What God does he mean? 
The Word? But he has already said: "Him we have seen and heard, and our hands 
have handled the Word of life." Well, (I must again ask,) what God does he mean? 
It is of course the Father, with whom was the Word, the only begotten Son, who 
is in the bosom of the Father, and has Himself declared Him. He was both heard 
and seen and, that He might not be supposed to be a phantom, was actually 
handled. Him, too, did Paul behold; but yet he saw not the Father. "Have I not," 
he says, "seen Jesus Christ our Lord?" Moreover, he expressly called Christ God, 
saying: "Of whom are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ 
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever." He shows us also that the Son of 
God, which is the Word of God, is visible, because He who became flesh was 
called Christ. Of the Father, however, he says to Timothy: "Whom none among men 
has seen, nor indeed can see;" and he accumulates the description in still 
ampler terms: "Who only has immortality, and dwells in the light which no man 
can approach to." It was of Him, too, that he had said in a previous passage: 
"Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, to the only God;" so that we 
might apply even the contrary qualities to the Son Himself -- mortality, 
accessibility -- of whom the apostle testifies that "He died according to the 
Scriptures," and that "He was seen by himself last of all," -- by means, of 
course, of the light which was accessible, although it was not without 
imperilling his sight that he experienced that light. A like danger to which 
also befell Peter, and John, and James, (who confronted not the same light) 
without risking the loss of their reason and mind; and if they, who were unable 
to endure the glory of the Son, had only seen the Father, they must have died 
then and there: "For no man shall see God, and live." This being the case, it is 
evident that He was always seen from the beginning, who became visible in the 
end; and that He, (on the contrary,) was not seen in the end who had never been 
visible from the beginning; and that accordingly there are two -- the Visible 
and the Invisible. It was the Son, therefore, who was always seen, and the Son 
who always conversed with men, and the Son who has always worked by the 
authority and will of the Father; because "the Son can do nothing of Himself, 
but what He sees the Father do" -- "do" that is, in His mind and thought. For 
the Father acts by mind and thought; whilst the Son, who is in the Father's mind 
and thought, gives effect and form to what He sees. Thus all things were made by 
tile Son, and without Him was not anything made. 
CHAPTER 16 -- EARLY MANIFESTATIONS OF THE SON OF GOD, AS RECORDED IN THE 
OLD TESTAMENT; REHEARSALS OF HIS SUBSEQUENT INCARNATION.
But you must not suppose that only the works which relate to the (creation of 
the) world were made by the Son, but also whatsoever since that time has been 
done by God. For "the Father who loves the Son, and has given all things into 
His hand," loves Him indeed from the beginning, and from the very first has 
handed all things over to Him. Whence it is written, "From the beginning the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God;" to whom "is given by the Father all 
power in heaven and on earth." "The Father judges no man, but has committed all 
judgment to the Son" -- from the very beginning even. For when He speaks of all 
power and all judgment, and says that all things were made by Him, and all 
things have been delivered into His hand, He allows no exception (in respect) of 
time, because they would not be all things unless they were the things of all 
time. It is the Son, therefore, who has been from the beginning administering 
judgment, throwing down the haughty tower, and dividing the tongues, punishing 
the whole world by the violence of waters, raining upon Sodom and Gomorrah fire 
and brimstone, as the LORD from the LORD. For He it was who at all times came 
down to hold converse with men, from Adam on to the patriarchs and the prophets, 
in vision, in dream, in mirror, in dark saying; ever from the beginning laying 
the foundation of the course of His dispensations, which He meant to follow out 
to the very last. Thus was He ever learning even as God to converse with men 
upon earth, being no other than the Word which was to be made flesh. But He was 
thus learning (or rehearsing), in order to level for us the way of faith, that 
we might the more readily believe that the Son of God had come down into the 
world, if we knew that in times past also something similar had been done. For 
as it was on our account and for our learning that these events are described in 
the Scriptures, so for our sakes also were they done -- (even ours, I say), 
"upon whom the ends of the world are come." In this way it was that even then He 
knew full well what human feelings and affections were, intending as He always 
did to take upon Him man's actual component substances, body and soul, making 
inquiry of Adam (as if He were ignorant), "Where art thou, Adam?" -- repenting 
that He had made man, as if He had lacked foresight; tempting Abraham, as if 
ignorant of what was in man; offended with persons, and then reconciled to them; 
and whatever other (weaknesses and imperfections) the heretics lay hold of (in 
their assumptions) as unworthy of God, in order to discredit the Creator, not 
considering that these circumstances are suitable enough for the Son, who was 
one day to experience even human sufferings -- hunger and thirst, and tears, and 
actual birth and real death, and in respect of such a dispensation "made by the 
Father a little less than the angels." But the heretics, you may be sure, will 
not allow that those things are suitable even to the Son of God, which you are 
imputing to the very Father Himself, when you pretend that He made Himself less 
(than the angels) on our account; whereas the Scripture informs us that He who 
was made less was so affected by another, and not Himself by Himself. What, 
again, if He was One who was "crowned with glory and honour," and He Another by 
whom He was so crowned, -- the Son, in fact, by the Father? Moreover, how comes 
it to pass, that the Almighty Invisible God, "whom no man has seen nor can see; 
He who dwells in light unapproachable;" "He who dwells not in temples made with 
hands;" "from before whose sight the earth trembles, and the mountains melt like 
wax;" who holds the whole world in His hand "like a nest;" "whose throne is 
heaven, and earth His footstool;" in whom is every place, but Himself is in no 
place; who is the utmost bound of the universe; -- how happens it, I say, that 
He (who, though) the Most High, should yet have walked in paradise towards the 
coal of the evening, in quest of Adam; and should have shut up the ark after 
Noah had entered it; and at Abraham's tent should have refreshed Himself under 
an oak; and have called to Moses out of the burning bush; and have appeared as 
"the fourth" in the furnace of the Babylonian monarch (although He is there 
called the Son of man), -- unless all these events had happened as an image, as 
a mirror, as an enigma (of the future incarnation)? Surely even these things 
could not have been believed even of the Son of God, unless they had been given 
us in the Scriptures; possibly also they could not have been believed of the 
Father, even if they had been given in the Scriptures, since these men bring Him 
down into Mary's womb, and set Him before Pilate's judgment-seat, and bury Him 
in the sepulchre of Joseph. Hence, therefore, their error becomes manifest; for, 
being ignorant that the entire order of the divine administration has from the 
very first had its course through the agency of the Son, they believe that the 
Father Himself was actually seen, and held converse with men. and worked, and 
was athirst, and suffered hunger (in spite of the prophet who says: "The 
everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, shall never 
thirst at all, nor be hungry;" much more, shall neither die at any time, nor be 
buried!), and therefore that it was uniformly one God, even the Father, who at 
all times did Himself the things which were really done by Him through the 
agency of the Son. 
CHAPTER 17 -- SUNDRY AUGUST TITLES, DESCRIPTIVE OF DEITY, APPLIED TO THE 
SON, NOT, AS PRAXEAS WOULD HAVE IT, ONLY TO THE FATHER.
They more readily supposed that the Father acted in the Son's name, than that 
the Son acted in the Father's; although the Lord says Himself, "I am come in my 
Father's name;" and even to the Father He declares, "I have manifested Your name 
to these men;" whilst the Scripture likewise says, "Blessed is He that comes in 
the name of the Lord," that is to say, the Son in the Father's name. And as for 
the Father's names, God Almighty, the Most High, the Lord of hosts, the King of 
Israel, the "One that is," we say (for so much do the Scriptures teach us) that 
they belonged suitably to the Son also, and that the Son came under these 
designations, and has always acted in them, and has thus manifested them in 
Himself to men. "All things," says He, "which the Father has are mine." Then why 
not His names also? When, therefore, you read of Almighty God, and the Most 
High, and the God of hosts, and the King of Israel the "One that is," consider 
whether the Son also be not indicated by these designations, who in His own 
right is God Almighty, in that He is the Word of Almighty God, and has received 
power over all; is the Most High, in that He is "exalted at the right hand of 
God," as Peter declares in the Acts; is the Lord of hosts, because all things 
are by the Father made subject to Him; is the King of Israel because to Him has 
especially been committed the destiny of that nation; and is likewise "the One 
that is," because there are many who are called Sons, but are not. As to the 
point maintained by them, that the name of Christ belongs also to the Father, 
they shall hear (what I have to say) in the proper place. Meanwhile, let this be 
my immediate answer to the argument which they adduce from the Revelation of 
John: "I am the Lord which is, and which was, and which is to come, the 
Almighty;" and from all other passages which in their opinion make the 
designation of Almighty God unsuitable to the Son. As if, indeed, He which is to 
came were not almighty; whereas even the Son of the Almighty is as much almighty 
as the Son of God is God. 
CHAPTER 18 -- THE DESIGNATION OF THE ONE GOD IN THE PROPHETIC SCRIPTURES. 
INTENDED AS A PROTEST AGAINST HEATHEN IDOLATRY, IT DOES NOT PRECLUDE THE 
CORRELATIVE IDEA OF THE SON OF GOD. THE SON IS IN THE FATHER.
But what hinders them from readily perceiving this community of the Father's 
titles in the Son, is the statement of Scripture, whenever it determines God to 
be but One; as if the selfsame Scripture had not also set forth Two both as God 
and Lord, as we have shown above. Their argument is: Since we find Two and One, 
therefore Both are One and the Same, both Father and Son. Now the Scripture is 
not in danger of requiring the aid of any one's argument, lest it should seem to 
be self-contradictory. It has a method of its own, both when it sets forth one 
only God, and also when it shows that there are Two, Father and Son; and is 
consistent with itself. It is clear that the Son is mentioned by it. For, 
without any detriment to the Son, it is quite possible for it to have rightly 
determined that God is only One, to whom the Son belongs; since He who has a Son 
ceases not on that account to exist, -- Himself being One only, that is, on His 
own account, whenever He is named without the Son. And He is named without the 
Son whensoever He is defined as the principle (of Deity)in the character of "its 
first Person," which had to be mentioned before the name of the Son; because it 
is the Father who is acknowledged in the first place, and after the Father the 
Son is named. 
Therefore "there is one God," the Father, "and without Him there is none 
else." And when He Himself makes this declaration, He denies not the Son, but 
says that there is no other God; and the Son is not different from the Father. 
Indeed, if you only look carefully at the contexts which follow such statements 
as this, you will find that they nearly always have distinct reference to the 
makers of idols and the worshippers thereof, with a view to the multitude of 
false gods being expelled by the unity of the Godhead, which nevertheless has a 
Son; and inasmuch as this Son is undivided and inseparable from the Father, so 
is He to be reckoned as being in the Father, even when He is not named. The fact 
is, if He had named Him expressly, He would have separated Him, saying in so 
many words: "Beside me there is none else, except my Son." In short He would 
have made His Son actually another, after excepting Him from others. Suppose the 
sun to say, "I am the Sun, and there is none other besides me, except my ray," 
would you not have remarked how useless was such a statement, as if the ray were 
not itself reckoned in the sun? He says, then, that there is no God' besides 
Himself in respect of the idolatry both of the Gentiles as well as of Israel; 
nay, even on account of our heretics also, who fabricate idols with their words, 
just as the heathen do with their hands; that is to say, they make another God 
and another Christ. When, therefore, He attested His own unity, the Father took 
care of the Son's interests, that Christ should not be supposed to have come 
from another God, but from Him who had already said, "I am God and there is none 
other beside me," who shows us that He is the only God, but in company with His 
Son, with whom "He stretches out the heavens alone." 
CHAPTER 19 -- THE SON IN UNION WITH THE FATHER IN THE CREATION OF ALL 
THINGS. THIS UNION OF THE TWO IN CO-OPERATION IS NOT OPPOSED TO THE TRUE UNITY 
OF GOD. IT IS OPPOSED ONLY TO PRAXEAS' IDENTIFICATION THEORY.
But this very declaration of His they will hastily pervert into an argument 
of His singleness. "I have," says He, "stretched out the heaven alone." 
Undoubtedly alone as regards all other powers; and He thus gives a premonitory 
evidence against the conjectures of the heretics, who maintain that the world 
was constructed by various angels and powers, who also make the Creator Himself 
to have been either an angel or some subordinate agent sent to form external 
things, such as the constituent parts of the world, but who was at the same time 
ignorant of the divine purpose. If, now, it is in this sense that He stretches 
out the heavens alone, how is it that these heretics assume their position so 
perversely, as to render inadmissible the singleness of that Wisdom which says, 
"When He prepared the heaven, I was present with Him?" -- even though the 
apostle asks, "Who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been His 
counsellor?" meaning, of course, to except that wisdom which was present with 
Him. In Him, at any rate, and with Him, did (Wisdom) construct the universe, He 
not being ignorant of what she was making. "Except Wisdom," however, is a phrase 
of the same sense exactly as "except the Son," who is Christ, "the Wisdom and 
Power of God," according to the apostle, who only knows the mind of the Father. 
"For who knows the things that be in God, except the Spirit which is in Him?" 
Not, observe, without Him. There was therefore One who caused God to be not 
alone, except "alone" from all other gads. But (if we are to follow the 
heretics), the Gospel itself will have to be rejected, because it tells us that 
all things were made by God through the Word, without whom nothing was made. And 
if I am not mistaken, there is also another passage in which it is written: "By 
the Word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by His 
Spirit." Now this Word, the Power of God and the Wisdom of God, must be the very 
Son of God. So that, if (He did) all things by the Son, He must have stretched 
out the heavens by the Son, and so not have stretched them out alone, except in 
the sense in which He is "alone" (and apart) from all other gods. Accordingly He 
says, concerning the Son, immediately afterwards: "Who else is it that 
frustrates the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners mad, turning wise men 
backward, and making their knowledge foolish, and confirming the words of His 
Son?" -- as, for instance, when He said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am 
well pleased; hear Him." By thus attaching the Son to Himself, He becomes His 
own interpreter in what sense He stretched out the heavens alone, meaning alone 
with His Son, even as He is one with His Son. The utterance, therefore, will be 
in like manner the Son's, "I have stretched out the heavens alone," because by 
the Word were the heavens established. Inasmuch, then, as the heaven was 
prepared when Wisdom was present in the Word, and since all things were made by 
the Word, it is quite correct to say that even the Son stretched out the heaven 
alone, because He alone ministered to the Father's work. It must also be He who 
says, "I am the First, and to all futurity I AM." The Word, no doubt, was before 
all things. "In the beginning was the Word;" and in that beginning He was sent 
forth by the Father. The Father, however, has no beginning, as proceeding from 
none; nor can He be seen, since He was not begotten. He who has always been 
alone could never have had order or rank. Therefore, if they have determined 
that the Father and the Son must be regarded as one and the same, for the 
express purpose of vindicating the unity of God, that unity of His is preserved 
intact; for He is one, and yet He has a Son, who is equally with Himself 
comprehended in the same Scriptures. Since they are unwilling to allow that the 
Son is a distinct Person, second from the Father, lest, being thus second, He 
should cause two Gods to be spoken of, we have shown above that Two are actually 
described in Scripture as God and Lord. And to prevent their being offended at 
this fact, we give a reason why they are not said to be two Gods and two Lords, 
but that they are two as Father and Son; and this not by severance of their 
substance, but from the dispensation wherein we declare the Son to be undivided 
and inseparable from the Father, -- distinct in degree, not in state. And 
although, when named apart, He is called God, He does not thereby constitute two 
Gods, but one; and that from the very circumstance that He is entitled to be 
called God, from His union with the Father. 
CHAPTER 20 -- THE SCRIPTURES RELIED ON BY PRAXEAS TO SUPPORT HIS HERESY 
BUT FEW. THEY ARE MENTIONED BY TERTULLIAN.
But I must take some further pains to rebut their arguments, when they make 
selections from the Scriptures in support of their opinion, and refuse to 
consider the other points, which obviously maintain the rule of faith without 
any infraction of the unity of the Godhead, and with the full admission of the 
Monarchy. For as in the Old Testament Scriptures they lay hold of nothing else 
than, "I am God, and beside me there is no God ;" so in the Gospel they simply 
keep in view the Lord's answer to Philip, "I and my Father are one;" and, "He 
that has seen me has seen the Father; and I am in the Father, and the Father in 
me." They would have the entire revelation of both Testaments yield to these 
three passages, whereas the only proper course is to understand the few 
statements in the light of the many. But in their contention they only act on 
the principle of all heretics. For, inasmuch as only a few testimonies are to be 
found (making for them) in the general mass, they pertinaciously set off the few 
against the many, and assume the later against the earlier. The rule, however, 
which has been from the beginning established for every case, gives its 
prescription against the later assumptions, as indeed it also does against the 
fewer. 
CHAPTER 21 -- IN THIS AND THE FOUR FOLLOWING CHAPTERS IT IS SHEWN, BY A 
MINUTE ANALYSIS OF ST. JOHN'S GOSPEL, THAT THE FATHER AND SON ARE CONSTANTLY 
SPOKEN OF AS DISTINCT PERSONS.
Consider, therefore, how many passages present their prescriptive authority 
to you in, this very Gospel before this inquiry of Philip, and previous to any 
discussion on your part. And first of all there comes at once to hand the 
preamble of John to his Gospel, which shows us what He previously was who had to 
become flesh. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the 
Word was God. He was in the beginning with God: all things were made by Him, and 
without Him was nothing made." Now, since these words may not be taken otherwise 
than as they are written, there is without doubt shown to be One who was from 
the beginning, and also One with whom He always was: one the Word of God, the 
other God although the Word is also God, but God regarded as the Son of God, not 
as the Father); One through whom were all things, Another by whom were all 
things. But in what sense we call Him Another we have already often described. 
In that we called Him Another, we must needs imply that He is not identical -- 
not identical indeed, yet not as if separate; Other by dispensation, not by 
division. He, therefore, who became flesh was not the very same as He from whom 
the Word came. "His glory was beheld -- the glory as of the only-begotten of the 
Father;" not, (observe,) as of the Father. He "declared" (what was in) "the 
bosom of the Father alone;" the Father did not divulge the secrets of His own 
bosom. For this is preceded by another statement: "No man has seen God at any 
time." Then, again, when He is designated by John (the Baptist) as "the Lamb of 
God," He is not described as Himself the same with Him of whom He is the beloved 
Son. He is, no doubt, ever the Son of God, but yet not He Himself of whom He is 
the Son. This (divine relationship) Nathanael at once recognised in Him, even as 
Peter did on another occasion: "You art the Son of God." And He affirmed Himself 
that they were quite right in their convictions; for He answered Nathanael: 
"Because I said, I saw you under the fig-tree, therefore do you believe?" And in 
the same manner He pronounced Peter to be "blessed," inasmuch as "flesh and 
blood had not revealed it to him" -- that he had perceived the Father -- "but 
the Father which is in heaven." By asserting all this, He determined the 
distinction which is between the two Persons: that is, the Son then on earth, 
whom Peter had confessed to be the Son of God; and the Father in heaven, who had 
revealed to Peter the discovery which he had made, that Christ was the Son of 
God. When He entered the temple, He called it "His Father's house," speaking as 
the Son. In His address to Nicodemus He says: "So God loved the world, that He 
gave His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes in Him should not perish, 
but have everlasting life." And again: "For God sent not His Son into the world 
to condemn the world, but that the world through Him might be saved. He that 
believes in Him is not condemned; but he that does not believes is condemned 
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only-begotten Son of 
God." Moreover, when John (the Baptist) was asked what he happened to know of 
Jesus, he said: "The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into His 
hand. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life; and he that does not 
believes the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him." Whom, 
indeed, did He reveal to the woman of Samaria? Was it not "the Messias which is 
called Christ?" And so lie showed, of course, that He was not the Father, but 
the Son; and elsewhere He is expressly called "the Christ, the Son of God," and 
not the Father. He says, therefore," My meat is to do the will of Him that sent 
me, and to finish His work;" whilst to the Jews He remarks respecting the cure 
of the impotent man, "My Father works hitherto, and I work." "My Father and I" 
-- these are the Son's words. And it was on this very account that "the Jews 
sought the more intently to kill Him, not only because He broke the Sabbath, but 
also because He said that God was His Father, thus making Himself equal with 
God. Then indeed did He answer and say to them, The Son can do nothing of 
Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for what things soever He does these 
also does the Son likewise. For the Father loves the Son, and shows Him all 
things that He Himself does; and He will also show Him greater works than these, 
that you may marvel. For as the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, 
even so the Son also quickens whom He will. For the Father judges no man, but 
has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honour the Son, even 
as they honour the Father. He that honours not the Son, honours not the Father, 
who has sent the Son. Verily, verily, I say to you, He that hears my words, and 
believes on Him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into 
condemnation, but is passed from death to life. Verily I say to you, that the 
hour is coming, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and when 
they have heard it, they shall live. For as the Father has eternal life in 
Himself, so also has He given to the Son to have eternal life in Himself; and He 
has given Him authority to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of man" 
-- that is, according to the flesh, even as He is also the Son of God through 
His Spirit. Afterwards He goes on to say: "But I have greater witness than that 
of John; for the works which the Father has given me to finish -- those very 
works bear witness of me that the Father has sent me. And the Father Himself, 
which has sent me, has also borne witness of me." But He at once adds, "You have 
neither heard His voice at any time, nor seen His shape;" thus affirming that in 
former times it was not the Father, but the Son, who used to be seen and heard. 
Then He says at last: "I am come in my Father's name, and you have not received 
me." It was therefore always the Son (of whom we read) under the designation of 
the Almighty and Most High God, and King, and Lord. To those also who inquired 
"what the should do to work the works of God," He answered, This is the work of 
God, that you believe on Him whom He has sent." He also declares Himself to be 
"the bread which the Father sent from heaven;" and adds, that "all that the 
Father gave Him should come to Him, and that He Himself would not reject them," 
because He had come down from heaven not to do His own will, but the will of the 
Father; and that the will of the Father was that every one who saw the Son, and 
believed on Him, should obtain the life (everlasting,) and the resurrection at 
the last day. No man indeed was able to come to Him, except the Father attracted 
him; whereas every one who had heard and learnt of the Father came to Him." He 
goes on then expressly to say, "Not that any man has seen the Father;" thus 
showing us that it was through the Word of the Father that men were instructed 
and taught. Then, when many departed from Him, and He turned to the apostles 
with the inquiry whether "they also would go away," what was Simon Peter's 
answer? "To whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life, and we believe 
that You an the Christ." (Tell me now, did they believe) Him to be the Father, 
or the Christ of the Father? 
CHAPTER 22 -- SUNDRY PASSAGES OF ST. JOHN QUOTED, TO SHOW THE DISTINCTION 
BETWEEN THE FATHER AND THE SON. EVEN PRAXEAS' CLASSIC TEXT -- I AND MY FATHER 
ARE ONE -- SHOWN TO BE AGAINST HIM.
Again, whose doctrine does He announce, at which all were astonished? Was it 
His own or the Father's? So, when they were in doubt among themselves whether He 
were the Christ (not as being the Father, of course but as the Son), He says to 
them "You are not ignorant whence I am; and I am not come of myself, but He that 
sent me is true, whom you know not; but I know Him, because I am from Him." He 
did not say, Because I myself am He; and, I have sent mine own self: but His 
words are, "He has sent me." When, likewise, the Pharisees sent men to apprehend 
Him, He says: "Yet a little while am I with you, and (then) I go to Him that 
sent me." When, however, He declares that He is not alone, and uses these words, 
"but I and the Father that sent me," does He not show that there are Two -- Two, 
and yet inseparable? Indeed, this was the sum: and substance of what He was 
teaching them, that they were inseparably Two; since, after citing the law when 
it affirms the truth of two men's testimony, He adds at once: "I am one who am 
bearing witness of myself; and the Father (is another,) who has sent me, and 
bears witness of me." Now, if He were one -- being at once both the Son and the 
Father -- He certainly would not have quoted the sanction of the law, which 
requires not the testimony of one, but of two. Likewise, when they asked Him 
where His Father was, He answered them, that they had known neither Himself nor 
the Father; and in this answer He plainly told them of Two, whom they were 
ignorant of. Granted that "if they had known Him, they would have known the 
Father also," this certainly does not imply that He was Himself both Father and 
Son; but that, by reason of the inseparability of the Two, it was impossible for 
one of them to be either acknowledged or unknown without the other. "He that 
sent me," says He, "is true; and I am telling the world those things which I 
have heard of Him." And the Scripture narrative goes on to explain in an 
exoteric manner, that "they understood not that He spake to them concerning the 
Father," although they ought certainly to have known that the Father's words 
were uttered in the Son, because they read in Jeremiah, "And the Lord said to 
me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth;" and again in Isaiah, "The Lord 
has given to me the tongue of learning that I should understand when to speak a 
word in season." In accordance with which, Christ Himself says: "Then shall you 
know that I am He and that I am saying nothing of my own self; but that, as my 
Father has taught me, so I speak, because He that sent me is with me." This also 
amounts to a proof that they were Two, (although) undivided. Likewise, when 
upbraiding the Jews in His discussion with them, because they wished to kill 
Him, He said, "I speak that which I have seen with my Father, and you do that 
which you have seen with your father;" "but now you seek to kill me, a man that 
has told you the truth which I have heard of God;" and again, "If God were your 
Father, you would love me, for I proceeded forth and came from God" (still they 
are not hereby separated, although He declares that He proceeded forth from the 
Father. Some persons indeed seize the opportunity afforded them in these words 
to propound their heresy of His separation; but His coming out from God is like 
the ray's procession from the sun, and the river's from the fountain, and the 
tree's from the seed); "I have not a devil, but I honour my Father;" again, "If 
I honour myself, my honour is nothing: it is my Father that honours me, of whom 
you say, that He is your God: yet ye have not known Him, but I know Him; and if 
I should say, I know Him not, I shall be a liar like to you; but I know Him, and 
keep His saying." But when He goes on to say, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to 
see my day; and he saw it, and was glad," He certainly proves that it was not 
the Father that appeared to Abraham, but the Son. In like manner He declares, in 
the case of the man barn blind, "that He must do the works of the Father which 
had sent Him;" and after He had given the man sight, He said to him, "Do you 
believe in the Son of God?" Then, upon the man's inquiring who He was, He 
proceeded to reveal Himself to him, as that Son of God whom He had announced to 
him as the right object of his faith. In a later passage He declares that He is 
known by the Father, and the Father by Him; adding that He was so wholly loved 
by the Father, that He was laying down His life, because He had received this 
commandment from the Father. When He was asked by the Jews if He were the very 
Christ (meaning, of course, the Christ of God; for to this day the Jews expect 
not the Father Himself, but the Christ of God, it being nowhere said that the 
Father will come as the Christ), He said to them, "I am telling you, and yet you 
do not believe: the works which I am doing, in my Father's name, they actually 
bear witness of me." Witness of what? Of that very thing, to be sure, of which 
they were making in-quiry -- whether He were the Christ of God. Then, again, 
concerning His sheep, and (the assurance) that no man should pluck them out of 
His hand, He says, "My Father, which gave them to me, is greater than all;" 
adding immediately, "I am and my Father are one." Here, then, they take their 
stand, too infatuated, nay, too blind, to see in the first place that there is 
in this passage an intimation of Two Beings -- "I and my Father;" then that 
there is a plural predicate, "are," inapplicable to one person only; and lastly, 
that (the predicate terminates in an abstract, not a personal noun) -- "we are 
one thing" Unum, not "one person" Unus. For if He had said "one Person," He 
might have rendered some assistance to their opinion. Unus, no doubt, indicates 
the singular number; but (here we have a case where) "Two" are still the subject 
in the masculine gender. He accordingly says Unum, a neuter term, which does not 
imply singularity of number, but unity of essence, likeness, conjunction, 
affection on the Father's part, who loves the Son, and submission on the Son's, 
who obeys the Father's will. When He says, "I and my Father are one" in essence 
-- Unum -- He shows that there are Two, whom He puts on an equality and unites 
in one. He therefore adds to this very statement, that He "had showed them many 
works from the Father," for none of which did He deserve to be stoned. And to 
prevent their thinking Him deserving of this fate, as if He had claimed to be 
considered as God Himself, that is, the Father, by having said, "I and my Father 
are One," representing Himself as the Father's divine Son, and not as God 
Himself, He says, "If it is written in your law, I said, You are gods; and if 
the Scripture cannot be broken, say you of Him whom the Father has sanctified 
and sent into the world, that He blasphemes, because He said, I am the Son of 
God? If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if I do, even if 
you will not believe me, still believe the works; and know that I am in the 
Father, and the Father in me." It must therefore be by the works that the Father 
is in the Son, and the Son in the Father; and so it is by the works that we 
understand that the Father is one with the Son. All along did He therefore 
strenuously aim at this conclusion, that while they were of one power and 
essence, they should still be believed to be Two; for otherwise, unless they 
were believed to be Two, the Son could not possibly be believed to have any 
existence at all. 
CHAPTER 23 -- MORE PASSAGES FROM THE SAME GOSPEL IN PROOF OF THE SAME 
PORTION OF THE CATHOLIC FAITH. PRAXEAS' TAUNT OF WORSHIPPING TWO GODS 
REPUDIATED.
Again, when Martha in a later passage acknowledged Him to be the Son of God, 
she no more made a mistake than Peter" and Nathanael had; and yet, even if she 
had made a mistake, she would at once have learnt the truth: for, behold, when 
about to raise her brother from the dead, the Lord looked up to heaven, and, 
addressing the Father, said -- as the Son, of course: "Father, I thank You that 
You always hear me; it is because of these crowds that are standing by that I 
have spoken to You, that they may believe that You have sent me." "But in the 
trouble of His soul, (on a later occasion,) He said: "What shall I say? Father, 
save me from this hour: but for this cause is it that I am come to this hour; 
only, O Father, do You glorify Your name" -- in which He spake as the Son. (At 
another time) He said: "I am come in my Father's name." Accordingly, the Son's 
voice was indeed alone sufficient, (when addressed) to the Father. But, behold, 
with an abundance (of evidence) the Father from heaven replies, for the purpose 
of testifying to the Son: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; 
hear Him." So, again, in that asseveration, "I have both glorified, and will 
glorify again," how many Persons do you discover, obstinate Praxeas? Are there 
not as many as there are voices? You have the Son on earth, you have the Father 
in heaven. Now this is not a separation; it is nothing but the divine 
dispensation. We know, however, that God is in the bottomless depths, and exists 
everywhere; but then it is by power and authority. We are also sure that the 
Son, being indivisible from Him, is everywhere with Him. Nevertheless, in the 
Economy or Dispensation itself, the Father willed that the Son should be 
regarded as on earth, and Himself in heaven; whither the Son also Him. self 
looked up, and prayed, and made supplication of the Father; whither also He 
taught us to raise ourselves, and pray, "Our Father Who art in heaven," etc., -- 
although, indeed, He is everywhere present. This heaven the Father willed to be 
His own throne; while He made the Son to be "a little lower than the angels," by 
sending Him down to the earth, but meaning at the same time to "crown Him with 
glory and honour," even by taking Him back to heaven. This He now made good to 
Him when He said: "I have both glorified You, and will glorify You again." The 
Son offers His request from earth, the Father gives His promise from heaven. 
Why, then, do you make liars of both the Father and the Son? If either the 
Father spake from heaven to the Son when He Himself was the Son on earth, or the 
Son prayed to the Father when He was Himself the Son in heaven, how happens it 
that the Son made a request of His own very self, by asking it of the Father, 
since the Son was the Father? Or, on the other hand, how is it that the Father 
made a promise to Himself, by making it to the Son, since the Father was the 
Son? Were we even to maintain that they are two separate gods, as you are so 
fond of throwing out against us, it would be a more tolerable assertion than the 
maintenance of so versatile and changeful a God as yours! Therefore it was that 
in the passage before us the Lord declared to the people present: "Not on my own 
account has this voice addressed me, but for your sakes," that these likewise 
may believe both in the Father and in the Son, severally, in their own names and 
persons and positions. "Then again, Jesus exclaims, and says, He that believes 
on me, believes not on me, but on Him that sent me;" because it is through the 
Son that men believe in the Father, while the Father also is the authority 
whence springs belief in the Son. "And he that sees me, sees Him that sent me." 
How so? Even because, (as He afterwards declares,) "I have not spoken from 
myself, but the Father which sent me: He has given me a commandment what I 
should say, and what I should speak." For "the Lord God has given me the tongue 
of the learned, that I should know when I ought to speak" the word which I 
actually speak. "Even as the Father has said to me, so do I speak." Now, in what 
way these things were said to Him, the evangelist and beloved disciple John knew 
better than Praxeas; and therefore he adds concerning i his own meaning: "Now 
before the feast of the passover, Jesus knew that the Father had given all 
things into His hands, and that He had come from God, and was going to God." 
Praxeas, however, would have it that it was the Father who proceeded forth from 
Himself, and had returned to Himself; so that what the devil put into the heart 
of Judas was the betrayal, not of the Son, but of the Father Himself. But for 
the matter of that, things have not turned out well either for the devil or the 
heretic; because, even in the Son's case, the treason which the devil wrought 
against Him contributed nothing to his advantage. It was, then, the Son of God, 
who was in the Son of man, that was betrayed, as the Scripture says afterwards: 
"Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in Him." Who is here 
meant by "God?" Certainly not the Father, but the Word of the Father, who was in 
the Son of man -- that is in the flesh, in which Jesus had been already 
glorified by the divine power and word. "And God," says He, "shall also glorify 
Him in Himself;" that is to say, the Father shall glorify the Son, because He 
has Him within Himself; and even though prostrated to the earth, and put to 
death, He would soon glorify Him by His resurrection, and making Him conqueror 
over death. 
CHAPTER 24 -- ON ST. PHILIP'S CONVERSATION WITH CHRIST. HE THAT HATH SEEN 
ME, HATH SEEN THE FATHER. THIS TEXT EXPLAINED IN AN ANTI-PRAXEAN SENSE.
But there were some who even then did not understand. For Thomas, who was so 
long incredulous, said: "Lord, we know not where You goest; and how can we know 
the way? Jesus says to him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man comes 
to the Father, but by me. If you had known me, you would have known the Father 
also: but henceforth you know Him, and have seen Him." And now we come to 
Philip, who, roused with the expectation of seeing the Father, and not 
understanding in what sense he was to take "seeing the Father," says: "Show us 
the Father, and it suffices us." Then the Lord answered him: "Have I been so 
long time with you, and yet have you not known me, Philip?" Now whom does He say 
that they ought to have known? -- for this is the sole point of discussion. Was 
it as the Father that they ought to have known Him, or as the Son? If it was as 
the Father, Praxeas must tell us how Christ, who had been so long time with 
them, could have possibly ever been (I will not say understood, but even) 
supposed to have been the Father. He is clearly defined to us in all Scriptures 
-- in the Old Testament as the Christ of God, in the New Testament as the Son of 
God. In this character was He anciently predicted, in this was He also declared 
even by Christ Himself; nay, by the very Father also, who openly confesses Him 
from heaven as His Son, and as His Son glorifies Him. "This is my beloved Son;" 
"I have glorified Him, and I will glorify Him." In this character, too, was He 
believed on by His disciples, and rejected by the Jews. It was, moreover, in 
this character that He wished to be accepted by them whenever He named the 
Father, and gave preference to the Father, and honoured the Father. This, then, 
being the case, it was not the Father whom, after His lengthened intercourse 
with them, they were ignorant of, but it was the Son; and accordingly the Lord, 
while upbraiding Philip for not knowing Himself who was the object of their 
ignorance, wished Himself to be acknowledged indeed as that Being whom He had 
reproached them for being ignorant of after so long a time -- in a word, as the 
Son. And now it may be seen in what sense it was said, "He that has seen me has 
seen the Father," -- even in the same in which it was said in a previous 
passage, "I and my Father are one." Wherefore? Because "I came forth from the 
Father, and am come into the world" and, "I am the way: no man comes to the 
Father, but by me;" and, "No man can come to me, except the Father draw him;" 
and, "All things are delivered to me by the Father;" and, "As the Father 
quickens (the dead), so also doth the Son;" and again, "If you had known me, you 
would have known the Father also." "For in all these passages He had shown 
Himself to be the Father's Commissioner," through whose agency even the Father 
could be seen in His works, and heard in His words, and recognised in the Son's 
administration of the Father's words and deeds. The Father indeed was invisible, 
as Philip had learnt in the law, and ought at the moment to have remembered: "No 
man shall see God, and live." So he is reproved for desiring to see the Father, 
as if He were a visible Being, and is taught that He only becomes visible in the 
Son from His mighty works, and not in the manifestation of His person. If, 
indeed, He meant the Father to be understood as the same with the Son, by 
saying, "He who sees me sees the Father," how is it that He adds immediately 
afterwards, "Don't you believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me?" 
He ought rather to have said: "Don't you believe that I am the Father?" With 
what view else did He so emphatically dwell on this point, if it Were not to 
clear up that which He wished men to understand -- namely, that He was the Son? 
And then, again, by saying, "Don't you believe that I am in the Father, and the 
Father in me," He laid the greater stress on His question on this very account, 
that He should not, because He had said, "He that has seen me, has seen the 
Father," be supposed to be the Father; because He had never wished Himself to be 
so regarded, having always professed Himself to be the Son, and to have come 
from the Father. And then He also set the conjunction of the two Persons in the 
clearest light, in order that no wish might be entertained of seeing the Father 
as if He were separately visible, and that the Son might be regarded as the 
representative of the Father. And yet He omitted not to explain how the Father 
was in the Son and the Son in the Father. "The words," says He, "which I speak 
to you, are not mine," because indeed they were the Father's words; "but the 
Father that dwells in me, He does the works." It is therefore by His mighty 
works, and by the words of His doctrine, that the Father who dwells in the Son 
makes Himself visible -- even by those wards and works whereby He abides in Him, 
and also by Him in whom He abides; the special properties of Both the Persons 
being apparent from this very circumstance, that He says, "I am in the Father, 
and the Father is in me." Accordingly He adds: "Believe -- " What? That I am the 
Father? I do not find that it is so written, but rather, "that I am in the 
Father, and the Father in me; or else believe me for my works' sake;" meaning 
those works by which the Father manifested Himself to be in the Son, not indeed 
to the sight of man, but to his intelligence. 
CHAPTER 25 -- THE PARACLETE, OR HOLY GHOST. HE IS DISTINCT FROM THE FATHER 
AND THE SON AS TO THEIR PERSONAL EXISTENCE. ONE AND INSEPARABLE FROM THEM AS TO 
THEIR DIVINE NATURE. OTHER QUOTATIONS OUT OF ST. JOHN'S GOSPEL.
What follows Philip's question, and the Lord's whole treatment of it, to the 
end of John's Gospel, continues to furnish us with statements of the same kind, 
distinguishing the Father and the Son, with the properties of each. Then there 
is the Paraclete or Comforter, also, which He promises to pray for to the 
Father, and to send from heaven after He had ascended to the Father. He is 
called "another Comforter," indeed; but in what way He is another we have 
already shown, "He shall receive of mine," says Christ, just as Christ Himself 
received of the Father's. Thus the connection of the Father in the Son, and of 
the Son in the Paraclete, produces three coherent Persons, who are yet distinct 
One from Another. These Three are, one essence, not one Person, as it is said, 
"I and my Father are One," in respect of] unity of substance not singularity of 
number. Run through the whole Gospel, and you will find that He whom you believe 
to be the Father (described as acting for the Father, although you, for your 
part, forsooth, suppose that "the Father, being the husbandman," must surely 
have been on earth) is once more recognised by the Son as in heaven, when, 
"lifting up His eyes thereto," He commended His disciples to the safe-keeping of 
the Father. We have, moreover, in that other Gospel a clear revelation, i.e. of 
the Son's distinction from the Father, "My God, why have You forsaken me?" and 
again, (in the third Gospel,) "Father, into Your hands I commend my spirit." But 
even if (we had not these passages, we meet with satisfactory evidence) after 
His resurrection and glorious victory over death. Now that all the restraint of 
His humiliation is taken away, He might, if possible, have shown Himself as the 
Father to so faithful a woman (as Mary Magdalene) when she approached to touch 
Him, out of love, not from curiosity, nor with Thomas' incredulity. But not so; 
Jesus saith to her, "Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but 
go to my brethren" (and even in this He proves Himself to be the Son; for if He 
had been the Father, He would have called them His children, (instead of His 
brethren), "and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my 
God and your God." Now, does this mean, I ascend as the Father to the Father, 
and as God to God? Or as the Son to the Father, and as the Word to God? 
Wherefore also does this Gospel, at its very termination, intimate that these 
things were ever written, if it be not, to use its own words, "that you might 
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God?" Whenever, therefore, you take any 
of the statements of this Gospel, and apply them to demonstrate the identity of 
the Father and the Son, supposing that they serve your views therein, you are 
contending against the definite purpose of the Gospel. For these things 
certainly are not written that you may believe that Jesus Christ is the Father, 
but the Son. 
CHAPTER 26 -- A BRIEF REFERENCE TO THE GOSPELS OF ST. MATTHEW AND ST. 
LUKE. THEIR AGREEMENT WITH ST. JOHN, IN RESPECT TO THE DISTINCT PERSONALITY OF 
THE FATHER AND THE SON.
In addition to Philip's conversation, and the Lord's reply to it, the reader 
will observe that we have run through John's Gospel to show that many other 
passages of a clear purport, both before and after that chapter, are only in 
strict accord with that single and prominent statement, which must be 
interpreted agreeably to all other places, rather than in opposition to them, 
and indeed to its own inherent and natural sense. I will not here largely use 
the support of the other Gospels, which confirm our belief by the Lord's 
nativity: it is sufficient to remark that He who had to be born of a virgin is 
announced in express terms by the angel himself as 'the Son of God: "The Spirit 
of God shall come upon you, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; 
therefore also the Holy Thing that shall be born of you shall be called the San 
of God." On this passage even they will wish to raise a cavil; but truth will 
prevail. Of course, they say, the Son of God is God, and the power of the 
highest is the Most High. And they do not hesitate to insinuate what, if it had 
been true, would have been written. Whom was he so afraid of as not plainly to 
declare, "God shall come upon you, and the Highest shall overshadow thee?" Now, 
by saying "the Spirit of God" (although the Spirit of God is God,) and by not 
directly naming God, he wished that portion of the whole Godhead to be 
understood, which was about to retire into the designation of "the Son." The 
Spirit of God in this passage must be the same as the Word. For just as, when 
John says, "The Word was made flesh," we understand the Spirit also in the 
mention of the Word: so here, too, we acknowledge the Word likewise in the name 
of the Spirit. For both the Spirit is the substance of the Word, and the Word is 
the operation of the Spirit, and the Two are One (and the same). Now John must 
mean One when he speaks of Him as "having been made flesh," and the angel 
Another when he announces Him as "about to be born," if the Spirit is not the 
Word, and the Word the Spirit. For just as the Word of God is not actually He 
whose Word He is, so also the Spirit (although He is called God) is not actually 
He whose Spirit He is said to be. Nothing which belongs to something else is 
actually the very same thing as that to which it belongs. Clearly, when anything 
proceeds from a personal subject, and so belongs to him, since it comes from 
him, it may possibly be such in quality exactly as the personal subject himself 
is from whom it proceeds, and to whom it belongs. And thus the Spirit is God, 
and the Word is God, because proceeding from God, but yet is not actually the 
very same as He from whom He proceeds. Now that which is God of God, although He 
is an actually existing thing, yet He cannot be God Himself (exclusively), but 
so far God as He is of the same substance as God Himself, and as being an 
actually existing thing, and as a portion of the Whole. Much more will "the 
power of the Highest" not be the Highest Himself, because It is not an actually 
existing thing, as being Spirit -- in the same way as the wisdom (of God) and 
the providence (of God) is not God: these attributes are not substances, but the 
accidents of the particular substance. 
Power is incidental to the Spirit, but cannot itself be the Spirit. These 
things, therefore, whatsoever they are -- (I mean) the Spirit of God, and the 
Word and the Power -- having been conferred on the Virgin, that which is born of 
her is the Son of God. This He Himself, in those other Gospels also, testifies 
Himself to have been from His very boyhood: "Didn't you know," says He, "that I 
must be about my Father's business?" Satan likewise knew Him to be this in his 
temptations: "Since You art the Son of God." This, accordingly, the devils also 
acknowledge Him to be: "we know You, who You are, the Holy Son of God." His 
"Father" He Himself adores. When acknowledged by Peter as the "Christ (the Son) 
of God," He does not deny the relation. He exults in spirit when He says to the 
Father, "I thank You, O Father, because You have hidden these things from the 
wise and prudent." He, moreover, affirms also that to no man is the Father 
known, but to His Son; and promises that, as the Son of the Father, He will 
confess those who confess Him, and deny those who deny Him, before His Father. 
He also introduces a parable of the mission to the vineyard of the Son (not the 
Father), who was sent after so many servants, and slain by the husbandmen, and 
avenged by the Father. He is also ignorant of the last day and hour, which is 
known to the Father only. He awards the kingdom to His disciples, as He says it 
had been appointed to Himself by the Father. He has power to ask, if He will, 
legions of angels from the Father for His help. He exclaims that God had 
forsaken Him. He commends His spirit into the hands of the Father. After His 
resurrection He promises in a pledge to His disciples that He will send them the 
promise of His Father; and lastly, He commands them to baptize into the Father 
and the Son and the Holy Ghost, not into a unipersonal God. And indeed it is not 
once only, but three times, that we are immersed into the Three Persons, at each 
several mention of Their names. 
CHAPTER 27 -- THE DISTINCTION OF THE FATHER AND THE SON, THUS ESTABLISHED, 
HE NOW PROVES THE DISTINCTION OF THE TWO NATURES, WHICH WERE, WITHOUT CONFUSION, 
UNITED IN THE PERSON OF THE SON. THE SUBTERFUGES OF PRAXEAS THUS EXPOSED.
But why should I linger over matters which are so evident, when I ought to be 
attacking points on which they seek to obscure the plainest proof? For, confuted 
on all sides on the distinction between the Father and the Son, which we 
maintain without destroying their inseparable union -- as (by the examples) of 
the sun and the ray, and the fountain and the river -- yet, by help of (their 
conceit)an indivisible number, (with issues)of two and three, they endeavour to 
interpret this distinction in a way which shall nevertheless tally with their 
own opinions: so that, all in one Person, they distinguish two, Father and Son, 
understanding the Son to be flesh, that is man, that is Jesus; and the Father to 
be spirit, that is God, that is Christ. Thus they, while contending that the 
Father and the Son are one and the same, do in fact begin by dividing them 
rather than uniting them. For if Jesus is one, and Christ is another, then the 
Son will be different from the Father, because the Son is Jesus, and the Father 
is Christ. Such a monarchy as this they learnt, I suppose, in the school of 
Valentinus, making two -- Jesus and Christ. But this conception of theirs has 
been, in fact, already confuted in what we have previously advanced, because the 
Word of God or the Spirit of God is also called the power of the Highest, whom 
they make the Father; whereas these relations are not themselves the same as He 
whose relations they are said to be, but they proceed from Him and appertain to 
Him. However, another refutation awaits them on this point of their heresy. See, 
say they, it was announced by the angel: "Therefore that Holy Thing which shall 
be born of you shall be called the Son of God." Therefore, (they argue,) as it 
was the flesh that was born, it must be the flesh that is the Son of God. Nay, 
(I answer,) this is spoken concerning the Spirit of God. For it was certainly of 
the Holy Spirit that the virgin conceived; and that which He conceived, she 
brought forth. That, therefore, had to be born which was conceived and was to be 
brought forth; that is to say, the Spirit, whose "name should be called Emmanuel 
which, being interpreted, is, God with us." Besides, the flesh is not God, so 
that it could not have been said concerning it, "That Holy Thing shall be called 
the Son of God," but only that Divine Being who was born in the flesh, of whom 
the psalm also says, "Since God became man in the midst of it, and established 
it by the will of the Father." Now what Divine Person was born in it? The Word, 
and the Spirit which became incarnate with the Word by the will of the Father. 
The Word, therefore, is incarnate; and this must be the point of our inquiry: 
How the Word became flesh, -- whether it was by having been transfigured, as it 
were, in the flesh, or by having really clothed Himself in flesh. Certainly it 
was by a real clothing of Himself in flesh. For the rest, we must needs believe 
God to be unchangeable, and incapable of form, as being eternal. But 
transfiguration is the destruction of that which previously existed. For 
whatsoever is transfigured into some other thing ceases to be that which it had 
been, and begins to be that which it previously was not. God, however, neither 
ceases to be what He was, nor can He be any other thing than what He is. The 
Word is God, and "the Word of the Lord remains for ever," -- even by holding on 
unchangeably in His own proper form. Now, if He admits not of being 
transfigured, it must follow that He be understood in this sense to have become 
flesh, when He comes to be in the flesh, and is manifested, and is seen, and is 
handled by means of the flesh; since all the other points likewise require to be 
thus understood. For if the Word became flesh by a transfiguration and change of 
substance, it follows at once that Jesus must be a substance compounded of two 
substances -- of flesh and spirit, -- a kind of mixture, like electrum, composed 
of gold and silver; and it begins to be neither gold (that is to say, spirit) 
nor silver (that is to say, flesh), -- the one being changed by the other, and a 
third substance produced. Jesus, therefore, cannot at this rate be God for He 
has ceased to be the Word, which was made flesh; nor can He be Man incarnate for 
He is not properly flesh, and it was flesh which the Word became. Being 
compounded, therefore, of both, He actually is neither; He is rather some third 
substance, very different from either. But the truth is, we find that He is 
expressly set forth as both God and Man; the very psalm which we have quoted 
intimating (of the flesh), that "God became Man in the midst of it, He therefore 
established it by the will of the Father," -- certainly in all respects as the 
Son of God and the Son of Man, being God and Man, differing no doubt according 
to each substance in its own especial property, inasmuch as the Word is nothing 
else but God, and the flesh nothing else but Man. Thus does the apostle also 
teach respecting His two substances, saying, "who was made of the seed of 
David;" in which words He will be Man and Son of Man. "Who was declared to be 
the Son of God, according to the Spirit;" in which words He will be God, and the 
Word -- the Son of God. We see plainly the twofold state, which is not 
confounded, but conjoined in One Person -- Jesus, God and Man. Concerning 
Christ, indeed, I defer what I have to say. (I remark here), that the property 
of each nature is so wholly preserved, that the Spirit s on the one hand did all 
things in Jesus suitable to Itself, such as miracles, and mighty deeds, and 
wonders; and the Flesh, on the other hand, exhibited the affections which belong 
to it. It was hungry under the devil's temptation, thirsty with the Samaritan 
woman, wept over Lazarus, was troubled even to death, and at last actually died. 
If, however, it was only a tertium quid, some composite essence formed out of 
the Two substances, like the electrum (which we have mentioned), there would be 
no distinct proofs apparent of either nature. But by a transfer of functions, 
the Spirit would have done things to be done by the Flesh, and the Flesh such as 
are effected by the Spirit; or else such things as are suited neither to the 
Flesh nor to the Spirit, but confusedly of some third character. Nay more, on 
this supposition, either the Word underwent death, or the flesh did not die, if 
so be the Word was converted into flesh; because either the flesh was immortal, 
or the Word was modal. Forasmuch, however, as the two substances acted 
distinctly, each in its own character, there necessarily accrued to them 
severally their own operations, and their own issues. Learn then, together with 
Nicodemus, that "that which is born in the flesh is flesh, and that which is 
born of the Spirit is Spirit." 
Neither the flesh becomes Spirit, nor the Spirit flesh. In one Person they no 
doubt are well able to be co-existent. Of them Jesus consists -- Man. of the 
flesh; of the Spirit, God -- and the angel designated Him as "the Son of God," 
in respect of that nature, in which He was Spirit, reserving for the flesh the 
appellation "Son of Man." In like manner, again, the apostle calls Him "the 
Mediator between God and Men,"" and so affirmed His participation of both 
substances. Now, to end the matter, will you, who interpret the Son of God to be 
flesh, be so good as as to show us what the Son of Man is? Will He then, I want 
to know, be the Spirit? But you insist upon it that the Father Himself is the 
Spirit, on the ground that "God is a Spirit," just as if we did not read also 
that there is "the Spirit of God;" in the same manner as we find that as "the 
Word was God," so also there is "the Word of God." 
CHAPTER 28 -- CHRIST NOT THE FATHER, AS PRAXEAS SAID. THE INCONSISTENCY OF 
THIS OPINION, NO LESS THAN ITS ABSURDITY, EXPOSED. THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF JESUS 
CHRIST ACCORDING TO ST. PAUL, WHO AGREES WITH OTHER SACRED WRITERS.
And so, most foolish heretic, you make Christ to be the Father, without once 
considering the actual force of this name, if indeed Christ is a name, and not 
rather a surname, or designation; for it signifies "Anointed." But Anointed is 
no more a proper name than Clothed or Shod; it is only an accessory to a name. 
Suppose now that by some means Jesus were also called Vestitus (Clothed), as He 
is actually called Christ from the mystery of His anointing, would you in like 
manner say that Jesus was the Son of God, and at the same time suppose that 
Vestitus was the Father? Now then, concerning Christ, if Christ is the Father, 
the Father is an Anointed One, and receives the unction of course from another. 
Else if it is from Himself that He receives it, then you must prove it to us. 
But we learn no such fact from the Acts of the Apostles in that ejaculation of 
the Church to God, "Of a truth, Lord, against Your Holy Child Jesus, whom You 
have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and the people of 
Israel were gathered together." These then testified both that Jesus was the Son 
of God, and that being the Son, He was anointed by the Father. Christ therefore 
must be the same as Jesus who was anointed by the Father, and not the Father, 
who anointed the Son. To the same effect are the words of Peter: "Let all the 
house of Israel know assuredly that God has made that same Jesus, whom you have 
crucified, both Lord and Christ," that is, Anointed. John, moreover, brands that 
man as "a liar" who "denies that Jesus is the Christ;" whilst on the other hand 
he declares that "every one is born of God who believes that Jesus is the 
Christ." Wherefore he also exhorts us to believe in the name of His (the 
Father's,) Son Jesus Christ, that "our fellowship may be with the Father, and 
with His Son Jesus Christ." Paul, in like manner, everywhere speaks of "God the 
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ." When writing to the Romans, he gives thanks 
to God through our Lord Jesus Christ. To the Galatians he declares himself to be 
"an apostle not of men, neither by man, but through Jesus Christ and God the 
Father." You possess indeed all his writings, which testify plainly to the same 
effect, and set forth Two -- God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son 
of the Father. (They also testify) that Jesus is Himself the Christ, and under 
one or the other designation the Son of God. For precisely by the same right as 
both names belong to the same Person, even the Son of God, does either name 
alone without the other belong to the same Person. Consequently, whether it be 
the name Jesus which occurs alone, Christ is also understood, because Jesus is 
the Anointed One; or if the name Christ is the only one given, then Jesus is 
identified with Him, because the Anointed One is Jesus. Now, of these two names 
Jesus Christ, the former is the proper one, which was given to Him by the angel; 
and the latter is only an adjunct, predicable of Him from His anointing, -- thus 
suggesting the proviso that Christ must be the Son, not the Father. How blind, 
to be sure, is the man who fails to perceive that by the name of Christ some 
other God is implied, if he ascribes to the Father this name of Christ! For if 
Christ is God the Father, when He says, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, 
and to my God and your God," He of course shows plainly enough that there is 
above Himself another Father and another God. If, again, the Father is Christ, 
He must be some other Being who "strengthens the thunder, and creates the wind, 
and declares to men His Christ." And if "the kings of the earth stood up, and 
the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against His Christ," that 
Lord must be another Being, against whose Christ were gathered together the 
kings and the rulers. And if, to quote another passage, "Thus saith the Lord to 
my Lord Christ," the Lord who speaks to the Father of Christ must be a distinct 
Being. Moreover, when the apostle in his epistle prays, "That the God of our 
Lord Jesus Christ may give to you the spirit of wisdom and of knowledge," He 
must be other (than Christ), who is the God of Jesus Christ, the bestower of 
spiritual gifts. And once for all, that we may not wander through every passage, 
He "who raised up Christ from the dead, and is also to raise up our mortal 
bodies," must certainly be, as the quickener, different from the dead Father, or 
even from the quickened Father, if Christ who died is the Father. 
CHAPTER 29 -- IT WAS CHRIST THAT DIED, THE FATHER IS INCAPABLE OF 
SUFFERING EITHER SOLELY OR WITH ANOTHER. BLASPHEMOUS CONCLUSIONS SPRING FROM 
PRAXEAS' PREMISES.
Silence! Silence on such blasphemy. Let us be content with saving that Christ 
died, the Son of the Father; and let this suffice, because the Scriptures have 
told us so much. For even the apostle, to his declaration -- which he makes not 
without feeling the weight of it -- that "Christ died," immediately adds, 
"according to the Scriptures," in order that he may alleviate the harshness of 
the statement by the authority of the Scriptures, and so remove offence from the 
reader. Now, although when two substances are alleged to be in Christ -- namely, 
the divine and the human -- it plainly follows that the divine nature is 
immortal, and that which is human is mortal, it is manifest in what sense he 
declares "Christ died" -- even in the sense in which He was flesh and Man and 
the Son of Man, not as being the Spirit and the Word and the Son of God. In 
short, since he says that it was Christ (that is, the Anointed One) that died, 
he shows us that that which died was the nature which was anointed; in a word, 
the flesh. Very well, say you; since we on our side affirm our doctrine in 
precisely the same terms which you use on your side respecting the Son, we are 
not guilty of blasphemy against the Lord God, for we do not maintain that He 
died after the divine nature, but only after the human. Nay, but you do 
blaspheme; because you allege not only that the Father died, but that He died 
the death of the cross. For "cursed are they which are hanged on a tree," -- a 
curse which, after the law, is compatible to the Son (inasmuch as "Christ has 
been made a curse for us," but certainly not the Father); since, however, you 
convert Christ into the Father, you are chargeable with blasphemy against the 
Father. But when we assert that Christ was crucified, we do not malign Him with 
a curse; we only re-affirm the curse pronounced by the law: nor indeed did the 
apostle utter blasphemy when he said the same thing as we. Besides, as there is 
no blasphemy in predicating of the subject that which is fairly applicable to 
it; so, on the other hand, it is blasphemy when that is alleged concerning the 
subject which is unsuitable to it. On this principle, too, the Father was not 
associated in suffering with the Son. The heretics, indeed, fearing to incur 
direct blasphemy against the Father, hope to diminish it by this expedient: they 
grant us so far that the Father and the Son are Two; adding that, since it iS 
the Son indeed who suffers, the Father is only His fellow-sufferer. 
But how absurd are they even in this conceit! For what is the meaning of 
"fellow-suffering," but the endurance of suffering along with another? Now if 
the Father is incapable of suffering, He . is incapable of suffering in company 
with another; otherwise, if He can suffer with another, He is of course capable 
of suffering. You, in fact, yield Him nothing by this subterfuge of your fears. 
You are afraid to say that He is capable of suffering whom you make to be 
capable of fellow-suffering. Then, again, the Father is as incapable of 
fellow-suffering as the Son even is of suffering under the conditions of His 
existence as God. Well, but how could the Son suffer, if the Father did not 
suffer with Him? My answer is, The Father is separate from the Son, though not 
from Him as God. For even if a river be soiled with mire and mud, alhough it 
flows from the fountain identical in nature with it, and is not separated from 
the fountain, yet the injury which affects the stream reaches not to the 
fountain; and although it is the water of the fountain which suffers down the 
stream, still, since it is not affected at the fountain, but only in the river, 
the fountain suffers nothing, but only the river which issues from the fountain. 
So likewise the Spirit of God, whatever suffering it might be capable of in the 
Son, yet, inasmuch as it could not suffer in the Father, the fountain of the 
Godhead, but only in the Son, it evidently could not have suffered, as the 
Father. But it is enough for me that the Spirit of God suffered nothing as the 
Spirit of God, since all that It suffered It suffered in the Son. It was quite 
another matter for the Father to suffer with the Son in the flesh. This likewise 
has been treated by us. Nor will any one deny this, since even we are ourselves 
unable to suffer for God, unless the Spirit of God be in us, who also utters by 
our instrumentality whatever pertains to our own conduct and suffering; not, 
however, that He Himself suffers in our suffering, only He bestows on us the 
power and capacity of suffering. 
CHAPTER 30 -- HOW THE SON WAS FORSAKEN BY THE FATHER UPON THE CROSS. THE 
TRUE MEANING THEREOF FATAL TO PRAXEAS. SO TOO, THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST, HIS 
ASCENSION, SESSION AT THE FATHER'S RIGHT HAND, AND MISSION OF THE HOLY 
GHOST.
However, if you persist in pushing your views further, I shall find means of 
answering you with greater stringency, and of meeting you with the exclamation 
of the Lord Himself, so as to challenge you with the question, What is your 
inquiry and reasoning about that? You have Him exclaiming in the midst of His 
passion: "My God, my God, why have You forsaken me?" Either, then, the Son 
suffered, being "forsaken" by the Father, and the Father consequently suffered 
nothing, inasmuch as He forsook the Son; or else, if it was the Father who 
suffered, then to what God was it that He addressed His cry? But this was the 
voice of flesh and soul, that is to say, of man -- not of the Word and Spirit, 
that is to say, not of God; and it was uttered so as to prove the impassibility 
of God, who "forsook" His Son, so far as He handed over His human substance to 
the suffering of death. This verity the apostle also perceived, when he writes 
to this effect: "If the Father spa. red not His own Son." This did Isaiah before 
him likewise perceive, when he declared: "And the Lord has delivered Him up for 
our offences." In this manner He "forsook" Him, in not sparing Him; "forsook" 
Him, in delivering Him up. In all other respects the Father did not forsake the 
Son, for it was into His Father's hands that the Son commended His. spirit. 
Indeed, after so commending it, He instantly died; and as the Spirit remained 
with the flesh, the flesh cannot undergo the full extent of death, i.e., in 
corruption and decay. For the Son, therefore, to die, amounted to His being 
forsaken by the Father. The Son, then, both dies and rises again, according to 
the Scriptures. It is the Son, too, who ascends to the heights of heaven, and 
also descends to the inner parts of the earth. "He sits at the Father's right 
hand" -- not the Father at His own. He is seen by Stephen, at his martyrdom by 
stoning, still sitting at the right hand of God? where He will continue to sit, 
until the Father shall make His enemies His footstool. He will come again on the 
clouds of heaven, just as He appeared when He ascended into heaven." Meanwhile 
He has received from the Father the promised gift, and has shed it forth, even 
the Holy Spirit -- the Third Name in the Godhead, and the Third Degree of the 
Divine Majesty; the Declarer of the One Monarchy of God, but at the same time 
the Interpreter of the Economy, to every one who hears and receives the words of 
the new prophecy; and "the Leader into all truth," such as is in the Father, and 
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, according to the mystery of the doctrine of Christ. 

CHAPTER 31 -- RETROGRADE CHARACTER OF THE HERESY OF PRAXEAS. THE DOCTRINE 
OF THE BLESSED TRINITY CONSTITUTES THE GREAT DIFFERENCE BETWEEN JUDAISM AND 
CHRISTIANITY.
But, (this doctrine of yours bears a likeness) to the Jewish faith, of which 
this is the substance -- so to believe in One God as to refuse to reckon the Son 
besides Him, and after the Son the Spirit. Now, what difference would there be 
between us and them, if there were not this distinction which you are far 
breaking down? What need would there be of the gospel, which is the substance of 
the New Covenant, laying down (as it does) that the Law anti the Prophets lasted 
until John the Baptist, if thenceforward the Father, the Son, and the Spirit are 
not both believed in as Three, and as making One Only God? God was pleased to 
renew His covenant with man in such a way as that His Unity might be believed 
in, after a new manner, through the Son and the Spirit, in order that God might 
now be known openly," in His proper Names and Persons, who in ancient times was 
not plainly understood, though declared through the Son and the Spirit. Away, 
then, with those "Antichrists who deny the Father and the Son." For they deny 
the Father, when they say that He is the same as the Son; and they deny the Son, 
when they suppose Him to be the same as the Father, by assigning to Them things 
which are not Theirs, and taking away from Them things which are Theirs. But 
"whosoever shall confess that (Jesus) Christ is the Son of God" (not the 
Father), "God dwells in him, and he in God." We believe not the testimony of God 
in which He testifies to us of His Son. "He that has not the Son, has not life." 
And that man has not the Son, who believes Him to be any other than the Son. 
Translated by Dr. Holmes. Electronic version copyright © 1996 by 
New Advent, Inc. 

