
Tertullian












Tertullian 
On Modesty
MODESTY, the flower of manners, the honour of our bodies, the grace of the 
sexes, the integrity of the blood, the guarantee of our race, the basis of 
sanctity, the pre-indication of every. good disposition; rare though it is, and 
not easily perfected, and scarce ever retained in perpetuity, will yet up to a 
certain point linger in the world, if nature shall have laid the preliminary 
groundwork of it, discipline persuaded to it, censorial rigour curbed its 
excesses--on the hypothesis, that is, that every mental good quality is the 
result either of birth, or else of training, or else of external compulsion. 
But as the conquering power of things evil is on the increase--which is the 
characteristic of the last times--things good are now not allowed either to be 
born, so corrupted are the seminal principles; or to be trained, so deserted are 
studies; nor to be enforced, so dined are the laws. In fact, (the modesty) of 
which we are now beginning (to treat) is by this time grown so obsolete, that it 
is not the abjuration but the moderation of the 'appetites which modesty is 
believed to be; and he is held to be chaste enough who has not been too chaste. 
But let the world's modesty see to itself, together with the world itself: 
together with its inherent nature, if it was wont to originate in birth; its 
study, if in training; its servitude, if in compulsion: except that it had been 
even more unhappy if it had remained only to prove fruitless, in that it had not 
been in God's household that its activities had been exercised. I should prefer 
no good to a vain good: what profits it that that should exist whose existence 
profits not? It is our own good things whose position is now sinking; it is the 
system of Christian modesty which is being shaken to its foundation-- (Christian 
modesty), which derives its all from heaven; its nature, "through the layer of 
regeneration;" its discipline, through the instrumentality of preaching; its 
censorial rigour, through the judgments which each Testament exhibits; and is 
subject to a more constant external compulsion, arising from the apprehension or 
the desire of the eternal fire or kingdom. 
In opposition to this (modesty), could I not have acted the dissembler? I 
hear that there has even been an edict set forth, and a peremptory one too. The 
Pontifex Maximus--that is, the bishop of bishops--issues an edict: "I remit, to 
such as have discharged (the requirements of) repentance, the sins both of 
adultery and of fornication." O edict, on which cannot be inscribed, "Good 
deed!" And where shall this liberality be posted up? On the very spot, I 
suppose, on the very gates of the sensual appetites, beneath the very titles of 
the sensual appetites. There is the place for promulgating such repentance, 
where the delinquency itself shall haunt. There is the place to read the pardon, 
where entrance shall be made under the hope thereof. But it is in the church 
that this (edict) is read, and in the church that it is pronounced; and (the 
church) is a virgin! Far, far from Christ's betrothed be such a proclamation! 
She, the true, the modest, the saintly, shall be free from stain even of her 
ears. She has none to whom to make such a promise; and if she have had, she does 
not make it; since even the earthly temple of God can sooner have been called by 
the Lord a "den of robbers," than of adulterers and fornicators. 
This too, therefore, shall be a count in my indictment against the Psychics; 
against the fellowship of sentiment also which I myself formerly maintained with 
them; in order that they may the more cast this in my teeth for a mark of 
fickleness. Repudiation of fellowship is never a pre-indication of sin. As if it 
were not easier to err with the majority, when it is in the company of the few 
that truth is loved But, however, a profitable fickleness shall no more be a 
disgrace to me, than I should wish a hurtful one to be an ornament. I blush not 
at an error which I have ceased to hold, because I am delighted at having ceased 
to hold it, because I recognise myself to be better and more modest. No one 
blushes at his own improvement. Even in Christ, knowledge had its stages of 
growth; through which stages the apostle, too, passed. "When I was a child," he 
says, "as a child I spake, as a child I understood; but when I became a man, 
those (things) which had been the child's I abandoned:" so truly did he turn 
away from his early opinions: nor did he sin by becoming an emulator not of 
ancestral but of Christian traditions, wishing even the prae-cision of them who 
advised the retention of circumcision. And would that the same fate might befall 
those, too, who obtruncate the pure and true integrity of the flesh; amputating 
not the extremest superficies, but the inmost image of modesty itself, while 
they promise pardon to adulterers and fornicators, in the teeth of the primary 
discipline of the Christian Name; a discipline to which heathendom itself bears 
such emphatic witness, that it strives to punish that discipline in the persons 
of Our females rather by defilements of the flesh than tortures; wishing to 
wrest from them that which they hold dearer than life! But now this glory is 
being extinguished, and that by means of those who ought with all the more 
constancy to refuse concession of any pardon to defilements of this kind, that 
they make the fear of succumbing to adultery and fornication their reason for 
marrying as often as they please--since "better it is to marry than to burn." No 
doubt it is for continence sake that incontinence is necessary--the "burning" 
will be extinguished by "fires!" Why, then, do they withal grant indulgence, 
under the name of repentance, to crimes for which they furnish remedies by their 
law of multinuptialism? For remedies will be idle while crimes are indulged, and 
crimes will remain if remedies are idle. And so, either way, they trifle with 
solicitude and negligence; by taking emptiest precaution against (crimes) to 
which they grant quarter, and granting absurdest quarter to (crimes) against 
which they take precaution: whereas either precaution is not to be taken where 
quarter is given, or quarter not given where precaution is taken; for they take 
precaution, as if they were unwilling that something should be committed; but 
grant indulgence, as if they were willing it should be committed: whereas, if 
they be unwilling it should be committed, they ought not to grant indulgence; if 
they be willing to grant indulgence, they ought not to take precaution. For, 
again, adultery and fornication will not be ranked at the same time among the 
moderate and among the greatest sins, so that each course may be equally open 
with regard to them--the solicitude which takes precaution, and the security 
which grants indulgence. But since they are such as to hold the culminating 
place among crimes, there is no room at once for their indulgence as if they 
were moderate, and for their precaution as if they were greatest But by us 
precaution is thus also taken against the greatest, or, (if you will), highest 
(crimes, viz.,) in that it is not permitted, after believing, to know even a 
second marriage, differentiated though it be, to be sure, from the work of 
adultery and fornication by the nuptial and dotal tablets: and accordingly, with 
the utmost strictness, we excommunicate digamists, as bringing infamy upon the 
Paraclete by the irregularity of their discipline. The self-same liminal limit 
we fix for adulterers also and fornicators; dooming them to pour forth tears 
barren of peace, and to regain from the Church no ampler return than the 
publication of their disgrace. 
CHAP. II.--GOD JUST AS WELL AS MERCIFUL; ACCORDINGLY, MERCY MUST NOT BE 
INDISCRIMINATE. 
"But," say they, "God is 'good,' and 'most good,' and 'pitiful-hearted,' and 
'a pitier,' and 'abundant in pitiful-heartedness,' which He holds 'dearer than 
all sacrifice,' 'not thinking the sinner's death of so much worth as his 
repentance, 'a Saviour of all men, most of all of believers.' And so it will be 
becoming for 'the sons of God' too to be 'pitiful-hearted' and 'peacemakers;' 
'giving in their turn just as 
Christ withal hath given to us;' 'not judging, that we be not judged.' For 
'to his own lord a man standeth or falleth; who art thou, to judge another's 
servant?' 'Remit, and remission shall be made to thee.'" Such and so great 
futilities of theirs wherewith they flatter God and pander to themselves, 
effeminating rather than invigorating discipline, with how cogent and contrary 
(arguments) are we for our part able to rebut,-- (arguments) which set before us 
warningly the "severity" of God, and provoke our own constancy? Because, albeit 
God is by nature good, still He is "just" too. 
For, from the nature of the case, just as He knows how to "heal," so does He 
withal know how to "smite;" "making peace," but withal "creating evils;" 
preferring repentance, but withal commanding Jeremiah not to pray for the 
aversion of ills on behalf of the sinful People,--"since, if they shall have 
fasted," saith He, "I will not listen to their entreaty." And again: "And pray 
not thou unto on behalf of the People, and request not on their behalf in prayer 
and supplication, since I will not listen to (them) in the time wherein they 
shall have invoked me, in the time of their affliction." And further, above, the 
same preferrer of mercy above sacrifice (says): "And pray not thou unto on 
behalf of this People, and request not that they may obtain mercy, and approach 
not on their behalf unto me, since I will not listen to (them)" of course when 
they sue for mercy, when out of repentance they weep and fast, and when they 
offer their self-affliction to God. For God is "jealous," and is One who is not 
contemptuously derided--derided, namely, by such as flatter His goodness--and 
who, albeit "patient," yet threatens, through Isaiah, an end of (His) patience. 
"I have held my peace; shall I withal always hold my peace and endure? I have 
been quiet as (a woman) in birth-throes; I will arise, and will make (them) to 
grow arid." For "a fire shall proceed before His face, and shall utterly burn 
His enemies;" striking down not the body only, but the souls too, into hell. 
Besides, the Lord Himself demonstrates the manner in which He threatens such as 
judge: "For with what judgment ye judge, judgment shall be given on you." Thus 
He has not prohibited judging, but taught (how to do it). Whence the apostle 
withal judges, and that in a case of fornication, that "such a man must be 
surrendered to Satan for the destruction of the flesh;" chiding them likewise 
because "brethren" were not "judged at the bar of the saints:" for he goes on 
and says, "To what (purpose is it) for me to judge those who are without?" "But 
you remit, in order that remission may be granted you by God." The sins which 
are (thus) cleansed are such as a man may have committed against his brother, 
not against God. We profess, in short, in our prayer, that we will grant 
remission to our debtors; but it is not becoming to distend further, on the 
ground of the authority of such Scriptures, the cable of contention with 
alternate pull into diverse directions; so that one (Scripture) may seem to draw 
tight, another to relax, the reins of discipline--in uncertainty, as it 
were,--and the latter to debase the remedial aid of repentance through lenity, 
the former to refuse it through austerity. Further: the authority of Scripture 
will stand within its own limits, without reciprocal opposition. The remedial 
aid of repentance is determined by its own conditions, without unlimited 
concession; and the causes of it themselves are anteriorly distinguished without 
confusion in the proposition. We agree that the causes of repentance are sins. 
These we divide into two issues: some will be remissible, some irremissible: in 
accordance wherewith it will be doubtful to no one that some deserve 
chastisement, some condemnation. Every sin is dischargeable either by pardon or 
else by penalty: by pardon as the result of chastisement, by penalty as the 
result of condemnation. Touching this difference, we have not only already 
premised certain antithetical passages of the Scriptures, on one hand retaining, 
on the other remitting, sins; but John, too, will teach us: "If any knoweth his 
brother to be sinning a sin not unto death, he shall request, and life shall be 
given to him;" because he is not "sinning unto death," this will be remissible. 
" (There) is a sin unto death; not for this do I say that any is to 
request"--this will be irremissible. So, where there is the efficacious power of 
"making request," there likewise is that of remission: where there is no 
(efficacious power) of "making request," there equally is none of remission 
either. According to this difference of sins, the condition of repentance also 
is discriminated. There will be a condition which may possibly obtain 
pardon,--in the case, namely, of a remissible sin: there will be a condition 
which can by no means obtain it,--in the case, namely, of an irremissible sin. 
And it remains to examine specially, with regard to the position of adultery and 
fornication, to which class of sins they ought to be assigned. 
CHAP. III.--AN OBJECTION ANTICIPATED BEFORE THE DISCUSSION ABOVE PROMISED IS 
COMMENCED. 
But before doing this, I will make short work with an answer which meets us 
from the opposite side, in reference to that species of repentance which we are 
just defining as being without pardon. "Why, if," say they, "there is a 
repentance which lacks pardon, it immediately follows that such repentance must 
withal be wholly unpractised by you. For nothing is to be done in vain. Now 
repentance will be practised in vain, if it is without pardon. But all 
repentance is to be practised. Therefore let (us allow that) all obtains pardon, 
that it may not be practised in vain; because it will not be to be practised, if 
it be practised in vain. Now, in vain it is practised, if it shall lack pardon." 
Justly, then, do they allege (this argument) against us; since they have 
usurpingly kept in their own power the fruit of this as of other 
repentance--that is, pardon; for, so far as they are concerned, at whose hands 
(repentance) obtains man's peace, (it is in vain). As regards us, however, who 
remember that the Lord alone concedes (the pardon of) sins, (and of course of 
mortal ones,) it will not be practised in vain. For (the repentance) being 
referred back to the Lord, and thenceforward lying prostrate before Him, will by 
this very fact the rather avail to win pardon, that it gains it by entreaty from 
God alone, that it believes not that man's peace is adequate to its guilt, that 
as far as regards the Church it prefers the blush of shame to the privilege of 
communion. For before her doors it stands, and by the example of its own stigma 
admonishes all others, and calls at the same time to its own aid the brethren's 
tears, and returns with an even richer merchandise--their compassion, 
namely--than their communion. And if it reaps not the harvest of peace here, yet 
it sows the seed of it with the Lord; nor does it lose, but prepares, its fruit. 
It will not fail of emolument if it do not fail in duty. Thus, neither is such 
repentance vain, nor such discipline harsh. Both honour God. The former, by 
laying no flattering unction to itself, will more readily win success; the 
latter, by assuming nothing to itself, will more fully aid. 
CHAP. IV.--ADULTERY AND FORNICATION SYNONYMOUS. 
Having defined the distinction (between the kinds) of repentance, we are by 
this time, then, able to return to the assessment of the sins--whether they be 
such as can obtain pardon at the hand of men. In the first place, (as for the 
fact) that we call adultery likewise fornication, usage requires (us so to do). 
"Faith," withal, has a familiar acquaintance with sundry appellations. So, in 
every one of our little works, we carefully guard usage. Besides, if I shall say 
"adulterium," and if "stuprum," the indictment of contamination of the flesh 
will be one and the same. For it makes no difference whether a man assault 
another's bride or widow, provided it be not his own "female;" just as there is 
no difference made by places--whether it be in chambers or in towers that 
modesty is massacred. Every homicide, even outside a wood, is banditry. 
So, too, whoever enjoys any other than nuptial intercourse, in whatever 
place, and in the person of whatever woman, makes himself guilty of adultery and 
fornication. Accordingly, among us, secret connections as well--connections, 
that is, not first professed in presence of the Church--run risk of being judged 
akin to adultery and fornication; nor must we let them, if thereafter woven 
together by the covering of marriage, elude the charge. But all the other 
frenzies of passions--impious both toward the bodies and toward the 
sexes--beyond the laws of nature, we banish not only from the threshold, but 
from all shelter of the Church, because they are not sins, but monstrosities. 
CHAP. V.--OF THE PROHIBITION OF ADULTERY IN 
THE DECALOGUE. 
Of how deep guilt, then, adultery--which is likewise a matter of fornication, 
in accordance with its criminal function--is to be accounted, the Law of God 
first comes to hand to show us; if it is true, (as it is), that after 
interdicting the superstitious service of alien gods, and the making of idols 
themselves, after commending (to religious observance) the veneration of the 
Sabbath, after commanding a religious regard toward parents second (only to 
that) toward God, (that Law) laid, as the next substratum in strengthening and 
fortifying such counts, no other precept than "Thou shall not commit adultery." 
For after spiritual chastity and sanctity followed corporeal integrity. And this 
(the Law) accordingly fortified, by immediately prohibiting its foe, adultery. 
Understand, consequently, what kind of sin (that must be), the repression of 
which (the Law) ordained next to (that of) idolatry. Nothing that is a second is 
remote from the first; nothing is so dose to the first as the second. That which 
results from the first is (in a sense) another first. And so adultery is 
bordering on idolatry. For idolatry withal, often cast as a reproach upon the 
People under the name of adultery and fornication, will be alike conjoined 
therewith in fate as in following--will be alike co-heir therewith in 
condemnation as in co-ordination. Yet further: premising "Thou shalt not commit 
adultery," (the Law) adjoins, "Thou shalt not kill." It honoured adultery, of 
course, to which it gives the precedence over murder, in the very fore-front of 
the most holy law, among the primary counts of the celestial edict, marking it 
with the inscription of the very principal sins. From its place you may discern 
the measure, from its rank the station, from its neighbourhood the merit, of 
each thing. Even evil has a dignity, consisting in being stationed at the 
summit, or else in the centre, of the superlatively bad. I behold a certain pomp 
and circumstance of adultery: on the one side, Idolatry goes before and leads 
the way; on the other, Murder follows in company. Worthily, without doubt, has 
she taken her seat between the two most conspicuous eminences of misdeeds, and 
has completely filled the vacant space, as it were, in their midst, with an 
equal majesty of crime. Enclosed by such flanks, encircled and supported by such 
ribs, who shall dislocate her from the corporate mass of coherencies, from the 
bond of neighbour crimes, from the embrace of kindred wickednesses, so as to set 
apart her alone for the enjoyment of repentance? Will not on one side Idolatry, 
on the other Murder, detain her, and (if they have any voice) reclaim: "This is 
our wedge, this our compacting power? By (the standard of) Idolatry we are 
measured; by her disjunctive intervention we are conjoined; to her, outjutting 
from our midst, we are united; the Divine Scripture has made us concorporate; 
the very letters are our glue; herself can no longer exist without us. 'Many and 
many a time do I, Idolatry, subminister occasion to Adultery; witness my groves 
and my mounts, and the living waters, and the very temples in cities, what 
mighty agents we are for overthrowing modesty.' 'I also, Murder, sometimes exert 
myself on behalf of Adultery. To omit tragedies, witness nowadays the poisoners, 
witness the magicians, how many seductions I avenge, how many rivalries I 
revenge; how many guards, how many informers, how many accomplices, I make away 
with. Witness the midwives likewise, how many adulterous conceptions are 
slaughtered.' Even among Christians there is no adultery without us. Wherever 
the business of the unclean spirit is, there are idolatries; wherever a man, by 
being polluted, is slain, there too is murder. 
Therefore the remedial aids of repentance will not be suitable to them, or 
else they will likewise be to us. We either detain Adultery, or else follow 
her." These words the sins themselves do speak. If the sins are deficient in 
speech, hard by (the door of the church) stands an idolater, hard by stands a 
murderer; in their midst stands, too, an adulterer. Alike, as the duty of 
repentance bids, they sit in sackcloth and bristle in ashes; with the self-same 
weeping they groan; with the selfsame prayers they make their circuits; with the 
self-same knees they supplicate; the self-same mother they invoke. What doest 
thou, gentlest and humanest Discipline? Either to all these will it be thy duty 
so to be, for "blessed are the peacemakers;" or else, if not to all, it will be 
thy duty to range thyself on our side. Dost thou once for all condemn the 
idolater and the murderer, but take the adulterer out from their midst?-- (the 
adulterer), the successor of the idolater, the predecessor of the murderer, the 
colleague of each? It is "an accepting of person:" the more pitiable repentances 
thou hast left (unpitied) behind! 
CHAP. VI.--EXAMPLES OF SUCH OFFENCES UNDER THE OLD DISPENSATION NO PATTERN 
FOR THE DISCIPLES OF THE NEW. BUT EVEN THE OLD HAS EXAMPLES OF VENGEANCE UPON 
SUCH OFFENCES. 
Plainly, if you show by what patronages of heavenly precedents and precepts 
it is that you open to adultery alone--and therein to fornication also--the gate 
of repentance, at this very line our hostile encounter will forthwith cross 
swords. Yet I must necessarily prescribe you a law, not to stretch out your hand 
after the old things, not to look backwards: for "the old things are passed 
away," according to Isaiah; and "a renewing hath been renewed," according to 
Jeremiah; and "forgetful of former things, we are reaching forward," according 
to the apostle; and "the law and the prophets (were) until John," according to 
the Lord. For even if we are just now beginning with the Law in demonstrating 
(the nature of) adultery, it is justly with that phase of the law which Christ 
has "not dissolved, but fulfilled." For it is the "burdens" of the law which 
were "until John," not the remedial virtues. It is the "yokes" of "works" that 
have been rejected, not those of disciplines. "Liberty in Christ" has done no 
injury to innocence. The law of piety, sanctity, humanity, truth, chastity, 
justice, mercy, benevolence, modesty, remains in its entirety; in which law 
"blessed the man who shall meditate by day and by night." About that (law) the 
same David (says) again: "The law of the Lord unblameable converting souls; the 
statutes of the Lord (are) direct, delighting hearts; the precept of the Lord 
far-shining, enlightening eyes." Thus, too, the apostle: "And so the law indeed 
is holy, and the precept holy and most good"--"Thou shalt not commit adultery," 
of course. But he had withal said above: "Are we, then, making void the law 
through faith? Far be it; but we are establishing the law "--forsooth in those 
(points) which, being even now interdicted by the New Testament, are prohibited 
by an even more emphatic precept: instead of, "Thou shalt not commit adultery," 
"Whoever shall have seen with a view to concupiscence, hath already committed 
adultery in his own heart; " and instead of, "Thou shalt not kill," "Whoever 
shall have said to his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of hell." Ask 
(yourself) whether the law of not committing adultery be still in force, to 
which has been added that of not indulging concupiscence. Besides, if any 
precedents (taken from the Old Dispensation) shall favour you in (the secrecy 
of) your bosom, they shall not be set in opposition to this discipline which we 
are maintaining. For it is in vain that an additional law has been reared, 
condemning the origin even of sins--that is, concupiscences and wills--no less 
than the actual deeds; if the fact that pardon was of old in some cases conceded 
to adultery is to be a reason why it shall be conceded at the present day. "What 
will be the reward attaching to the restrictions imposed upon the more fully 
developed discipline of the present day, except that the eider (discipline) may 
be made the agent for granting indulgence to your prostitution?" In that case, 
you will grant pardon to the idolater too, and to every apostate, because we 
find the People itself, so often guilty of these crimes, as often reinstated in 
their former privileges. You will maintain communion, too, with the murderer: 
because Ahab, by deprecation, washed away (the guilt of) Naboth's blood; and 
David, by confession, purged Uriah's slaughter, together with its 
cause--adultery. That done, you will condone incests, too, for Lot's sake; and 
fornications combined with incest, for Judah's sake; and base marriages with 
prostitutes, for Hosea's sake; and not only the frequent repetition of marriage, 
but its simultaneous plurality, for our fathers' sakes: for, of come, it is meet 
that there should also be a perfect equality of grace in regard of all deeds to 
which indulgence was in days bygone granted, if on the ground of some pristine 
precedent pardon is claimed for adultery. We, too, indeed have precedents in the 
self-same antiquity on the side of our opinion,-- (precedents) of judgment not 
merely not waived, but even summarily executed upon fornication. And of course 
it is a sufficient one, that so vast a number-- (the number) of 24,000--of the 
People, when they committed fornication with the daughters of Madian, fell in 
one plague. But, with an eye to the glory of Christ, I prefer to derive 
discipline from Christ. Grant that the pristine days may have had--if the 
Psychics please--even a right of (indulging) every immodesty; grant that, before 
Christ, the flesh may have disported itself, nay, may have perished before its 
Lord went to seek and bring it back: not yet was it worthy of the gift of 
salvation; not yet apt for the office of sanctity. It was still, up to that 
time, accounted as being in Adam, with its own vicious nature, easily indulging 
concupiscence after whatever it had seen to be "attractive to the sight," and 
looking back at the lower things, and checking its itching with fig-leaves. 
Universally inherent was the virus of lust--the dregs which are formed out of 
milk contain it-- (dregs) fitted (for so doing), in that even the waters 
themselves had not yet been bathed. But when the Word of God descended into 
flesh,-- (flesh) not unsealed even by marriage,--and "the Word was made 
flesh,"-- (flesh) never to be unsealed by marriage,--which was to find its way 
to the tree not of incontinence, but of endurance; which was to taste from that 
tree not anything sweet, but something bitter; which was to pertain not to the 
infernal regions, but to heaven; which was to be precinct not with the leaves of 
lasciviousness, but the flowers of holiness; which was to impart to the waters 
its own purities--thenceforth, whatever flesh "in Christ" has lost its pristine 
soils, is now a thing different, emerges in a new state, no longer (generated) 
of the slime of natural seed, nor of the grime of concupiscence, but of "pure 
water" and a "clean 
Spirit." And, accordingly, why excuse it on the ground of pristine precedent? 
It did not bear the names of "body of Christ," of "members of Christ," of 
"temple of God," at the time When it used to obtain pardon for adultery. And 
thus if, from the moment when it changed its condition, and "having been 
baptized into Christ put on Christ," and was "redeemed with a great price"--"the 
blood," to wit, "of the Lord and Lamb"--you take hold of any one precedent (be 
it precept, or law, or sentence,) of indulgence granted, or to be granted, to 
adultery and fornication,--you have likewise at our hands a definition of the 
time from which the age of the question dates. 
CHAP. VII.--OF THE PARABLES OF THE LOST EWE 
AND THE LOST DRACHMA. 
You shall have leave to begin with the parables, where you have the lost ewe 
re-sought by the Lord, and carried back on His shoulders. Let the very paintings 
upon your cups come forward to show whether even in them the figurative meaning 
of that sheep will shine through (the outward semblance, to teach) whether a 
Christian or heathen sinner be the object it aims at in the matter of 
restoration. For we put in a demurrer arising out of the teaching of nature, out 
of the law of ear and tongue, out of the soundness of the mental faculty, to the 
effect that such answers are always given as are called forth (by the 
question,--answers), that is, to the (questions) which call them forth. That 
which was calling forth (an answer in the present case) was, I take it, the fact 
that the Pharisees were muttering in indignation at the Lord's admitting to His 
society heathen publicans and sinners, and communicating with them in food. 
When, in reply to this, the Lord had figured the restoration of the lost ewe, to 
whom else is it credible that he configured it but to the lost heathen, about 
whom the question was then in hand,--not about a Christian, who up to that time 
had no existence? Else, what kind of (hypothesis) is it that the Lord, like a 
quibbler in answering, omitting the present subject-matter which it was His duty 
to refute, should spend His labour about one yet future? "But a 'sheep' properly 
means a Christian, and the Lord's 'flock' is the people of the Church, and the 
'good shepherd' is Christ; and hence in the 'sheep' we must understand a 
Christian who has erred from the Church's 'flock.'" In that case, you make the 
Lord to have given no answer to the Pharisees' muttering, but to your 
presumption. And yet you will be bound so to defend that presumption, as to deny 
that the (points) which you think applicable to Christians are referable to a 
heathen. Tell me, is not all mankind one flock of God? Is not the same GOD both 
Lord and Shepherd of the universal nations? Who more "perishes" from God than 
the heathen, so long as he "errs?" Who is more "re-sought" by God than the 
heathen, when he is recalled by Christ? In fact, it is among heathens that this 
order finds antecedent place; if, that is, Christians are not otherwise made out 
of heathens than by being first "lost," and "re-sought" by God, and "carried 
back" by Christ. So likewise ought this order to be kept, that we may interpret 
any such (figure) with reference to those in whom it finds prior place. But you, 
I take it, would wish this: that He should represent the ewe as lost not from a 
flock, but from an ark or a chest! In like manner, albeit He calls the remaining 
number of the heathens "righteous," it does not follow that He shows them to be 
Christians; dealing as He is with Jews, and at that very moment refuting them, 
because they were indignant at the hope of the heathens. But in order to 
express, in opposition to the Pharisees' envy, His own grace and goodwill even 
in regard of one heathen, He preferred the salvation of one sinner by repentance 
to theirs by righteousness; or else, pray, were the Jews not "righteous," and 
such as "had no need of repentance," having, as they had, as pilotages of 
discipline and instruments of fear, "the Law and the Prophets?" He set them 
therefore in the parable--and if not such as they were, yet such as they ought 
to have been--that they migh blush the more when they heard that repentance was 
necessary to others, and not to themselves. 
Similarly, the parable of the drachma, as being called forth out of the same 
subject-matter, we equally interpret with reference to a heathen; albeit it had 
been "lost" in a house, as it were in the church; albeit "found" by aid of a 
"lamp," as it were by aid of God's word. Nay, but this whole world is the one 
house of all; in which world it is more the heathen, who is found in darkness, 
whom the grace of God enlightens, than the Christian, who is already in God's 
light. Finally, it is one "straying" which is ascribed to the ewe and the 
drachma: (and this is an evidence in my favour); for if the parables had been 
composed with a view to a Christian sinner, after the loss of his faith, a 
second loss and restoration of them would have been noted. 

I will now withdraw for a short time from this position; in order that I may, 
even by withdrawing, the more recommend it, when I shall have succeeded even 
thus also in confuting the presumption of the opposite side. I admit that the 
sinner portrayed in each parable is one who is already a Christian; yet not that 
on this account must he be affirmed to be such an one as can be restored, 
through repentance, from the crime of adultery and fornication. For although he 
be said to "have perished," there will be the kind of perdition to treat of; 
inasmuch as the "ewe" "perished" not by dying, but by straying; and the 
"drachma" not by being destroyed, but by being hidden. In this sense, a thing 
which is safe may be said to "have perished." Therefore the believer, too, 
"perishes," by lapsing out of (the right path) into a public exhibition of 
charioteering frenzy, or gladiatorial gore, or scenic foulness, or athletic 
vanity; or else if he has lent the aid of any special "arts of curiosity" to 
sports, to the convivialities of heathen solemnity, to official exigence, to the 
ministry of another's idolatry; if he has impaled himself upon some word of 
ambiguous denial, or else of blasphemy. For some such cause he has been driven 
outside the flock; or even himself, perhaps, by anger, by pride, by 
jealousy,--as, in fact, often happens--by disdaining to submit to chastisement, 
has broken away (from it). He ought to be re-sought and recalled. That which can 
be recovered does not "perish," unless it persist in remaining outside. You will 
well interpret the parable by recalling the sinner while he is still living. 
But, for the adulterer and fornicator, I who is there who has not pronounced him 
to be dead immediately upon commission of the crime? With what face will you 
restore to the flock one who is dead, on the authority of that parable which 
recalls a sheep not dead? 
Finally, if you are mindful of the prophets, when they are chiding the 
shepherds, there is a word--I think it is Ezekiel's: "Shepherds, hold, ye devour 
the milk, and clothe you with the fleeces: what is strong ye have slain; what is 
weak ye have not tended; what is shattered ye have not bound; what has been 
driven out ye have not brought back; what has perished ye have not re-sought." 
Pray, does he withal upbraid them at all concerning that which is dead, that 
they have taken no care to restore that too to the flock? Plainly, he makes it 
an additional reproach that they have caused the sheep to perish, and to be 
eaten up by the beasts of the field; nor can they either "perish mortally," or 
be "eaten up," if they are left remaining. "Is it not possible-- (granting) that 
ewes which have been mortally lost, and eaten up, are recovered--that (in 
accordance also with the example of the drachma (lost and found again) even 
within the house of God, the Church) there may be some sins of a moderate 
character, proportionable to the small size and the weight of a drachma, which, 
lurking in the same Church, and by and by in the same discovered, forthwith are 
brought to an end in the same with the joy of amendment?" But of adultery and 
fornication it is not a drachma, but a talent, (which is the measure); and for 
searching them out there is need not of the javelin-light of a lamp, but of the 
spear-like ray of the entire sun. No sooner has (such a) man made his appearance 
than he is expelled from the Church; nor does he remain there; nor does he cause 
joy to the Church which discovers him, but grief; nor does he invite the 
congratulation of her neighbours, but the fellowship in sadness of the 
surrounding fraternities. 
By comparison, even in this way, of this our interpretation with theirs, the 
arguments of both the ewe and the drachma will all the more refer to the 
heathen, that they cannot possibly apply to the Christian guilty of the sin for 
the sake of which they are wrested into a forced application to the Christian on 
the opposite side. 
CHAP. VIII.--OF THE PRODIGAL SON. 
But, however, the majority of interpreters of the parables are deceived by 
the self-same result as is of very frequent occurrence in the case of 
embroidering garments with purple. When you think that you have judiciously 
harmonized the proportions of the hues, and believe yourself to have succeeded 
in skilfully giving vividness to their mutual combination; presently, when each 
body (of colour) and (the various) lights are fully developed, the convicted 
diversity will expose all the error. In the self-same darkness, accordingly, 
with regard to the parable of the two, sons also, they are led by some figures 
(occurring in it), which harmonize in hue with the present (state of things), to 
wander out of the path of the true light of that comparison which the 
subject-matter of the parable presents. For they set down, as represented in the 
two sons, two peoples--the eider the Jewish, the younger the Christian: for they 
cannot in the sequel arrange for the Christian sinner, in the person of the 
younger son, to obtain pardon, unless in the person of the eider they first 
portray the Jewish. Now, if I shall succeed in showing that the Jewish fails to 
suit the comparison of the elder son, the consequence of course will be, that 
the Christian will not be admissible (as represented) by the joint figure of the 
younger son. For although the Jew withal be called "a son," and an "elder one," 
inasmuch as he had priority in adoption; 
although, too, he envy the Christian the reconciliation of God the Father,--a 
point which the opposite side most eagerly catches at,--still it will be no 
speech of a Jew to the Father: "Behold, in how many years do I serve Thee, and 
Thy precept have I never transgressed." For when has the Jew not been a 
transgressor of the law; hearing with the ear, and not hearing; holding in 
hatred him who reproveth in the gates, and in scorn holy speech? So, too, it 
will be no speech of the Father to the Jew: "Thou art always with Me, and all 
Mine are thine." For the Jews are pronounced "apostate sons, begotten indeed and 
raised on high, but who have not understood the Lord, and who have quite 
forsaken the LORD, and have provoked unto anger the Holy One of Israel." That 
all things, plainly, were conceded to the Jew, we shall admit; but he has 
likewise had every more savoury morsel torn from his throat, not to say the very 
land of paternal promise. And accordingly the Jew at the present day, no less 
than the younger son, having squandered God's substance, is a beggar in alien 
territory, serving even until now its princes, that is, the princes of this 
world. Seek, therefore, the Christians some other as their brother; for the Jew 
the parable does not admit. Much more aptly would they have matched the 
Christian with the elder, and the Jew with the younger son, "according to the 
analogy of faith," if the order of each people as intimated from Rebecca's womb 
permitted the inversion: only that (in that case) the concluding paragraph would 
oppose them; for it will he fitting for the Christian to rejoice, and not to 
grieve, at the restoration of Israel, if it he true, (as it is), that the whole 
of our hope is intimately united with the remaining expectation of Israel. Thus, 
even if some (features in the parable) are favourable, yet by others of a 
contrary significance the thorough carrying out of this comparison is destroyed; 
although (albeit all points be capable of corresponding with mirror-like 
accuracy) there he one cardinal danger in interpretations--the danger lest the 
felicity of our comparisons be tempered with a different aim from that which the 
subject-matter of each particular parable has bidden us (temper it). For we 
remember (to have seen) actors withal, white accommodating allegorical gestures 
to their ditties, giving expression to such as are far different from the 
immediate plot, and scene, and character, and yet with the utmost congruity. But 
away with extraordinary ingenuity, for it has nothing to do with our subject. 
Thus heretics, too, apply the self-same parables where they list, and exclude 
them (in other cases)--not where they ought--with the utmost aptitude. Why the 
utmost aptitude? Because from the very beginning they have moulded together the 
very subject-matters of their doctrines in accordance with the opportune 
incidences of the parables. Loosed as they are from the constraints of the rule 
of truth, they have had leisure, of course, to search into and put together 
those things of which the parables seem (to be symbolical). 
CHAP. IX.--CERTAIN GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF PARABOLIC INTERPRETATION. THESE 
APPLIED TO THE PARABLES NOW UNDER CONSIDERATION, ESPECIALLY TO THAT OF THE 
PRODIGAL SON. 
We, however, who do not make the parables the sources whence we devise our 
subject-matters, but the subject-matters the sources whence we interpret the 
parables, do not labour hard, either, to twist all things (into shape) in the 
exposition, while we take care to avoid all contradictions. Why "an hundred 
sheep?" and why, to be sure, "ten drachmas?" And what is that "besom?" Necessary 
it was that He who was desiring to express the extreme pleasure which the 
salvation of one sinner gives to God, should name some special quantity of a 
numerical whole from which to describe that "one" had perished. Necessary it was 
that the style of one engaged in searching for a "drachma" in a "house," should 
be aptly fitted with the helpful accompaniment of a "besom" as well as of a 
"lamp." For curious niceties of this kind not only render some things suspected, 
but, by the subtlety of forced explanations, generally lead away from the truth. 
There are, moreover, some points which are just simply introduced with a view to 
the structure and disposition and texture of the parable, in order that they may 
be worked up throughout to the end for which the typical example is being 
provided. Now, of course the (parable of) the two sons will point to the same 
end as (those of) the drachma and the ewe: for it has the self-same cause (to 
call it forth) as those to which it coheres, and the selfsame "muttering," of 
course, of the Pharisees at the intercourse between the Lord and heathens. Or 
else, if any doubts that in the land of Judea, subjugated as it had been long 
since by the hand of Pompey and of Lucullus, the publicans were heathens, let 
him read Deuteronomy: "There shall be no tribute-weigher of the sons of Israel." 
Nor would the name of publicans have been so execrable in the eyes of the Lord, 
unless as being a "strange", name,--a (name) of such as put up the pathways of 
the very sky, and earth, and sea, for sale. Moreover, when (the writer) adjoins 
"sinners" to "publicans," it does not follow that he shows them to have been 
Jews, albeit some may possibly have been so; but by placing on a par the one 
genus of heathens--some sinners by office, that is, publicans; some by nature, 
that is, not publicans--he has drawn a distinction between them. Besides, the 
Lord would not have been censured for partaking of food with Jews, but with 
heathens, from whose board the Jewish discipline excludes (its disciples). 
Now we must proceed, in the case of the prodigal son, to consider first that 
which is more useful; for no adjustment of examples, albeit in the most 
nicely-poised balance, shall be admitted if it shall prove to be most hurtful to 
salvation. But the whole system of salvation, as it is comprised in the 
maintenance of discipline, we see is being subverted by that interpretation 
which is affected by the opposite side. For if it is a Christian who, after 
wandering far from his Father, squanders, by living heathenishly, the 
"substance" received from God his Father,-- (the substance), of course, of 
baptism-- (the substance), of course, of the Holy Spirit, and (in consequence) 
of eternal hope; if, stripped of his mental "goods," he has even handed his 
service over to the prince of the world--who else but the devil?--and by him 
being appointed over the business of "feeding swine"--of tending unclean 
spirits, to wit--has recovered his senses so as to return to his Father,--the 
result will be, that, not adulterers and fornicators, but idolaters, and 
blasphemers, and renegades, and every class of apostates, will by this parable 
make satisfaction to the Father; and in this way (it may) rather (be said that) 
the whole "substance" of the sacrament is most truly wasted away. For who will 
fear to squander what he has the power of afterwards recovering? Who will be 
careful to preserve to perpetuity what he will be able to lose not to 
perpetuity? Security in sin is likewise an appetite for it. Therefore the 
apostate withal will recover his former "garment," the robe of the Holy Spirit; 
and a renewal of the "ring," the sign and seal of baptism; and Christ will again 
be "slaughtered;" and he will recline on that couch from which such as are 
unworthily clad are wont to be lifted by the torturers, and cast away into 
darkness,--much more such as have been stripped. It is therefore a further step 
if it is not expedient, (any more than reasonable), that the story of the 
prodigal son should apply to a Christian. Wherefore, if the image of a "son" is 
not entirely suitable to a Jew either, our interpretation shall be simply 
governed with an eye to the object the Lord had in view. The Lord had come, of 
course, to save that which "had perished;" "a Physician." necessary to "the 
sick" "more than to the whole." This fact He was in the habit both of typifying 
in parables and preaching in direct statements. Who among men "perishes," who 
falls from health, but he who knows not the Lord? 
Who is "safe and sound," but he who knows the Lord? These two 
classes--"brothers" by birth--this parable also will signify. See whether the 
heathen have in God the Father the "substance" of origin, and wisdom, and 
natural power of Godward recognition; by means of which power the apostle withal 
notes that "in the wisdom of God, the world through wisdom knew not God,"-- 
(wisdom) which, of course, it had received originally from God. This 
("substance"), accordingly, he "squandered;" having been cast by his moral 
habits far from the Lord, amid the errors and allurements and appetites of the 
world, where, compelled by hunger after truth," he handed himself over to the 
prince of this age. He set him over "swine," to feed that flock familiar to 
demons, where he would not be master of a supply of vital food, and at the same 
time would see others (engaged) in a divine work, having abundance of heavenly 
bread. He remembers his Father, God; he returns to Him when he has been 
satisfied; he receives again the pristine "garment,"--the condition, to wit, 
which Adam by transgression had lost. The "ring" also he is then Wont to receive 
for the first time, wherewith, after being interrogated, he publicly seals the 
agreement of faith, and thus thenceforward feeds upon the "fatness" of the 
Lord's body,--the Eucharist, to wit. This will be the prodigal son, who never in 
days bygone was thrifty; who was from the first prodigal, because not from the 
first a Christian. Him withal, returning from the world to the Father's 
embraces, the Pharisees mourned over, in the persons of the "publicans and 
sinners." And accordingly to this point alone the elder brother's envy is 
adapted: not because the Jews were innocent, and obedient to God, but because 
they envied the nation salvation; being plainly they who ought to have been 
"ever with" the Father. And of course it is immediately over the first calling 
of the Christian that the Jew groans, not over his second restoration: for the 
former reflects its rap even upon the heathen; but the latter, which takes place 
in the churches, is not known even to the Jews. I think that I have advanced 
interpretations more consonant with the subject-matter of the parables, and the 
congruity of things, and the preservation of disciplines. But if the view with 
which the opposite party is eager to mould the ewe, and the dracnma, and the 
voluptuousness of the son to the shape of the Christian sinner, is that they may 
endow adultery and fornication with (the gift of) repentance; it will be fitting 
either that all other crimes equally capital should be conceded remissible, or 
else that their peers, adultery and fornication, should be retained 
inconcessible. 
But it is more (to the point) that it is not lawful to draw conclusions about 
anything else than the subject which was immediately in hand. In short, if it 
were lawful to transfer the parables to other ends (than they were originally 
intended for), it would be rather to martyrdom that we would direct the hope 
drawn from those now in question; for that is the only thing which, after all 
his substance has been squandered, will be able to restore the son; and will 
joyfully proclaim that the drachma has been found, albeit among all (rubbish) on 
a dungheap; and will carry back into the flock on the shoulders of the Lord 
Himself the ewe, fugitive though she have been over all that is rough and 
rugged. But we prefer, if it must be so, to be less wise in the Scriptures, than 
to be wise against them. We are as much bound to keep the sense of the Lord as 
His precept. Transgression in interpretation is not lighter than in 
conversation. 
CHAP. X.--REPENTANCE MORE COMPETENT TO HEATHENS THAN TO CHRISTIANS. 
When, therefore, the yoke which forbade the discussion of these parables with 
a view to the heathens has been shaken off, and the necessity Once for all 
discerned or admitted of not interpreting otherwise than is (suitable to) the 
subject-matter of the proposition; they contend in the next place, that the 
official proclamation of repentance is not even applicable to heathens, since 
their sins are not amenable to it, imputable as they are to ignorance, which 
nature alone renders culpable before God. Hence the remedies are unintelligible 
to such to whom the perils themselves are unintelligible: whereas the principle 
of repentance finds there its corresponding place where sin is committed with 
conscience and will, where both the fault and the favour are intelligible; that 
he who mourns, he who prostrates himself, is he who knows both what he has lost 
and what he will recover if he makes to God the offering of his repentance--to 
God who, of course, offers that repentance rather to sons than to strangers. 
Was that, then, the reason why Jonah thought not repentance necessary to the 
heathen Ninevites, when he tergiversated in the duty of preaching? or did he 
rather, foreseeing the mercy of God poured forth even upon strangers, fear that 
that mercy would, as it were, destroy (the credit of) his proclamation? and 
accordingly, for the sake of a profane city, not yet possessed of a knowledge of 
God, still sinning in ignorance, did the prophet well-nigh perish? except that 
he suffered a typical example of the Lord's passion, which was to redeem 
heathens as well (as others) on their repentance. It is enough for me that even 
John, when "strewing the Lord's ways," was the herald of repentance no less to 
such as were on military service and to publicans, than to the sons of Abraham. 
The Lord Himself presumed repentance on the part of the Sidonians and Tyrians if 
they had seen the evidences of His "miracles." 
Nay, but I will even contend that repentance is more competent to natural 
sinners than to voluntary. For he will merit its fruit who has not yet used more 
than he who has already withal abused it; and remedies will be more effective on 
their first application than when outworn. No doubt the Lord is "kind" to "the 
unthankful," rather than to the ignorant! and "merciful" to the "reprobates" 
sooner than to such as have yet had no probation! so that in-suits offered to 
His clemency do not rather incur His anger than His caresses! and He does not 
more willingly impart to strangers that (clemency) which, in the case of His own 
sons, He has lost, seeing that He has thus adopted the Gentiles while the Jews 
make sport of His patience! But what the Psychics mean is this--that God, the 
Judge of righteousness, prefers the repentance to the death of that sinner who 
has preferred death to repentance! If this is so, it is by sinning that we merit 
favour. 
Come, you rope-walker upon modesty, and chastity, and every kind of sexual 
sanctity, who, by the instrumentality of a discipline of this nature remote from 
the path of truth, mount with uncertain footstep upon a most slender thread, 
balancing flesh with spirit, moderating your animal principle by faith, 
tempering your eye by fear; why are you thus wholly engaged in a single step? Go 
on, if you succeed in finding power and will, while you are so secure, and as it 
were upon solid ground. For if any wavering of the flesh, any distraction of the 
mind, any wandering of the eye, shall chance to shake you down from your 
equipoise, "God is good." To His own (children), not to heathens, He opens His 
bosom: a second repentance will await you; you will again, from being an 
adulterer, be a Christian! These (pleas) you (will urge) to me, most benignant 
interpreter of God. But I would yield my ground to you, if the scripture of" the 
Shepherd," which is the only one which favours adulterers, had deserved to find 
a place in the Divine canon; if it had not been habitually judged by every 
council of Churches (even of your own) among apocryphal and false (writings); 
itself adulterous, and hence a patroness of its comrades; from which in other 
respects, too, you derive initiation; to which, perchance, that" Shepherd will 
play the patron whom you depict upon your (sacramental) chalice, (depict, I say, 
as) himself withal a prostitutor of the Christian sacrament, (and hence) 
worthily both the idol of drunkenness, and the brize of adultery by which the 
chalice will quickly be followed, (a chalice) from which you sip nothing more 
readily than (the flavour of) the "ewe" of (your) second repentance! I, however, 
imbibe the Scriptures of that Shepherd who cannot be broken. Him John forthwith 
offers me, together with the layer and duty of repentance; (and offers Him as) 
saying, "Bear worthy fruits of repentance: and say not, We have Abraham (as our) 
father"--for fear, to wit, lest they should again take flattering unctions for 
delinquency from the grace shown to the fathers--"for God is able from these 
stones to raise sons to Abraham." Thus it follows that we too (must judge) such 
as "sin no more" "bearing worthy fruits of repentance." For what more ripens as 
the fruit of repentance than the achievement of emendation? But even if pardon 
is rather the" fruit of repentance," even pardon cannot co-exist without the 
cessation from sin. So is the cessation from sin the root of pardon, that pardon 
may be the fruit of repentance. 
CHAP. XI.--FROM PARABLES TERTULLIAN COMES TO CONSIDER DEFINITE ACTS OF THE 
LORD. 
From the side of its pertinence to the Gospel, the question of the parables 
indeed has by this time been disposed of. If, however, the Lord, by His deeds 
withal, issued any such proclamation in favour of sinners; as when He permitted 
contact even with his own body to the "woman, a sinner,"--washing, as she did, 
His feet with tears, and wiping them with her hair, and inaugurating His 
sepulture with ointment; as when to the Samaritaness--not an adulteress by her 
now sixth marriage, but a prostitute--He showed (what He did show readily to any 
one) who He was;--no benefit is hence conferred upon our adversaries, even if it 
had been to such as were already Christians that He (in these several cases) 
granted pardon. For we now affirm: This is lawful to the Lord alone: may the 
power of His indulgence be operative at the present day! At those times, 
however, in which He lived on earth we lay this down definitively, that it is no 
prejudgment against us if pardon used to be conferred on sinners--even Jewish 
ones. For Christian discipline dates from the renewing of the Testament, and (as 
we have premised) from the redemption of flesh--that is, the Lord's passion. 
None was perfect before the discovery of the order of faith; none a Christian 
before the resumption of Christ to heaven; none holy before the manifestation of 
the Holy Spirit from heaven, the Determiner of discipline itself. 
CHAP. XII.--OF THE VERDICT OF THE APOSTLES, ASSEMBLED IN COUNCIL, UPON THE 
SUBJECT OF ADULTERY. 
Accordingly, these who have received "another Paraclete" in and through the 
apostles,-- (a Paraclete) whom, not recognising Him even in His special 
prophets, they no longer possess in the apostles either;--come, now, let them, 
even from the apostolic instrument, teach us the possibility that the stains of 
a flesh which after baptism has been repolluted, can by repentance be washed 
away. Do we not, in the apostles also, recognise the form of the Old Law with 
regard to the demonstration of adultery, how great (a crime) it is; lest 
perchance it be esteemed more trivial in the new stage of disciplines than in 
the old? When first the Gospel thundered and shook the old system to its base, 
when dispute was being held on the question of retaining or not the Law; this is 
the first rule which the apostles, on the authority of the Holy Spirit, send out 
to those who were already beginning to be gathered to their side out of the 
nations: "It has seemed (good)," say they, "to the Holy Spirit and to us to cast 
upon you no ampler weight than (that) of those (things) from which it is 
necessary that abstinence be observed; from sacrifices, and from fornications, 
and from blood: by abstaining from which ye act rightly, the Holy Spirit 
carrying you." Sufficient it is, that in this place withal there has been 
preserved to adultery and fornication the post of their own honour between 
idolatry and mur der: for the interdict upon "blood" we shall understand to be 
(an interdict) much more upon human blood. Well, then, in what light do the 
apostles will those crimes to appear which alone they select, in the way of 
careful guarding against, from the pristine Law? which alone they prescribe as 
necessarily to be abstained from? Not that they permit others; but that these 
alone they put in the foremost rank, of course as not remissible; (they,) who, 
for the heathens' sake, made the other burdens of the law remissible. Why, then, 
do they release our neck from so heavy a yoke, except to place forever upon 
those (necks) these compendia of discipline? Why do they indulgently relax so 
many bonds, except that they may wholly bind us in perpetuity to such as are 
more necessary? They loosed us from the more numerous, that we might be bound up 
to abstinence from the more noxious. The matter has been settled by 
compensation: we have gained much, in order that we may render some what. But 
the compensation is not revocable; if, that is, it will be revoked by iteration- 
(iteration) of adultery, of course, and blood and idolatry: for it will follow 
that the (burden of) the whole law will be incurred, if the condition of pardon 
shall be violated. But it is not lightly that the Holy Spirit has come to an 
agreement with us--coming to this agreement even without our asking; whence He 
is the more to be honoured. His engagement none but an ungrateful man will 
dissolve. In that event, He will neither accept back what He has discarded, nor 
discard what He has retained. Of the latest Testament the condition is ever 
immutable; and, of course the public recitation of that decree, and the counsel 
embodied therein, will cease (only) with the word. He has definitely enough 
refused pardon to those crimes the careful avoidance whereof He selectively 
enjoined; He has claimed whatever He has not inferentially conceded. Hence it is 
that there is no restoration of peace granted by the Churches to "idolatry" or 
to "blood." From which final decision of theirs that the apostles should have 
departed, is (I think) not lawful to believe; or else, if some find it possible 
to believe so, they will be bound to prove it. 
CHAP. XIII.--OF ST. PAUL, AND THE PERSON WHOM HE URGES THE CORINTHIANS TO 
FORGIVE. 
We know plainly at this point, too, the suspicions which they raise. For, in 
fact, they suspect the Apostle Paul of having, in the second (Epistle) to the 
Corinthians, granted pardon to the self-same fornicator whom in the first he has 
publicly sentenced to be "surrendered to Satan, for the destruction of the 
flesh,"--impious heir as he was to his father's wedlock; as if he subsequently 
erased his own words, writing: "But if any hath wholly saddened, he hath not 
wholly saddened me, but in part, lest I burden you all. Sufficient is such a 
chiding which is given by many; so that, on the contrary, ye should prefer to 
forgive and console, lest, perhaps, by more abundant sadness, such an one be 
devoured. For which reason, I pray you, confirm toward him affection. For to 
this end withal have I written, that I may learn a proof of you, that in all 
(things) ye are obedient to me. But if ye shall have forgiven any, so I; for I, 
too, if I have forgiven ought, have forgiven in the person of Christ, lest we be 
overreached by Satan, since we are not ignorant of his injections." What 
(reference) is understood here to the fornicator? what to the contaminator of 
his father's bed? what to the Christian who had overstepped the shamelessness of 
heathens?--since, of course, he would have absolved by a special pardon one whom 
he had condemned by a special anger. He is more obscure in his pity than in his 
indignation. He is more open m his austerity than in his lenity. And yet, 
(generally), anger is more readily indirect than indulgence. Things of a sadder 
are more wont to hesitate than things of a more joyous cast. Of course the 
question in hand concerned some moderate indulgence; which (moderation in the 
indulgence) was now, if ever, to be divined, when it is usual for all the 
greatest indulgences not to be granted without public proclamation, so far (are 
they from being granted) without particularization. Why, do you yourself, when 
introducing into the church, for the purpose of melting the brotherhood by his 
prayers, the repentant adulterer, lead into the midst and prostrate him, all in 
haircloth and ashes, a compound of disgrace and horror, before the widows, 
before the elders, suing for the tears of all, licking the footprints of all, 
clasping the knees of all? And do you, good shepherd and blessed father that you 
are, to bring about the (desired) end of the man, grace your harangue with all 
the allurements of mercy in your power, and under the parable of the "ewe" go in 
quest of your goats? do you, for fear lest your "ewe" again take a leap out from 
the flock--as if that were no more lawful for the future which was not even once 
lawful--fill all the rest likewise full of apprehension at the very moment of 
granting indulgence? And would the apostle so carelessly have granted indulgence 
to the atrocious licentiousness of fornication burdened with incest, as not at 
least to have exacted from the criminal even this legally established garb of 
repentance which you ought to have learned from him? as to have uttered no 
commination on the past? no allocution touching the future? Nay, more; he goes 
further, and beseeches that they "would confirm toward him affection," as if he 
were making satisfaction to him, not as if he were granting an indulgence! And 
yet I hear (him speak of) "affection," not "communion;" as (he writes) withal to 
the Thessalonians "But if any obey not our word through the epistle, him mark; 
and associate not with him, that he may feel awed; not regarding (him) as an 
enemy, but rebuking as a brother." Accordingly, he could have said that to a 
fornicator, too, "affection" only was conceded, not "communion "as well; to an 
incestuous man, however, not even "affection;" whom he would, to be sure, have 
bidden to be banished from their midst--much more, of course, from their mind. 
"But he was apprehensive lest they should be 'overreached by Satan' with regard 
to the loss of that person whom himself had cast forth to Satan; or else lest, 
'by abundance of mourning, he should be devoured 'whom he had sentenced to 
'destruction of the flesh.'" Here they go so far as to interpret "destruction of 
the flesh" the office of repentance; in that by fasts, and squalor, and every 
species of neglect and studious ill-treatment devoted to the extermination of 
the flesh, it seems to make satisfaction to God; so that they argue that that 
fornicator--that incestuous person rather--having been delivered by the apostle 
to Satan, not with a view to "perdition," but with a view to "emendation," on 
the hypothesis that subsequently he would, on account of the "destruction" (that 
is, the general affliction) "of the flesh," attain pardon, therefore did 
actually attain it. Plainly, the selfsame apostle delivered to Satan Hymenaeus 
and Alexander, "that they might be emended into not blaspheming," as he writes 
to his Timotheus. "But withal himself says that a stake was given him, an angel 
of Satan," by which he was to be buffeted, lest he should exalt himself" If they 
touch upon this (instance) withal, in order to lead us to understand that such 
as were "delivered to Sam" by him (were so delivered) with a view to emendation, 
not to perdition; what similarity is there between blasphemy and incest, and a 
soul entirely free from these,--nay, rather elated from no other source than the 
highest sanctity and all innocence; which (elation of soul) was being restrained 
in the apostle by "buffets," if you will, by means (as they say) of pain in the 
ear or head? 
Incest, however, and blasphemy, deserved to have delivered the entire persons 
of men to Satan himself for a possession, not to "an angel" of his. And (there 
is yet another point): for about this it makes a difference, nay, rather withal 
in regard to this it is of the utmost consequence, that we find those men 
delivered by the apostle to Satan, but to the apostle himself an angel of Satan 
given. Lastly, when Paul is praying the Lord for its removal, what does he hear? 
"Hold my grace sufficient; for virtue is perfected in infirmity." 
This they who are surrendered to Satan cannot hear. Moreover, if the crime of 
Hymenaeus and Alexander--blasphemy, to wit--is irremissible in this and in the 
future. age, of course the apostle would not, in opposition to the determinate 
decision of the Lord, have given to Satan, under a hope of pardon, men already 
sunken from the faith into blasphemy; whence, too, he pronounced them 
"shipwrecked with regard to faith," having no longer the solace of the ship, the 
Church. For to those who, after believing, have struck upon (the rock of) 
blasphemy, pardon is denied; on the other hand, heathens and heretics are daily 
emerging out of blasphemy. But even if he did say, "I delivered them to Satan, 
that they might receive the discipline of not blaspheming," he said it of the 
rest, who, by their deliverance to Satan--that is, their projection outside the 
Church--had to be trained in the knowledge that there must be no blaspheming. 
So, therefore, the incestuous fornicator, too, he delivered, not with a view to 
emendation, but with a view to perdition, to Satan, to whom he had already, by 
sinning above an heathen, gone over; that they might learn there must be no 
fornicating. Finally, he says, "for the destruction of the flesh," not its 
"torture"--condemning the actual substance through which he had fallen out (of 
the faith), which substance had already perished immediately on the loss of 
baptism--" in order that the spirit," he says, "may be saved in the day of the 
Lord." And (here, again, is a difficulty): for let this point be inquired into, 
whether the man's own spirit will be saved. In that case, a spirit polluted with 
so great a wickedness will be saved; the object of the perdition of the flesh 
being, that the spirit may be saved in penalty. In that case, the interpretation 
which is contrary to ours will recognise a penalty without the flesh, if we lose 
the resurrection of the flesh. It remains, therefore, that his meaning was, that 
that spirit which is accounted to exist in the Church must be presented "saved," 
that is, untainted by the contagion of impurities in the day of the Lord, by the 
ejection of the incestuous fornicator; if, that is, he subjoins: "Know ye not, 
that a little leaven spoileth the savour of the whole lump?" And yet incestuous 
fornication was not a little, but a large, leaven. 
CHAP. XIV.--THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED. 
And--these intervening points having accordingly been got rid of--I return to 
the second of Corinthians; in order to prove that this saying also of the 
apostle, "Sufficient to such a man be this rebuke which (is administered) by 
many," is not suitable to the person of the fornicator. For if he had sentenced 
him "to be surrendered to Satan for the destruction of the flesh," of course he 
had condemned rather than rebuked him. Some other, then, it was to whom he 
willed the "rebuke" to be sufficient; if, that is, the fornicator had incurred 
not "rebuke" from his sentence, but "condemnation." For I offer you withal, for 
your investigation, this very question: Whether there were in the first Epistle 
others, too, who "wholly saddened" the apostle by "acting disorderly," and "were 
wholly saddened" by him, through incurring (his) "rebuke," according to the 
sense of the second Epistle; of whom some particular one may in that (second 
Epistle) have received pardon. Direct we, moreover, our attention to the entire 
first Epistle, written (that I may so say) as a whole, not with ink, but with 
gall; swelling, indignant, disdainful, comminatory, invidious, and shaped 
through (a series of) individual charges, with an eye to certain individuals who 
were, as it were, the proprietors of those charges? For so had schisms, and 
emulations, and discussions, and presumptions, and elations, and contentions 
required, that they should be laden with invidiousness, and rebuffed with curt 
reproof, and filed down by haughtiness, and deterred by austerity. And what kind 
of invidiousness is the pungency of humility? "To God I give thanks that I have 
baptized none of you, except Crispus and Gaius, lest any say that I have 
baptized in mine own name." "For neither did I judge to know anything among you 
but Jesus Christ, and Him crucified." And, " (I think) God hath selected us the 
apostles hindmost, like men appointed to fight with wild beasts; since we have 
been made a spectacle to this world, both to angels and to men:" And, "We have 
been made the offscourings of this world, the refuse of all:" And, "Am I not 
free? am I not an apostle? have I not seen Christ Jesus our Lord?" With what 
kind of superciliousness, on the contrary, was he compelled to declare, "But to 
me it is of small moment that I be interrogated by you, or by a human court-day; 
for neither am I conscious to myself (of any guilt);" and, "My glory none shall 
make empty." "Know ye not that we are to judge angels?" Again, of how open 
censure (does) the free expression (find utterance), how manifest the edge of 
the spiritual sword, (in words like these): "Ye are already enriched! ye are 
already satiated! ye are already reigning!" and, "If any thinks himself to know, 
he knoweth not yet how it behaves him to know I" Is he not even then "smiting 
some one's face," in saying, "For who maketh thee to differ? What, moreover, 
hast thou which thou hast not received? Why gloriest thou as if thou have not 
received?" Is he not withal "smiting them upon the mouth," (in saying): "But 
some, in (their) conscience, even until now eat as if (it were) an 
idol-sacrifice. But, so sinning, by shocking the weak consciences of the 
brethren thoroughly, they will sin against Christ." By this time, indeed, (he 
mentions individuals) by name: "Or have we not a power of eating., and of 
drinking, and of leading about women, just as the other apostles withal, and the 
brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?" and, "If others attain to (a share) in power 
over you, (may) not we rather?" In like manner he pricks them, too, with an 
individualizing pen: 
"Wherefore, let him who thinketh himself to be standing, see lest he fall;" 
and, "If any seemeth to be contentious, we have not such a custom, nor (has) the 
Church of the Lord." With such a final clause (as the following), wound up with 
a malediction, "If any loveth not the Lord Jesus, be he anathema maranatha," he 
is, of course, striking same particular individual through. 
But I will rather take my stand at that point where the apostle is more 
fervent, where the fornicator himself has troubled others also. "As if I be not 
about to come unto you, some are inflated. But I will come with more speed, if 
the Lord shall have permitted, and will learn not the speech of those who are 
inflated, but the power. For the kingdom of God is not in speech, but in power. 
And what will ye? shall I come unto you in a rod, or in a spirit of lenity?" For 
what was to succeed? "There is heard among you generally fornication, and such 
fornication as not (heard) even among the Gentiles, that one should have his own 
father's wife. And are ye inflated, and have ye not rather mourned, that he who 
hath committed such a deed may be taken away from the midst of you?" For whom 
were they to "mourn?" Of course, for one dead. To whom were they to mourn? Of 
course, to the Lord, in order that in some way or other he may be "taken away 
from the midst of them;" not, of course in order that he may be put outside the 
Church. For a thing would not have been requested of God which came within the 
official province of the president (of the Church); but (what would be requested 
of Him was), that through death--not only this death common to all, but one 
specially appropriate to that very flesh which was already a corpse, a tomb 
leprous with irremediable uncleanness--he might more fully (than by simple 
excommunication) incur the penalty of being "taken away" from the Church. And 
accordingly, in so far as it was meantime possible for him to be "taken away," 
he "adjudged such an one to be surrendered to Satan for the destruction of the 
flesh." For it followed that flesh which was being cast forth to the devil 
should be accursed, in order that it might be discarded from the sacrament of 
blessing, never to return into the camp of the Church. 
And thus we see in this place the apostle's severity divided, against one who 
was "inflated," and one who was "incestuous:" (we see the apostle) armed against 
the one with "a rod," against the other with a sentence,--a "rod," which he was 
threatening; a sentence, which he was executing: the former (we see) still 
brandishing, the latter instantaneously hurtling; (the one) wherewith he was 
rebuking, and (the other) wherewith he was condemning. And certain it is, that 
forthwith thereafter the rebuked one indeed trembled beneath the menace of the 
uplifted rod, but the condemned perished under the instant infliction of the 
penalty. Immediately the former retreated fearing the blow, the latter paying 
the penalty. When a letter of the self-same apostle is sent a second time to the 
Corinthians, pardon is granted plainly; but it is uncertain to whom, because 
neither person nor cause is advertised. I will compare the cases with the 
senses. If the "incestuous" man is set before us, on the same platform will be 
the "inflated" man too. Surely the analogy, of the case is sufficiently 
maintained, when the "inflated" is rebuked, but the "incestuous" is condemned. 
To the "inflated" pardon is granted, but after rebuke; to the "incestuous" no 
pardon seems to have been granted, as under condemnation. If it was to him for 
whom it was feared that he might be "devoured by mourning" that pardon was being 
granted, the "rebuked" one was still in danger of being devoured, losing heart 
on account of the commination, and mourning on account of the rebuke. The 
"condemned" one, however, was permanently accounted as already devoured, alike 
by his fault and by his sentence; (accounted, that is, as one) who had not to 
"mourn," but to suffer that which, before suffering it, he might have mourned. 
If the reason why pardon was being granted was "lest we should be defrauded by 
Satan," the loss against which precaution was being taken had to do with that 
which had not yet perished. No precaution is taken in the use of a thing finally 
despatched, but in the case of a thing still safe. But the condemned one 
--condemned, too, to the possession of Satan--had already perished from the 
Church at the moment when he had committed such a deed, not to say withal at the 
moment of being forsworn by the Church itself. How should (the Church) fear to 
suffer a fraudulent loss of him whom she had already lost on his ereption, and 
whom, after condemnation, she could not have held? Lastly, to what will it be 
becoming for a judge to grant indulgence? to that which by a formal 
pronouncement he has decisively settled, or to that which by an interlocutory 
sentence he has left in suspense? And, of course, (I am speaking of) that judge 
who is not wont "to rebuild those things which he has destroyed, lest he be held 
a transgressor." 
Come, now, if he had not "wholly saddened" so many persons in the first 
Epistle; if he had "rebuked" none, had "terrified" none; if he had "smitten" the 
incestuous man alone; if, for his cause, he had sent none into panic, had struck 
"inflated" one with consternation,--would it not be better for you to suspect, 
and more believing for you to argue, that rather some one far different had been 
in the same predicament at that time among the Corinthians; so that, rebuked, 
and terrified, and already wounded with mourning, he therefore--the moderate 
nature of his fault permitting it--subsequently received pardon, than that you 
should interpret that (pardon as granted) to an incestuous fornicator? For this 
you had been bound to read, even if not in an Epistle, yet impressed upon the 
very character of the apostle, by (his) modesty more clearly than by the 
instrumentality of a pen: not to steep, to wit, Paul, the "apostle of Christ," 
the "teacher of the nations in faith and verity," the "vessel of election," the 
founder of Churches, the censor of discipline, (in the guilt of) levity so great 
as that he should either have condemned rashly one whom he was presently to 
absolve, or else rashly absolved one whom he had not rashly condemned, albeit on 
the ground of that fornication which is the result of simple immodesty, not to 
say on the ground of incestuous nuptials and impious voluptuousness and 
parricidal lust,-- (lust) which he had refused to compare even with (the lusts 
of) the nations, for fear it should be set down to the account of custom; (lust) 
on which he would sit in judgment though absent, for fear the culprit should 
"gain the time;" (lust) which he had condemned after calling to his aid even 
"the Lord's power," for fear the sentence should seem human. Therefore he has 
trifled both with his own "spirit," and with "the angel of the Church," and with 
"the power of the Lord," if he rescinded what by their counsel he had formally 
pronounced. 
CHAP. XV.--THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED. 
If you hammer out the sequel of that Epistle to illustrate the meaning of the 
apostle, neither will that sequel be found to square with the obliteration of 
incest; lest even here the apostle be put to the blush by the incongruity of his 
later meanings. For what kind (of hypothesis) is it, that the very moment after 
making a largess of restoration to the privileges of ecclesiastical peace to an 
incestuous fornicator, he should forthwith have proceeded to accumulate 
exhortations about turning away from impurities, about pruning away of 
blemishes, about exhortations to deeds of sanctity, as if he had decreed nothing 
of a contrary nature just before? Compare, in short, (and see) whether it be his 
province to say, "Wherefore, having this ministration, in accordance with (the 
fact) that we have obtained mercy, we faint not; but renounce the secret things 
of disgrace," who has just released from condemnation one manifestly convicted 
of, not "disgrace" merely, but crime too: whether it be Ms province, again, to 
excuse a conspicuous immodesty, who, among the counts of his own labours, after" 
straits and pressures," after" fasts and vigils," has named "chastity" also: 
whether it be, once more, his province to receive back into communion whatsoever 
reprobates, who writes, "For what society (is there) between righteousness and 
iniquity? what communion, moreover, between light and darkness? what consonance 
between Christ and Belial? or what part for a believer with an unbeliever? or 
what agreement between the temple of God and idols?" Will he not deserve to hear 
constantly (the reply); "And in what manner do you make a separation between 
things which, in the former part of your Epistle, by restitution of the 
incestuous one, you have joined? For by his restoration to concorporate unity 
with the Church, righteousness is made to have fellowship with iniquity, 
darkness has communion with light, Belial is consonant with Christ, and believer 
shares the sacraments with unbeliever. And idols may see to themselves: the very 
vitiator of the temple of God is converted into a temple of God: for here, too, 
he sap, 'For ye are a temple of the living God. For He saith, That I will dwell 
in you, and will walk in (you), and will be their God, and they shall be to Me a 
people. Wherefore depart from the midst of them, be separate, and touch not the 
unclean.' This (thread of discourse) also you spin out, O apostle, when at the 
very moment you yourself are offering your hand to so huge a whirlpool of 
impurities; nay, you superadd yet further, 'Having therefore this promise, 
beloved, cleanse we ourselves out from every defilement of flesh and spirit, 
perfecting chastity in God's fear.'" I pray you, had he who fixes such 
(exhortations) in our minds been recalling some notorious fornicator into the 
Church? or is his reason for writing it, to prevent himself from appearing to 
you in the present day to have so recalled him? These (words of his) will be in 
duty bound alike to serve as a prescriptive rule for the foregone, and a 
prejudgment for the following, (parts of the Epistle). For in saying, toward the 
end of the Epistle, "Lest, when I shall have come, God humble me, and I bewail 
many of those who have formerly sinned, and have not repented of the impurity 
which they have committed, the fornication, and the vileness," he did not, of 
course, determine that they were to be received hack (by him into the Church) if 
they should have entered (the path of) repentance, whom he was to find in the 
Church, but that they were to be bewailed, and indubitably ejected, that they 
might lose (the benefit of) repentance. And, besides, it is not congruous that 
he, who had above asserted that there was no communion between light and 
darkness, righteousness and iniquity, should in this place have been indicating 
somewhat touching communion. But all such are ignorant of the apostle as 
understand anything in a sense contrary to the nature and design of the man 
himself, contrary to the norm and rule of his docrines; so as to presume that 
he, a teacher of every sanctity, even by his own example, an execrator and 
expiator of every impurity, and universally consistent with himself in these 
points, restored ecclesiastical privileges to an incestuous person sooner than 
to some more mild offender. 
CHAP. XVI.--GENERAL CONSISTENCY OF THE APOSTLE. 
Necessary it is, therefore, that the (character of the) apostle should be 
continuously pointed out to them; whom I will maintain to be such in the second 
of Corinthians withal, as I know (him to be) in all his letters. (He it is) who 
even in the first (Epistle) was the first of all (the apostles) to dedicate the 
temple of God: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that in you the 
Lord dwells?"--who likewise, for the consecrating and purifying that temple, 
wrote the law pertaining to the temple-keepers: "If any shall have marred the 
temple of God, him shall God mar; for the temple of God is holy, which (temple) 
are ye." Come, now; who in the world has (ever) redintegrated one who has been 
"marred" by God (that is, delivered to Satan with a view to destruction of the 
flesh), after subjoining for that reason, "Let none seduce himself;" that is, 
let none presume that one "marred" by God can possibly be redintegrated anew? 
Just as, again, among all other crimes--nay, even before all others--when 
affirming that "adulterers, and fornicators, and effeminates, and co-habitors 
with males, will not attain the kingdom of God," he premised, "Do not err"--to 
wit, if you think they will attain it. But to them from whom "the kingdom" is 
taken away, of course the life which exists in the kingdom is not permitted 
either. Moreover, by superadding, "But such indeed ye have been; but ye have 
received ablution, but ye have been sanctified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and in the Spirit of our God;" in as far as he puts on the paid side of 
the account such sins before baptism, in so far after baptism he determines them 
irremissible, if it is true, (as it is), that they are not allowed to "receive 
ablution" anew. Recognise, too, in what follows, Paul (in the character of) an 
immoveable column of discipline and its rules: "Meats for the belly, and the 
belly for meats: God maketh a full end both of the one and of the others; but 
the body not for fornication, but for God:" for "Let Us make man," said God, " 
(conformable) to Our image and likeness." "And God made man; (conformable) to 
the image and likeness of God made He him." "The Lord for the body:" yes; for 
"the Word was made flesh." "Moreover, God both raised up the Lord, and will 
raise up us through His own power;" on account, to wit, of the union of our body 
with Him. And accordingly, "Know ye not your bodies (to be) members of Christ?" 
because Christ, too, is God's temple. "Overturn this temple, and I will in three 
days' space resuscitate it." "Taking away the members of Christ, shall I make 
(them) members of an harlot? Know ye not, that whoever is agglutinated to an 
harlot is made one body? (for the two shall be (made) into one flesh): but 
whoever is agglutinated to the Lord is one spirit? Flee fornication." If 
revocable by pardon, in what sense am I to flee it, to turn adulterer anew? I 
shall gain nothing if I do flee it: I shall be "one body," to which by communion 
I shall be agglutinated. "Every sin which a human being may have committed is 
extraneous to the body; but whoever fornicateth, sinneth against his own body." 
And, for fear you should fly to that statement for a licence to fornication, on 
the ground that you will be sinning against a thing which is yours, not the 
Lord's, he takes you away from yourself, and awards you, according to his 
previous disposition, to Christ: "And ye are not your own;" immediately opposing 
(thereto), "for bought ye are with a price"--the blood, to wit, of the Lord: 
"glorify and extol the Lord in your body." See whether he who gives this 
injunction be likely to have pardoned one who has disgraced the Lord, and who 
has cast Him down from (the empire of) his body, and this indeed through incest. 
If you wish to imbibe to the utmost all knowledge of the apostle, in order to 
understand with what an axe of censorship he lops, and eradicates, and 
extirpates, every forest of lusts, for fear of permitting aught to regain 
strength and sprout again; behold him desiring souls to keep a fast from the 
legitimate fruit of nature--the apple, I mean, of marriage: "But with regard to 
what ye wrote, good it is for a man to have no contact with a woman; but, on 
account of fornication, let each one have his own wife: let husband to wife, and 
wife to husband, render what is due." Who but must know that it was against his 
will that he relaxed the bond of this "good," in order to prevent fornication? 
But if he either has granted, or does grant, indulgence to fornication, of 
course he has frustrated the design of his own remedy. and will be bound 
forthwith to put the curb upon the nuptials of continence, if the fornication 
for the sake of which those nuptials are permitted shall cease to be feared. For 
(a fornication) which has indulgence granted it will not be feared. And yet he 
professes that he has granted the use of marriage "by way of indulgence, not of 
command." For he "wills" all to be on a level with himself. But when things 
lawful are (only) granted by way of indulgence, who hope for things unlawful? 
"To the unmarried" also, "and widows," he says, "It is good, by his example, to 
persevere" (in their present state); "but if they were too weak, to marry; 
because it is preferable to marry than to bum." With what fires, I pray you, is 
it preferable to "burn"-- (the fires) of concupiscence, or (the fires) of 
penalty? Nay, but if fornication is pardonable, it will not be an object of 
concupiscence. But it is more (the manner) of an apostle to take forethought for 
the fires of penalty. Wherefore, if it is penalty which "burns," it follows that 
fornication, which penalty awaits, is not pardonable. Meantime withal, while 
prohibiting divorce, he uses the Lord's precept against adultery as an 
instrument for providing, in place of divorce, either perseverance in widowhood, 
or else a reconciliation of peace: inasmuch as "whoever shall have dismissed a 
wife (for any cause) except the cause of adultery, maketh her commit adultery; 
and he who marrieth one dismissed by a husband committeth adultery." What 
powerful remedies does the Holy Spirit furnish, to prevent, to wit, the 
commission anew of that which He wills not should anew be pardoned! 
Now, if in all cases he says it is best for a man thus to be; "Thou art 
joined to a wife seek not loosing" (that you may give no occasion to adultery); 
"thou art loosed from a wife, seek not a wife," that you may reserve an 
opportunity for yourself: "but withal, if thou shalt have married a wife, and if 
a virgin shall have married, she sinneth not; pressure, however, of the flesh 
such shall have,"--even here he is granting a permission by way of "sparing 
them." On the other hand, he lays it down that "the time is wound up," in order 
that even "they who have wives may be as if they had them not." "For the fashion 
of this world is passing away,"- (this world) no longer, to wit, requiting (the 
command), "Grow and multiply." Thus he wills us to pass our life "without 
anxiety," because "the unmarried care about the Lord, how they may please God; 
the married, however, muse about the world, how they may please their spouse." 
Thus he pronounces that the "preserver of a virgin" doeth" better" than her 
"giver in marriage." Thus, too, he discriminatingly judges her to be more 
blessed, who, after losing her husband subsequently to her entrance into the 
faith, lovingly embraces the opportunity of widowhood. Thus he commends as 
Divine all these counsels of continence: 
"I think," he says, "I too have the Spirit of God." 
Who is this your most audacious asserter of all immodesty, plainly a "most 
faithful" advocate of the adulterous, and fornicators, and incestuous, in whose 
honour he has undertaken this cause against the Holy Spirit, so that he recites 
a false testimony from (the writings of) His apostle? No such indulgence granted 
Paul, who endeavours to obliterate "necessity of the flesh" wholly from (the 
list of) even honourable pretexts (for marriage unions). He does grant 
"indulgence," I allow;--not to adulteries, but to nuptials. He does "spare," I 
allow;--marriages, not harlotries. He tries to avoid giving pardon even to 
nature, for fear he may flatter guilt. He is studious to put restraints upon the 
union which is heir to blessing, for fear that which is heir to curse be 
excused. This (one possibility) was left him--to purge the flesh from (natural) 
dregs, for (cleanse it) from (foul) stains he cannot. But this is the usual way 
with perverse and ignorant heretics; yes, and by this time even with Psychics 
universally: to arm themselves with the opportune support of some one ambiguous 
passage, in opposition to the disciplined host of sentences of the entire 
document: 
CHAP. XVII.--CONSISTENCY OF THE APOSTLE IN HIS OTHER EPISTLES. 
Challenge me to front the apostolic line of battle; look at his Epistles: 
they all keep guard in defence of modesty, of chastity, of sanctity; they all 
aim their missiles against the interests of luxury, and lasciviousness, and 
lust. What, in short, does he write to the Thessalonians withal? "For our 
consolation (originated) not of seduction, nor of impurity:" and, "This is the 
will of God, your sanctification, that ye abstain from fornication; that each 
one know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour, not in the lust 
of concupiscence, as the nations which are ignorant of God." What do the 
Galatians read? "Manifest are the works of the flesh." What are these? Among the 
first he has set "fornication, impurity, lasciviousness:" " (concerning) which I 
foretell you, as I have foretold, that whoever do such acts are not to attain by 
inheritance the kingdom of God." The Romans, moreover,--what learning is more 
impressed upon them than that there must be no dereliction of the Lord after 
believing? "What, then, say we? Do we persevere in sin, in order that grace may 
superabound? Far be it. We, who are dead to sin, how shall we live in it still? 
Are ye ignorant that we who have been baptized in Christ have been baptized into 
His death? Buried with Him, then, we have been, through the baptism into the 
death, in order that, as Christ hath risen again from the dead, so we too may 
walk in newness of life. For if we have been buried together in the likeness of 
His death, why, we shall be (in that) of (His) resurrection too; knowing this, 
that our old man hath been crucified together with Him. But if we died with 
Christ, we believe that we shall live, too, with Him; knowing that Christ, 
having been raised from the dead, no more dieth, (that) death no more hath 
domination over Him. For in that He died to sin, He died once for all; but in 
that He liveth, to God He liveth. Thus, too, repute ye yourselves dead indeed to 
sin, but living to God through Christ Jesus." Therefore, Christ being once for 
all dead, none who, subsequently to Christ, has died, can live again to sin, and 
especially to so heinous a sin. Else, if fornication and adultery may by 
possibility be anew admissible, Christ withal will be able anew to die. 
Moreover, the apostle is urgent in prohibiting" sin from reigning in our mortal 
body," whose "infirmity of the flesh" he knew. "For as ye have tendered your 
members to servile impurity and iniquity, so too now tender them servants to 
righteousness unto holiness." For even if he has affirmed that "good dwelleth 
not in his flesh," yet (he means) according to "the law of the letter," in which 
he "was:" but according to "the law of the Spirit," to which he annexes us, he 
frees us from the "infirmity of the flesh." "For the law," he says, "of the 
Spirit of life hath manumitted thee from the law of sin and of death." For 
albeit he may appear to be partly disputing from the standpoint of Judaism, yet 
it is to us that he is directing the integrity and plenitude of the rules of 
discipline,--, for whose sake soever, labouring (as we were) in the law, "God 
hath sent, through flesh, His own Son, in similitude of flesh of sin; and, 
became of sin, hath condemned sin in the flesh; in order that the righteousness 
of the law," he says, "might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to 
flesh, but according to (the) Spirit. For they who walk according to flesh are 
sensible as to those things which are the flesh's, and they who (walk) according 
to (the) Spirit those which (are) the Spirit's." Moreover, he has affirmed the 
"sense of the flesh" to be "death;" hence too, "enmity," and enmity toward God; 
and that "they who are in the flesh," that is, in the sense of the flesh, 
"cannot please God:" and, "If ye live according to flesh," he says, "it will 
come to pass that ye die."But what do we understand "the sense of the flesh" and 
"the life of the flesh" (to mean), except whatever "it shames (one) to 
pronounce?" for the other (works) of the flesh even an apostle would have named. 
Similarly, too, (when writing) to the Ephesians, while recalling past (deeds), 
he warns (them) concerning the future: "In which we too had our conversation, 
doing the concupiscences and pleasures of the flesh." Branding, in fine, such as 
had denied themselves--Christians, to wit--on the score of having "delivered 
themselves up to the working of every impunity," "But ye," he says, "not so have 
learnt Christ." And again he says thus: "Let him who was wont to steal, steal no 
more." But, similarly, let him who was wont to commit adultery hitherto, not 
commit adultery; and he who was wont to fornicate hitherto, not fornicate: for 
he would have added these (admonitions) too, had he been in the habit of 
extending pardon to such, or at all willed it to be extended-- who, not willing 
pollution to be contracted even by a word, says, "Let no base speech proceed out 
of your mouth." Again: "But let fornication and every impurity not be even named 
among you, as becometh saints,"--so far is it from being excused,--"knowing 
this, that every fornicator or impure (person) hath not God's kingdom. Let none 
seduce you with empty words: on this account cometh the wrath of God upon the 
sons of unbelief." Who "seduces with empty words" but he who states in a public 
harangue that adultery is remissible? not seeing into the fact that its very 
foundations have been dug out by the apostle, when he puts restraints upon 
drunkennesses and revellings, as withal here: "And be not inebriated with wine, 
in which is voluptuousness." He demonstrates, too, to the Colossians what 
"members" they are to "mortify" upon earth: "fornication, impurity, lust, evil 
concupiscence," and "base talk." Yield up, by this time, to so many and such 
sentences, the one (passage) to which you cling. Paucity is cast into the shade 
by multitude, doubt by certainty, obscurity by plainness. Even if, for certain, 
the apostle had granted pardon of fornication to that Corinthian, it would be 
another instance of his once for all contravening his own practice to meet the 
requirement of the time. He circumcised Timotheus alone, and yet did away with 
circumcision. 
CHAP. XVIII.--ANSWER TO A PSYCHICAL OBJECTION. 
"But these (passages)," says (our opponent), "will pertain to the 
interdiction of all immodesty, and the enforcing of all modesty, yet without 
prejudice to the place of pardon; which (pardon) is not forthwith quite denied 
when sins are condemned, since the time of the pardon is concurrent with the 
condemnation which it excludes." 
This piece of shrewdness on the part of the Psychics was (naturally) sequent; 
and accordingly we have reserved for this place the cautions which, even in the 
times of antiquity, were openly taken with a view to the refusing of 
ecclesiastical communion to cases of this kind. 
For even in the Proverbs, which we call Paroemiae, Solomon specially (treats) 
of the adulterer (as being) nowhere admissible to expiation. "But the 
adulterer," he says, "through indigence of senses acquireth perdition to his own 
soul; sustaineth dolors and disgraces. His ignominy, moreover, shall not be 
wiped away for the age. For indignation, full of jealousy, will not spare the 
man in the day of judgment." If you think this said about a heathen, at all 
events about believers you have already heard (it said) through Isaiah:" Go out 
from the midst of them, and be separate, and touch not the impure." You have at 
the very outset of the Psalms, "Blessed the man who hath not gone astray in the 
counsel of the impious, nor stood in the way of sinners, and sat in the 
state-chair of pestilence;" whose voice, withal, (is heard) subsequently: "I 
have not sat with the conclave of vanity; and with them who act iniquitously 
will I not enter"--this (has to do with "the church" of such as act ill--"and 
with the impious will I not sit;" and, "I will wash with the innocent mine 
hands, and Thine altar will I surround, Lord"--as being" a host in 
himself"--inasmuch as indeed "With an holy (man), holy Thou wilt be; and with an 
innocent man, innocent Thou wilt be; and with an elect, elect Thou wilt be; and 
with a perverse, perverse Thou wilt be." And elsewhere: "But to the sinner saith 
the Lord, Why expoundest thou my righteous acts, and takest up my testament 
through thy mouth? If thou sawest a thief, thou rannest with him; and with 
adulterers thy portion thou madest." Deriving his instructions, therefore, from 
hence, the apostle too says: "I wrote to you in the Epistle, not to be mingled 
up with fornicators: not, of course, with the fornicators of this world"--and so 
forth--" else it behoved you to go out from the world. But now I write to you, 
if any is named a brother among you, (being) a fornicator, or an idolater" (for 
what so intimately joined?), "or a defrauder" (for what so near akin?), and so 
on, "with such to take no food even," not to say the Eucharist: because, to wit, 
withal "a little leaven spoileth the flavour of the whole lump." Again to 
Timotheus: "Lay hands on no one hastily, nor communicate with others' sins." 
Again to the Ephesians: "Be not, then, partners with them: for ye were at one 
time darkness." And yet more earnestly: "Communicate not with the unfruitful 
works of darkness; nay rather withal convict them. For (the things) which are 
done by them in secrecy it is disgraceful even to utter." What more disgraceful 
than immodesties? If, moreover, even from a "brother" who "walketh idly" he 
warns the Thessalonians to withdraw themselves, how much more withal from a 
fornicator! For these are the deliberate judgments of Christ, "loving the 
Church," who "hath delivered Him self up for her, that He may sanctify her 
(purifying her utterly by the layer of water) in the word, that He may present 
the Church to Him self glorious, not having stain or wrinkle"--of course after 
the laver--"but (that) she may be holy and without reproach;" thereafter, to 
wit, being "without wrinkle" as a virgin, "without stain" (of fornication) as a 
spouse, "without disgrace" (of vileness), as having been "utterly purified." 
What if, even here, you should conceive to reply that communion is indeed 
denied to sinners, very especially such as had been "polluted by the flesh," but 
(only) for the present; to be restored, to wit, as the result of penitential 
suing: in accordance with that clemency of God which prefers a sinner's 
repentance to his death?--for this fundamental ground of your opinion must be 
universally attacked. We say, accordingly, that if it had been competent to the 
Divine clemency to have guaranteed the demonstration of itself even to the 
post-baptismally lapsed, the apostle would have said thus: "Communicate not with 
the works of darkness, unless they shall have repented;" and, "With such take 
not food even, unless after they shall have wiped, with rolling at their feet, 
the shoes of the brethren;" and, "Him who shall have marred the temple of God, 
shall God mar, unless he shall have shaken off from his head in the church the 
ashes of all hearths." For it had been his duty, in the case of those things 
which he had condemned, to have equally determined the extent to which he had 
(and that conditionally) condemned them--whether he had condemned them with a 
temporary and conditional, and not a perpetual, seventy. However, since in all 
Epistles he both prohibits such a character, (so sinning) after believing, from 
being admitted (to the society of believers); and, if admitted, detrudes him 
from communion, without hope of any condition or time; he sides more with our 
opinion, pointing out that the repentance which the Lord prefers is that which 
before believing, before baptism, is esteemed better than the death of the 
sinner,-- (the sinner, I say,) once for all to be washed through the grace of 
Christ, who once for all has suffered death for our sins. For this (rule), even 
in his own person, the apostle has laid down. For, when affirming that Christ 
came for this end, that He might save sinners, of whom himself had been the 
"first," what does he add? "And I obtained mercy, because I did ignorantly in 
unbelief." Thus that clemency of God, preferring the repentance of a sinner to 
his death, looks at such as are ignorant still, and still unbelieving, for the 
sake of whose liberation Christ came; not (at such) as already know God, and 
have learnt the sacrament of the faith. But if the clemency of God is applicable 
to such as are ignorant still, and unbelieving, of course it follows that 
repentance invites clemency to itself; without prejudice to that species of 
repentance after believing, which either, for lighter sins, will be able to 
obtain pardon from the bishop, or else, for greater and irremissible ones, from 
God only. 
CHAP. XIX.--OBJECTIONS FROM THE REVELATION AND THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN 
REFUTED. 
But how far (are we to treat) of Paul; since even John appears to give some 
secret countenance to the opposite side? as if in the Apocalypse he has 
manifestly assigned to fornication the auxiliary aid of repentance, where, to 
the angel of the Thyatirenes, the Spirit sends a message that He "hath against 
him that he kept (in communion) the woman Jezebel, who calleth herself a 
prophet, and teacheth, and seduceth my servants unto fornicating and eating of 
idolsacrifice. And I gave her bounteously a space of time, that she might enter 
upon repentance; nor is she willing to enter upon it on the count of 
fornication. Behold, I will give her into a bed, and her adulterers with herself 
into greatest pressure, unless they shall have repented of her works." I am 
content with the fact that, between apostles, there is a common agreement in 
rules of faith and of discipline. For, "Whether (it be) I," says (Paul), "or 
they, thus we preach." Accordingly, it is material to the interest of the whole 
sacrament to believe nothing conceded by John, which has been taffy refused by 
Paul. This harmony of the Holy Spirit whoever observes, shall by Him be 
conducted into His meanings. For (the angel of the Thyatirene Church) was 
secretly introducing into the Church, and urging justly to repentance, an 
heretical woman, who had taken upon herself to teach what she had learnt from 
the Nicolaitans. For who has a doubt that an heretic, deceived by (a spurious 
baptismal) rite, upon discovering his mischance, and expiating it by repentance, 
both attains pardon and is restored to the bosom of the Church? Whence even 
among us, as being on a par with an heathen, nay even more than heathen, an 
heretic likewise, (such an one) is purged through the baptism of truth from each 
character, and admitted (to the Church). Or else, if you are certain that that 
woman had, after a living faith, subsequently expired, and turned heretic, in 
order that you may claim pardon as the result of repentance, not as it were for 
an heretical, but as it were for a believing, sinner: let her, I grant, repent; 
but with the view of ceasing from adultery, not however in the prospect of 
restoration (to Church-fellowship) as well. For this will be a repentance which 
we, too, acknowledge to be due much more (than you do); but which we reserve, 
for pardon, to God. 
In short, this Apocalypse, in its later passages, has assigned "the infamous 
and fornicators," as well as "the cowardly, and unbelieving, and murderers, and 
sorcerers, and idolaters," who have been guilty of any such crime while 
professing the faith, to "the lake of fire," without any conditional 
condemnation. For it will not appear to savour of (a bearing upon) heathens, 
since it has (just) pronounced with regard to believers, "They who shall have 
conquered shall have this inheritance; and I will be to them a God, and they to 
me for sons;" and so has subjoined: "But to the cowardly, and unbelieving, and 
infamous, and fornicators, and murderers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, (shall 
be) a share in the lake of fire and sulphur, which (lake) is the second death." 
Thus, too, again "Blessed they who act according to the precepts, that they may 
have power over the tree of life and over the gates, for entering into the holy 
city. Dogs, sorcerers, fornicators, murderers, out!"--of course, such as do not 
act according to the precepts; for to be sent out is the portion of those who 
have been within. Moreover "What have I to do to judge them who are without?" 
had preceded (the sentences now in question). 
From the Epistle also of John they forthwith cull (a proof). It is said: "The 
blood of His Son purifieth us utterly from every sin." Always then, and in every 
form, we will sin, if always and from every sin He utterly purifies us; or else, 
if not always, not again after believing; and if not from sin, not again from 
fornication. But what is the point whence (John) has started? He had predicated 
"God" to be "Light," and that "darkness is not in Him," and that "we lie if we 
say that we have communion with Him, and walk in darkness." "If, however," he 
sap, "we walk in the light, we shall have communion with Him, and the blood of 
Jesus Christ our Lord purifieth us utterly from every sin." Walking, then, in 
the light, do we sin? and, sinning in the light, shall we be utterly purified? 
By no means. For he who sins is not in the light, but in darkness. Whence, too, 
he points out the mode in which we shall be utterly purified from sin-- "walking 
in the light," in which sin cannot be committed. Accordingly, the sense in which 
he says we "are utterly purified" is, not in so far as we sin, but in so far as 
we do not sin. For, "walking in the light," but not having communion with 
darkness, we shall act as they that are "utterly purified;" sin not being quite 
laid down, but not being wittingly committed. For this is the virtue of the 
Lord's blood, that such as it has already purified from sin, and thenceforward 
has set "in the light," it renders thenceforward pure, if they shall continue to 
persevere walking in the light. "But he subjoins," you say, "'If we say that we 
have not sin, we are seducing ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we 
confess our sins, faithful and just is He to remit them to us, and utterly 
purify us from every unrighteousness.'" Does he say "from impurity?": or else, 
if that is so, then (He "utterly purifies" us) from "idolatry" too. But there is 
a difference in the sense. For see yet again: "If we say," he says, "that we 
have not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His word is not in us." All the more 
fully: "Little children, these things have I written to you, lest ye sin; and if 
ye shall have sinned, an Advocate we have with God the Father, Jesus Christ the 
righteous; and, He is the propitiation for our sins." "According to these 
words," you say, "it will be admitted both that we sin, and that we have 
pardon." What, then, will become (of your theory), when, proceeding (with the 
Epistle), I find something different? For he affirms that we do not sin at all; 
and to this end he treats at large, that he may make no such concession; setting 
forth that sins have been once for all deleted by Christ, not subsequently to 
obtain pardon; in which statement the sense requires us (to apply the statement) 
to an admonition to chastity. "Every one," he says, "who hath this hope, maketh 
himself chaste, because He too is chaste. Every one who doeth sin, doeth withal 
iniquity; and sin is iniquity. And ye know that He hath been manifested to take 
away sins"--henceforth, of course, to be no more incurred, if it is true, (as it 
is,) that he subjoins, "Every one who abideth in Him sinneth not; every one who 
sinneth neither hath seen nor knoweth Him. Little children, let none seduce you. 
Every one who doeth righteousness is righteous, as He withal is righteous. He 
who doeth sin is of the devil, inasmuch as the devil sinneth from the beginning. 
For unto this end was manifested the Son of God, to undo the works of the 
devil:" for He has "undone" them withal, by setting man free through baptism, 
the "handwriting of death" having been "made a gift of" to him:" and 
accordingly, "he who is being born of God doeth not sin, because the seed of God 
abideth in him; and he cannot sin, because he hath been born of God. Herein are 
manifest the sons of God and the sons of the devil." Wherein? except it be 
(thus): the former by not sinning, from the time that they were born from God; 
the latter by sinning, because they are from the devil, just as if they never 
were born from God? But if he says, "He who is not righteous is not of God," how 
shall he who is not modest again become (a son) of God, who has already ceased 
to be so? 
"It is therefore nearly equivalent to saying that John has forgotten himself; 
asserting, in the former part of his Epistle, that we are not without sin, but 
now prescribing that we do not sin at all: and in the one case flattering us 
somewhat with hope of pardon, but in the other as setting with all stringency, 
that whoever may have sinned are no sons of God." But away with (the thought): 
for not even we ourselves forget the distinction between sins, which was the 
starting-point of our digression. And (a right distinction it was); for John has 
here sanctioned it; in that there are some sins of daily committal, to which we 
all are liable: for who will be free from the accident of either being angry 
unjustly, and retaining his anger beyond sunset; or else even using manual 
violence or else carelessly speaking evil; or else rashly swearing; or else 
forfeiting his plighted word or else lying, from bashfulness or "necessity?" In 
businesses, in official duties, in trade, in food, in sight, in hearing, by how 
great temptations are we plied! So that, if there were no pardon for such sins 
as these, salvation would be unattainable to any. Of these, then, there will be 
pardon, through the successful Suppliant of the Father, Christ. But there are, 
too, the contraries of these; as the graver and destructive ones, such as are 
incapable of pardon--murder, idolatry, fraud, apostasy, blasphemy; (and), of 
come, too, adultery and fornication; and if there be any other "violation of the 
temple of God." For these Christ will no more be the successful Header: these 
will not at all be incurred by one who has been born of God, who will cease to 
be the son of God if he do incur them. 
Thus John's rule of diversity will be established; arranging as he does a 
distinction of sins, while he now admits and now denies that the sons of God 
sin. For (in making these assertions) he was looking forward to the final clause 
of his letter, and for that (final clause) he was laying his preliminary bases; 
intending to say, in the end, more manifestly: "If any knoweth his brother to be 
sinning a sin not unto death, he shall make request, and the Lord shall give 
life to him who sinneth not unto death. For there is a sin unto death: not 
concerning that do I say that one should make request." He, too, (as I have 
been), was mindful that Jeremiah had been prohibited by God to deprecate (Him) 
on behalf of a people which was committing mortal sins. "Every unrighteousness 
is sin; and there is a sin unto death. But we know that every one who hath been 
born of God sinneth not"--to wit, the sin which is unto death. Thus there is no 
course left for you, but either to deny that adultery and fornication are mortal 
sins; or else to confess them irremissible, for which it is not permitted even 
to make successful intercession. 
CHAP. XX.--FROM APOSTOLIC TEACHING TERTULLIAN TURNS TO THAT OF COMPANIONS OF 
THE APOSTLES, AND OF THE LAW. 
The discipline, therefore, of the apostles properly (so called), indeed, 
instructs and determinately directs, as a principal point, the overseer of all 
sanctity as regards the temple of God to the universal eradication of every 
sacrilegious outrage upon modesty, without any mention of restoration. I wish, 
however, redundantly to superadd the testimony likewise of one particular 
comrade of the apostles,-- (a testimony) aptly suited for confirming, by most 
proximate right, the discipline of his masters. For there is extant withal an 
Epistle to the Hebrews under the name of Barnabas--a man sufficiently accredited 
by God, as being one whom Paul has stationed next to himself in the 
uninterrupted observance of abstinence: "Or else, I alone and Barnabas, have not 
we the power of working?" And, of course, the Episfie of Barnabas is more 
generally received among the Churches than that apocryphal "Shepherd" of 
adulterers. Warning, accordingly, the disciples to omit all first principles, 
and strive rather after perfection, and not lay again the foundations of 
repentance from the works of the dead, he says: "For impossible it is that they 
who have once been illuminated, and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have 
participated in the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the word of God and found it 
sweet, when they shall--their age already setting--have fallen away, should be 
again recalled unto repentance, crucifying again for themselves the Son of God, 
and dishonouring Him." "For the earth which hath drunk the rain often descending 
upon it, and hath borne grass apt for them on whose account it is tilled withal, 
attaineth God's blessing; but if it bring forth thorns, it is reprobate, and 
nighest to cursing, whose end is (doomed) unto utter burning." He who learnt 
this from aposties, and taught it with apostles, never knew of any "second 
repentance" promised by apostles to the adulterer and fornicator. 
For excellently was he wont to interpret the law, and keep its figures even 
in (the dispensation of) the Truth itself. It was with a reference, in short, to 
this species of discipline that the caution was taken in the case of the leper: 
"But if the speckled appearance shall have become efflorescent over the skin, 
and shall have covered the whole skin from the head even unto the feet through 
all the visible surface, then the priest, when he shall have seen, shall utterly 
cleanse him: since he hath wholly turned into white he is clean. But on the day 
that there shall have been seen in such an one quick colour, he is defiled.", 
(The Law) would have the man who is wholly turned from the pristine habit of the 
flesh to the whiteness of faith--which (faith) is esteemed a defect and blemish 
in (the eyes of) the world--and is wholly made new, to be understood to be 
"clean;" as being no longer "speckled," no longer dappled with the pristine and 
the new (intermixt). If, however, after the reversal (of the sentence of 
uncleanness), ought of the old nature shall have revived with its tendencies, 
that which was beginning to be thought utterly dead to sin in his flesh must 
again be judged unclean, and must no more be expiated by the priest. Thus 
adultery, sprouting again from the pristine stock, and wholly blemishing the 
unity of the new colour from which it had been excluded, is a defect that admits 
of no cleansing. Again, in the case of a house: if any spots and cavities in the 
party-walls had been reported to the priest, before he entered to inspect that 
house he bids all (its contents) be taken away from it; thus the belongings of 
the house would not be unclean. Then the priest, if, upon entering, he had found 
greenish or reddish cavities, and their appearance to the sight deeper down 
within the body of the party-wall, was to go out to the gate, and separate the 
house for a period within seven days. Then, upon returning on the seventh day, 
if he should have perceived the taint to have become diffused in the 
party-walls, he was to order those stones in which the taint of the leprosy had 
been to be extracted and cast away outside the city into an unclean place; and 
other stones, polished and sound, to be taken and replaced in the stead of the 
first, and the house to be plastered with other mortar. For, in coming to the 
High Priest of the Father--Christ--all impediments must first be taken away, in 
the space of a week, that the house which remains, the flesh and the soul, may 
be clean; and when the Word of God has entered it, and has found "stains of red 
and green," forthwith must the deadly and sanguinary passions "be extracted" and 
"cast away" out of doors--for the Apocalypse wtthal has set "death" upon a 
"green horse," but a "warrior" upon a "red"--and in their stead must be 
under-strewn stones polished and apt for conjunction, and firm,--such as are 
made (by God) into (sons) of Abraham,--that thus the man may be fit for God. But 
if, after the recovery and reformation, the priest again perceived in the same 
house ought of the pristine disorders and blemishes, he pronounced it unclean, 
and bade the timbers, and the stones, and all the structure of it, to be pulled 
down, and cast away into an unclean place. This will be the man --flesh and 
soul--who, subsequently to reformation, after baptism and the entrance of the 
priests, again resumes the scabs and stains of the flesh, and "is case away 
outside the city into an unclean place,"--" surrendered," to wit, "to Satan for 
the destruction of the flesh,"--and is no more rebuilt in the Church after his 
ruin. So, too, with regard to lying with a female slave, who had been betrothed 
to an husband, but not yet redeemed, not yet set free: "provision," says (the 
Law), shall be made for her, and she shall not die, because she was not yet 
manumitted for him for whom she was being kept. For flesh not yet manumitted to 
Christ, for whom it was being kept, used to be contaminated with impunity: so 
now, after manumission, it no more receives pardon. 
CHAP. XXI.--OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DISCIPLINE AND POWER, AND OF THE POWER 
OF THE KEYS. 
If the apostles understood these (figurative meanings of the Law) better, of 
course they were more careful (with regard to them than even apostolic men). But 
I will descend even to this point of contest now, making a separation between 
the doctrine of apostles and their power. Discipline governs a man, power sets a 
seal upon him; apart from the fact that power is the Spirit, but the Spirit is 
God. What, moreover, used (the Spirit) to teach? 
That there must be no communicating with the works of darkness. Observe what 
He bids. Who, moreover, was able to forgive sins? This is His alone prerogative: 
for "who remitteth sins but God alone?" and, of course, (who but He can remit) 
mortal sins, such as have been committed against Himself, and against His 
temple? For, as far as you are concerned, such as are chargeable with offence 
against you personally, you are commanded, in the person of Peter, to forgive 
even seventy times sevenfold. And so, if it were agreed that even the blessed 
apostles had granted any such indulgence (to any crime) the pardon of which 
(comes) from God, not from man, it would be competent (for them) to have done 
so, not in the exercise of discipline, but of power. For they both raised the 
dead, which God alone (can do), and restored the debilitated to their integrity, 
which none but Christ (can do); nay, they infflicted plagues too, which Christ 
would not do. 

For it did not beseem Him to be severe who had come to suffer. Smitten were 
both Ananias and Elymas--Ananias with death, Elymas with blindness--in order 
that by this very fact it might be proved that Christ had had the power of doing 
even such (miracles). So, too, had the prophets (of old) granted to the 
repentant the pardon of murder, and therewith of adultery, inasmuch as they 
gave, at the same time, manifest proofs of seventy. Exhibit therefore even now 
to me, apostolic sir, prophetic evidences, that I may recognise your divine 
virtue, and vindicate to yourself the power of remitting such sins! If, however, 
you have had the functions of discipline alone allotted you, and (the duty) of 
presiding not imperially, but ministerially; who or how great are you, that you 
should grant indulgence, who, by exhibiting neither the prophetic nor the 
apostolic character, lack that virtue whose property it is to indulge? 
"But," you say, "the Church has the power of forgiving sins." This I 
acknowledge and adjudge more (than you; I) who have the Paraclete Himself in the 
persons of the new prophets, saying, "The Church has the power to forgive sins; 
but I will not do it, lest they commit others withal." "What if a 
pseudo-prophetic spirit has made that declaration?" Nay, but it would have been 
more the part of a subverter on the one hand to commend himself on the score of 
clemency, and on the other to influence all others to sin. Or if, again, (the 
pseudo-prophetic spirit) has been eager to affect this (sentiment) in accordance 
with "the Spirit of truth," it follows that "the Spirit of truth" has indeed the 
power of indulgently granting pardon to fornicators, but wills not to do it if 
it involve evil to the majority. 
I now inquire into your opinion, (to see) from what source you usurp this 
right to "the Church." 
If, because the Lord has said to Peter, "Upon this rock will I build My 
Church," "to thee have I given the keys of the heavenly kingdom;" or, 
"Whatsoever thou shale have bound or loosed in earth, shall be bound or loosed 
in the heavens," you therefore presume that the power of binding and loosing has 
derived to you, that is, to every Church akin to Peter, what sort of man are 
you, subverting and wholly changing the manifest intention of the Lord, 
conferring (as that intention did) this (gift) personally upon Peter? 
"On thee," He says, "will I build My Church; "and," I will give to thee the 
keys," not to the Church; and, "Whatsoever thou shall have based or bound," not 
what they shall have loosed or bound. For so withal the result teaches. In 
(Peter) himself the Church was reared; that is, through (Peter) himself; (Peter) 
himself essayed the key; you see what (key): "Men of Israel, let what I say sink 
into your ears: Jesus the Nazarene, a man destined by God for you," and so 
forth. (Peter) himself, therefore, was the first to unbar, in Christ's baptism, 
the entrance to the heavenly kingdom, in which (kingdom) are "loosed" the sins 
that were beforetime "bound;" and those which have not been "loosed" are 
"bound," in accordance with true salvation; and Ananias he "bound" with the bond 
of death, and the weak in his feet he "absolved" from his defect of health. 
Moreover, in that dispute about the observance or non-observance of the Law, 
Peter was the first of all to be endued with the Spirit, and, after making 
preface touching the calling of the nations, to say, "And now why are ye 
tempting the Lord, concerning the imposition upon the brethren of a yoke which 
neither we nor our fathers were able to support? But however, through the grace 
of Jesus we believe that we shall be saved m the same way as they." This 
sentence both "loosed" those parts of the law which were abandoned, and "bound" 
those which were reserved. Hence the power of loosing and of binding committed 
to Peter had nothing to do with the capital sins of believers; and if the Lord 
had given him a precept that he must grant pardon to a brother sinning against 
him even "seventy times sevenfold," of course He would have commanded him to 
"bind"--that is, to "retain"--nothing subsequently, unless perchance such (sins) 
as one may have committed against the Lord, not against a brother. For the 
forgiveness of (sins) committed in the case of a man is a prejudgment against 
the remission of sins against God. 
What, now, (has this to do) with the Church, and) your (church), indeed, 
Psychic? For, in accordance with the person of Peter, it is to spiritual men 
that this power will correspondently appertain, either to an apostle or else to 
a prophet. For the very Church itself is, properly and principally, the Spirit 
Himself, in whom is the Trinity of the One Divinity--Father, Son. and Holy 
Spirit. (The Spirit) combines that Church which the Lord has made to consist in 
"three." And thus, from that time forward, every number (of persons) who may 
have combined together into this faith is accounted "a Church," from the Author 
and Consecrator (of the Church). And accordingly "the Church," it is true, will 
forgive sins: but (it will be) the Church of the Spirit, by means of a spiritual 
man; not the Church which consists of a number of bishops. For the right and 
arbitrament is the Lord's, not the servant's; God's Himself, not the priest's. 
CHAP. XXII.--OF MARTYRS, AND THEIR INTERCESSION ON BEHALF OF SCANDALOUS 
OFFENDERS. 
But you go so far as to lavish this "power" upon martyrs withal! No sooner 
has any one, acting on a preconceived arrangement, put on the bonds-- (bonds), 
moreover, which, in the nominal custody now in vogue, are soft ones--than 
adulterers beset him, fornicators gain access to him; instantly prayers echo 
around him; instantly pools of tears (from the eyes) of all the polluted 
surround him; nor are there any who are more diligent in purchasing entrance 
into the prison than they who have lost (the fellowship of) the Church! Men and 
women are violated in the darkness with which the habitual indulgence of lusts 
has plainly familiarized them; and they seek peace at the hands of those who are 
risking their own! Others betake them to the mines, and return, in the character 
of communicants, from thence, where by this time another "martyrdom" is 
necessary for sins committed after "martyrdom." "Well, who on earth and in the 
flesh is faultless?" What "martyr" (continues to be) an inhabitant of the world 
supplicating? pence in hand? subject to physician and usurer? 
Suppose, now, (your "martyr") beneath the glaive, with head already steadily 
poised; suppose him on the cross, with body already outstretched; suppose him at 
the stake, with the lion already let loose; suppose him on the axle, with the 
fire already heaped; in the very certainty, I say, and possession of martyrdom: 
who permits man to condone (offences) which are to be reserved for God, by whom 
those (offfences) have been condemned without discharge, which not even apostles 
(so far as I know)--martyrs withal themselves--have judged condonable? In short, 
Paul had already "fought with beasts at Ephesus," when he decreed "destruction" 
to the incestuous person. Let it suffice to the martyr to have purged his own 
sins: it is the part of ingratitude or of pride to lavish upon others also what 
one has obtained at a high price. Who has redeemed another's death by his own, 
but the Son of God alone? For even in His very passion He set the robber free. 
For to this end had He come, that, being Himself pure from sin, and in all 
respects holy, He might undergo death on behalf of sinners. Similarly, you who 
emulate Him in condoning sins, if you yourself have done no sin, plainly suffer 
in my stead. If, however, you are a sinner, how will the oil of your puny torch 
be able to suffice for you and for me? 
I have, even now, a test whereby to prove (the presence of) Christ (in you). 
If Christ is in the martyr for this reason, that the martyr may absolve 
adulterers and fornicators, let Him tell publicly the secrets of the heart, that 
He may thus concede (pardon to) sins; and He is Christ. For thus it was that the 
Lord Jesus Christ showed His power: "Why think ye evil in your hearts? For which 
is easier, to say to the paralytic, Thy sins are remitted thee; or, Rise and 
walk? Therefore, that ye may know the Son of man to have the power upon earth of 
remitting sins, I say to thee, paralytic, Rise, and walk." If the Lord set so 
much store by the proof of His power as to reveal thoughts, and so impart health 
by His command, lest He should not be believed to have the power of remitting 
sins; it is not lawful for me to believe the same power (to reside) in any one, 
whoever he be, without the same proofs. In the act, however, of urgently 
entreating from a martyr pardon for adulterers and fornicators, you yourself 
confess that crimes of that nature are not to be washed away except by the 
martyrdom of the criminal himself, while you presume (they can be washed away) 
by another's If this is so, then martyrdom will be another baptism. For "I have 
withal," saith He, "another baptism." Whence, too, it was that there flowed out 
of the wound in the Lord's side water and blood, the materials of either 
baptism? I ought, then, by the first baptism too to (have the fight of) setting 
another free if I can by the second: and we must necessarily force upon the mind 
(of our opponents this conclusion): Whatever authority, whatever reason, 
restores ecclesiastical peace to the adulterer and fornicator, the same will be 
bound to come to the aid of the murderer and idolater in their repentance,--at 
all events, of the apostate, and of course of him whom, in the battle of his 
confession, after hard struggling with torments, savagery has overthrown. 
Besides, it were unworthy of God and of His mercy, who prefers the repentance of 
a sinner to his death, that they should have easier return into (the bosom of) 
the Church who have fallen in heat of passion, than they who have fallen in 
hand-to hand combat. Indignation urges us to speak. Contaminated bodies you will 
recall rather than gory ones! Which repentance is more pitiable--that which 
prostrates tickled flesh, or lacerated? Which pardon is, in all causes, more 
justly concessible--that which a voluntary, or that which an involuntary, sinner 
implores? No one is compelled with his will to apostatize; no one against his 
will commits fornication. Lust is exposed to no violence, except itself: it 
knows no coercion whatever. Apostasy, on the contrary, what ingenuities of 
butchery and tribes of penal inflictions enforce! Which has more truly 
apostatized--he who has lost Christ amid agonies, or (he who has done so) amid 
delights? he who when losing Him grieved, or he who when losing Him sported? And 
yet those scars graven on the Christian combatant--scars, of course, enviable in 
the eyes of Christ, because they yearned after Conquest, and thus also glorious, 
because failing to conquer they yielded; (scars) after which even the devil 
himself yet sighs; (scars) with an infelicity of their own, but a chaste one, 
with a repentance that mourns, but blushes not, to the Lord for pardon--will 
anew be remitted to such, because their apostasy was expiable! In their case 
alone is the "flesh weak." Nay, no flesh so strong as that which crushes out the 
Spirit! 
[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.] 

