
Tertullian












TERTULLIAN 
THE SOUL'S TESTIMONY. 
[BY THE REV S. THELWALL.]
CHAP. I.
IF, with the object of convicting the rivals and persecutors of Christian 
truth, from their own authorities, of the crime of at once being untrue to 
themselves and doing injustice to us, one is bent on gathering testimonies in 
its favour from the writings of the philosophers, or the poets, or other masters 
of this world's learning and wisdom, he has need of a most inquisitive spirit, 
and a still greater memory to carry out the research. Indeed, some of our 
people, who still continued their inquisitive labours in ancient literature, and 
still occupied memory with it, have published works we have in our hands of this 
very sort; works in which they relate and attest the nature and origin of their 
traditions, and the grounds on which opinions rest, and from which it may be 
seen at once that we have embraced nothing new or monstrous--nothing for which 
we cannot claim the support of ordinary and well-known writings, whether in 
ejecting error from our creed, or admitting truth into it. But the unbelieving 
hardness of the human heart leads them to slight even their own teachers, 
otherwise approved and in high renown, whenever they touch upon arguments which 
are used in defence of Christianity. Then the poets are fools, when they 
describe the gods with human passions and stories; then the philosophers are 
without reason, when they knock at the gates of truth. He will thus far be 
reckoned a wise and sagacious man who has gone the length of uttering sentiments 
that are almost Christian; while if, in a mere affectation of judgment and 
wisdom, he sets himself to reject their ceremonies, or to convicting the world 
of its sin, he is sure to be branded as a Christian. We will have nothing, then, 
to do with the literature and the teaching, perverted in its best results, which 
is believed in its errors rather than its truth. We shall lay no stress on it, 
if some of their authors have declared that there is one God, and one God only. 
Nay, let it be granted that there is nothing in heathen writers which a 
Christian approves, that it may be put out of his power to utter a single word 
of reproach. For all are not familiar with their teachings; and those who are, 
have no assurance in regard to their truth. Far less do men assent to our 
writings, to which no one comes for guidance unless he is already a Christian. I 
call in a new testimony, yea, one which is better known than all literature, 
more discussed than all doctrine, more public than all publications, greater 
than the whole man--I mean all which is man's. Stand forth, O soul, whether thou 
art a divine and eternal substance, as most philosophers believe if it be so, 
thou wilt be the less likely to lie,--or whether thou art the very opposite of 
divine, because indeed a mortal thing, as Epicurus alone thinks--in that case 
there will be the less temptation for thee to speak falsely in this case: 
whether thou art received from heaven, or sprung from earth; whether thou art 
formed of numbers, or of atoms; whether thine existence begins with that of the 
body, or thou art put into it at a later stage; from whatever source, and in 
whatever way, thou makest man a rational being, in the highest degree capable of 
thought and knowledge,--stand forth and give thy witness. But I call thee not as 
when, fashioned in schools, trained in libraries, fed in Attic academies and 
porticoes, thou belchest wisdom. I address thee simple, rude, uncultured and 
untaught, such as they have thee who have thee only; that very thing of the 
road, the street, the work-shop, wholly. I want thine inexperience, since in thy 
small experience no one feels any confidence. I demand of thee the things thou 
bringest with thee into man, which thou knowest either from 176 
thyself, or from thine author, whoever he may be. Thou art not, as I well 
know, Christian; for a man becomes a Christian, he is not born one. Yet 
Christians earnestly press thee for a testimony; they press thee, though an 
alien, to bear witness against thy friends, that they may be put to shame before 
thee, for hating and mocking us on account of things which convict thee as an 
accessory. 
CHAP. II.
We give offence by proclaiming that there is one God, to whom the name of God 
alone belongs, from whom all things come, and who is Lord of the whole universe. 
Bear thy testimony, if thou knowest this to be the truth; for openly and with a 
perfect liberty, such as we do not possess, we hear thee both in private and in 
public exclaim, "Which may God grant," and, "If God so will." By expressions 
such as these thou declarest that there is one who is distinctively God, and 
thou con-fessest that all power belongs to him to whose will, as Sovereign, thou 
dost look. At the same time, too, thou deniest any others to be truly gods, in 
calling them by their own names of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Minerva; for thou 
affirmest Him to be God alone to whom thou givest no other name than God; and 
though thou sometimes callest these others gods, thou plainly usest the 
designation as one which does not really belong to them, but is, so to speak, a 
borrowed one. Nor is the nature of the God we declare unknown to thee: "God is 
good, God does good," thou art wont to say; plainly suggesting further, "But man 
is evil." In asserting an antithetic proposition, thou, in a sort of indirect 
and figurative way, reproachest man with his wickedness in departing from a God 
so good. So, again, as among us, as belonging to the God of benignity and 
goodness, "Blessing" is a most sacred act in our religion and our life, thou too 
sayest as readily as a Christian needs, "God bless thee;" and when thou turnest 
the blessing of God into a curse, in like manner thy very words confess with us 
that His power over us is absolute and entire. There are some who, though they 
do not deny the existence of God, hold withal that He is neither Searcher, nor 
Ruler, nor Judge; treating with especial disdain those of us who go over to 
Christ out of fear of a coming judgment, as they think, honouring God in freeing 
Him from the cares of keeping watch, and the trouble of taking note,--not even 
regarding Him as capable of anger. For if God, they say, gets angry, then He is 
susceptible of corruption and passion; but that of which passion and corruption 
can be affirmed may also perish, which God cannot do. But these very persons 
elsewhere, confessing that the soul is divine, and bestowed on us by God, 
stumble against a testimony of the soul itself, which affords an answer to these 
views. For if either divine or God-given, it doubtless knows its giver; and if 
it knows Him, it undoubtedly fears Him too, and especially as having been by Him 
endowed so amply. Has it no fear of Him whose favour it is so desirous to 
possess, and whose anger it is so anxious to avoid? Whence, then, the soul's 
natural fear of God, if God cannot be angry? How is there any dread of Him whom 
nothing offends? What is feared but anger? Whence comes anger, but from 
observing what is done? What leads to watchful oversight, but judgment in 
prospect? Whence is judgment, but from power? To whom does supreme authority and 
power belong, but to God alone? So thou art always ready, O 
soul, from thine own knowledge, nobody casting scorn upon thee, and no one 
preventing, to exclaim, "God sees all," and "I commend thee to God," and "May 
God repay," and "God shall judge between us." How happens this, since thou art 
not Christian? How is it that, even with the garland of Ceres on the brow, 
wrapped in the purple cloak of Saturn, wearing the white robe of the goddess 
Isis, thou invokest God as judge? Standing under the statue of AEsculapius, 
adorning the brazen image of Juno, arraying the helmet of Minerva with dusky 
figures, thou never thinkest of appealing to any of these deities. In thine own 
forum thou appealest to a God who is elsewhere; thou permittest honour to be 
rendered in thy temples to a foreign god. Oh, striking testimony to truth, which 
in the very midst of demons obtains a witness for us Christians! 
CHAP. III.
But when we say that there are demons--as though, in the simple fact that we 
alone expel them from the men's bodies, we did not also prove their 
existence--some disciple of Chrysippus begins to curl the lip. Yet thy curses 
sufficiently attest that there are such beings, and that they are objects of thy 
strong dislike. As what comes to thee as a fit expression of thy strong hatred 
of him, thou callest the man a daemon who annoys thee with his filthiness, 177 
or malice, or insolence, or any other vice which we ascribe to evil spirits. 
In expressing vexation, contempt, or abhorrence, thou hast Satan constantly upon 
thy lips; the very same we hold to be the angel of evil, the source of error, 
the corrupter of the whole world, by whom in the beginning man was entrapped 
into breaking the commandment of God. And (the man) being given over to death on 
account of his sin, the entire human race, tainted in their descent from him, 
were made a channel for transmitting his condemnation. Thou seest, then, thy 
destroyer; and though he is fully known only to Christians, or to whatever sect 
confesses the Lord, yet, even thou hast some acquaintance with him while yet 
thou abhorrest him! 
CHAP. IV.
Even now, as the matter refers to thy opinion on a point the more closely 
belonging to thee, in so far as it bears on thy personal well-being, we maintain 
that after life has passed away thou still remainest in existence, and lookest 
forward to a day of judgment, and according to thy deserts art assigned to 
misery or bliss, in either way of it for ever; that, to be capable of this, thy 
former substance must needs return to thee, the matter and the memory of the 
very same human being: for neither good nor evil couldst thou feel if thou wert 
not endowed again with that sensitive bodily organization, and there would be no 
grounds for judgment without the presentation of the very person to whom the 
sufferings of judgment were due. That Christian view, though much nobler than 
the Pythagorean, as it does not tranfser thee into beasts; though more complete 
than the Platonic, since it endows thee again with a body; though more worthy of 
honour than the Epicurean, as it preserves thee from annihilation,--yet, because 
of the name connected with it, it is held to be nothing but vanity and folly, 
and, as it is called, a mere presumption. But we are not ashamed of ourselves if 
our presumption is found to have thy support. Well, in the first place, when 
thou speakest of one who is dead, thou sayest of him, "Poor man"--poor, surely, 
not because he has been taken from the good of life, but because he has been 
given over to punishment and condemnation. But at another time thou speakest of 
the dead as free from trouble; thou professest to think life a burden, and death 
a blessing. Thou art wont, too, to speak of the dead as in repose, when, 
returning to their graves beyond the city gates with food and dainties, thou art 
wont to present offerings to thyself rather than to them; or when, coming from 
the graves again, thou art staggering under the effects of wine. But I want thy 
sober opinion. Thou callest the dead poor when thou speakest thine own thoughts, 
when thou art at a distance from them. For at their feast, where in a sense they 
are present and recline along with thee, it would never do to cast reproach upon 
their lot. Thou canst not but adulate those for whose sake thou art feasting it 
so sumptuously. Dost thou then speak of him as poor who feels not? How happens 
it that thou cursest, as one capable of suffering from thy curse, the man whose 
memory comes back on thee with the sting in it of some old injury? It is thine 
imprecation that "the earth may lie heavy on him," and that there may be trouble 
"to his ashes in the realm of the dead." 
In like manner, in thy kindly feeling to him to whom thou art indebted for 
favours, thou entreatest "repose to his bones and ashes," and thy desire is that 
among the dead he may "have pleasant rest." If thou hast no power of suffering 
after death, if no feeling remains,--if, in a word, severance from the body is 
the annihilation of thee, what makes thee lie against thyself, as if thou 
couldst suffer in another state? Nay, why dost thou fear death at all? 
There is nothing after death to be feared, if there is nothing to be felt. 
For though it may be said that death is dreadful not for anything it threatens 
afterwards, but because it deprives us of the good of life; yet, on the other 
hand, as it puts an end to life's discomforts, which are far more numerous, 
death's terrors are mitigated by a gain that more than outweighs the loss. And 
there is no occasion to be troubled about a loss of good things, which is amply 
made up for by so great a blessing as relief from every trouble. There is 
nothing dreadful in that which delivers from all that is to be dreaded. If thou 
shrinkest from giving up life because thy experience of it has been sweet, at 
any rate there is no need to be in any alarm about death if thou hast no 
knowledge that it is evil. Thy dread of it is the proof that thou art aware of 
its evil. 
178 
Thou wouldst never think it evil--thou wouldst have no fear of it at all--if 
thou weft not sure that after it there is something to make it evil, and so a 
thing of terror. Let us leave unnoted at this time that natural way of fearing 
death. It is a poor thing for any one to fear what is inevitable. I take up the 
other side, and argue on the ground of a joyful hope beyond our term of earthly 
life; for desire of posthumous fame is with almost every class an inborn thing. 
I have not time to speak of the Curtii, and the Reguli, or the brave men of 
Greece, who afford us innumerable cases of death despised for after renown. Who 
at this day is without the desire that he may be often remembered when he is 
dead? Who does not give all endeavour to preserve his name by works of 
literature, or by the simple glory of his virtues, or by the splendour even of 
his tomb? How is it the nature of the soul to have these posthumous ambitions 
and with such amazing effort to prepare the things it can only use after 
decease? It would care nothing about the future, if the future were quite 
unknown to it. But perhaps thou thinkest thyself surer, after thy exit from the 
body, of continuing still to feel, than of any future resurrection, which is a 
doctrine laid at our door as one of our presumptuous suppositions. But it is 
also the doctrine of the soul; for if any one inquires about a person lately 
dead as though he were alive, it occurs at once to say, "He has gone." He is 
expected to return, then. 
CHAP. V.
These testimonies of the soul are simple as true, commonplace as simple, 
universal as commonplace, natural as universal, divine as natural. I don't think 
they can appear frivolous or feeble to any one, if he reflect on the majesty of 
nature, from which the soul derives its authority. If you acknowledge the 
authority of the mistress, you will own it also in the disciple. Well, nature is 
the mistress here, and her disciple is the soul. But everything the one has 
taught or the other learned, has come from God--the Teacher of the teacher. And 
what the soul may know from the teachings of its chief instructor, thou canst 
judge from that which is within thee. Think of that which enables thee to think; 
reflect on that which in forebodings is the prophet, the augur in omens, the 
foreseer of coming events. Is it a wonderful thing, if, being the gift of God to 
man, it knows how to divine? Is it anything very strange, if it knows the God by 
whom it was bestowed? Even fallen as it is, the victim of the great adversary's 
machinations, it does not forget its Creator, His goodness and law, and the 
final end both of itself and of its foe. Is it singular then, if, divine in its 
origin, its revelations agree with the knowledge God has given to His own 
people? But he who does not regard those outbursts of the soul as the teaching 
of a congenital nature and the secret deposit of an inborn knowledge, will say 
that the habit and, so to say, the vice of speaking in this way has been 
acquired and confirmed from the opinions of published books widely spread among 
men. Unquestionably the soul existed before letters, and speech before books, 
and ideas before the writing of them, and man himself before the poet and 
philosopher. Is it then to be believed, that before literature and its 
publication no utterances of the sort we have pointed out came from the lips of 
men? Did nobody speak of God and His goodness, nobody of death, nobody of the 
dead? Speech went a-begging, I suppose; nay, (the subjects being still awanting, 
without which it cannot even exist at this day, when it is so much more copious, 
and rich, and wise), it could not exist at all if the things which are now so 
easily suggested, that cling to us so constantly, that are so very near to us, 
that are somehow born on our very lips, had no existence in ancient times, 
before letters had any existence in the world--before there was a Mercury, I 
think, at all. And whence was it, I pray, that letters themselves came to know, 
and to disseminate for the use of speech, what no mind had ever conceived, or 
tongue put forth, or ear taken in? But, clearly, since the Scriptures of God, 
whether belonging to Christians or to Jews, into whose olive tree we have been 
grafted--are much more ancient than any secular literature, (or, let us only 
say, are of a somewhat earlier date, as we have shown in its proper place when 
proving their trustworthiness); if the soul have taken these utterances from 
writings at all, we must believe it has taken them from ours, and not from 
yours, its instruction coming more naturally from the earlier than the later 
works. Which latter indeed waited for their own instruction from the former, and 
though we grant that light has come from you, still it has flowed from the first 
fountainhead originally; and we claim as 179 
entirely ours, all you may have taken from us and handed down. Since it is 
thus, it matters little whether the soul's knowledge was put into it by God or 
by His book. Why, then, O man, wilt thou maintain a view so groundless, as that 
those testimonies of the soul have gone forth from the mere human speculations 
of your literature, and got hardening of common use? 
CHAP. VI.
Believe, then, your own books, and as to our Scriptures so much the more 
believe writings which are divine, but in the witness of the soul itself give 
like confidence to Nature. Choose the one of these you observe to be the most 
faithful friend of truth. If your own writings are distrusted, neither God nor 
Nature lie. And if you would have faith in God and Nature, have faith in the 
soul; thus you will believe yourself. Certainly you value the soul as giving you 
your true greatness,--that to which you belong; which is all things to you; 
without which you can neither live nor die; on whose account you even put God 
away from you. Since, then, you fear to become a Christian, call the soul before 
you, and put her to the question. Why does she worship another? why name the 
name of God? Why does she speak of demons, when she means to denote spirits to 
be held accursed? Why does she make her protestations towards the heavens, and 
pronounce her ordinary execrations earthwards? Why does she render service in 
one place, in another invoke the Avenger? Why does she pass judgments on the 
dead? What Christian phrases are those she has got, though Christians she 
neither desires to see nor hear? Why has she either bestowed them On us, or 
received them from us? Why has she either taught us them, or learned them as our 
scholar? Regard with suspicion this accordance in words, while there is such 
difference in practice. It is utter folly--denying a universal nature--to 
ascribe this exclusively to our language and the Greek, which are regarded among 
us as so near akin. The soul is not a boon from heaven to Latins and Greeks 
alone. Man is the one name belonging to every nation upon earth: there is one 
soul and many tongues, one spirit and various sounds; every country has its own 
speech, but the subjects of speech are common to all. God is everywhere, and the 
goodness of God is everywhere; demons are everywhere, and the cursing of them is 
everywhere; the invocation of divine judgment is everywhere, death is 
everywhere, and the sense of death is everywhere, and all the world over is 
found the witness of the soul. There is not a soul of man that does not, from 
the light that is in itself, proclaim the very things we are not permitted to 
speak above our breath. Most justly, then, every soul is a culprit as well as a 
witness: in the measure that it testifies for truth, the guilt of error lies on 
it; and on the day of judgment it will stand before the courts of God, without a 
word to say. Thou proclaimedst God, O soul, but thou didst not seek to know Him: 
evil spirits were detested by thee, and yet they were the objects of thy 
adoration; the punishments of hell were foreseen by thee, but no care was taken 
to avoid them; thou hadst a savour of Christianity, and withal wert the 
persecutor of Christians. 

