
Tertullian












TERTULLIAN 
AD NATIONES. 
[TRANSLATED BY DR. HOLMES.]
CHAP. I.--THE HATRED FELT BY THE HEATHEN AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS IS UNJUST, 
BECAUSE BASED ON CULPABLE IGNORANCE.
ONE proof of that ignorance of yours, which condemns whilst it excuses your 
injustice, is at once apparent in the fact, that all who once shared in your 
ignorance and hatred (of the Christian religion), as soon as they have come to 
know it, leave off their hatred when they cease to be ignorant; nay more, they 
actually themselves become what they had hated, and take to hating what they had 
once been. Day after day, indeed, you groan over the increasing number of the 
Christians. Your constant cry is, that the state is beset (by us); that 
Christians are in your fields, in your camps, in your islands. You grieve over 
it as a calamity, that each sex, every age--in short, every rank--is passing 
over from you to us; yet you do not even after this set your minds upon 
reflecting whether there be not here some latent good. You do not allow 
yourselves in suspicions which may prove too true, nor do you like ventures 
which may be too near the mark. This is the only instance in which human 
curiosity grows torpid. You love to be ignorant of what other men rejoice to 
have discovered; you would rather not know it, because you now cherish your 
hatred as if you were aware that, (with the knowledge,) your hatred would 
certainly come to an end. Still, if there shall be no just ground for hatred, it 
will surely be found to be the best course to cease from the past injustice. 
Should, however, a cause have really existed there will be no diminution of the 
hatred, which will indeed accumulate so much the more in the consciousness of 
its justice; unless it be, forsooth, that you are ashamed to cast off your 
faults, or sorry to free yourselves from blame. I know very well with what 
answer you usually meet the argument from our rapid increase. That indeed must 
not, you say, be hastily accounted a good thing which converts a great number of 
persons, and gains them over to its side. I am aware how the mind is apt to take 
to evil courses. How many there are which forsake virtuous living! How many seek 
refuge in the opposite! Many, no doubt; nay, very many, as the last days 
approach. But such a comparison as this fails in fairness of application; for 
all are agreed in thinking thus of the evil-doer, so that not even the guilty 
themselves, who take the wrong side, and turn away from the pursuit of good to 
perverse ways, are bold enough to defend evil as good. Base things excite their 
fear, impious ones their shame. In short, they are eager for concealment, they 
shrink from publicity, they tremble when caught; when accused, they deny; even 
when tortured, they do not readily or invariably confess (their crime); at all 
events, they grieve when they are condemned. They reproach themselves for their 
past life; their change from innocence to an evil disposition they even 
attribute to fate. They cannot say that it is not a wrong thing, therefore they 
will not admit it to be their own act. As for the Christians, however, in what 
does their case resemble this? No one is ashamed; no one is sorry, except for 
his former (sins). If he is pointed 110 
at (for his religion), he glories in it; if dragged to trial, he does not 
resist; if accused, he makes no defence. When questioned, he confesses; when 
condemned, he rejoices. What sort of evil is this, in which the nature of evil 
comes to a standstill? 
CHAP. II.--THE HEATHEN PERVERTED JUDGMENT IN THE TRIAL OF CHRISTIANS. THEY 
WOULD BE MORE CONSISTENT IF THEY DISPENSED WITH ALL FORM OF TRIAL. TERTULLIAN 
URGES THIS WITH MUCH INDIGNATION.
In this case you actually conduct trials contrary to the usual form of 
judicial process against criminals; for when culprits are brought up for trial, 
should they deny the charge, you press them for a confession by tortures. When 
Christians, however, confess without compulsion, you aply the torture to induce 
them to deny. What great perverseness is this, when you stand out against 
confession, and change the use of the torture, compelling the man who frankly 
acknowledges the charge to evade it, and him who is unwilling, to deny it? You, 
who preside for the purpose of extorting truth, demand falsehood from us alone 
that we may declare ourselves not to be what we are. I suppose you do not want 
us to be bad men, and therefore you earnestly wish to exclude us from that 
character. To be sure, you put others on the rack and the gibbet, to get them to 
deny what they have the reputation of being. Now, when they deny (the charge 
against them), you do not believe them but on our denial, you instantly believe 
us. If you feel sure that we are the most injurious of men, why, even in 
processes against us, are we dealt with by you differently from other offenders? 
I do not mean that you make no account of either an accusation or a denial (for 
your practice is not hastily to condemn men without an indictment and a 
defence); but, to take an instance in the trial of a murderer, the case is not 
at once ended, or the inquiry satisfied, on a man's confessing himself the 
murderer. However complete his confession, you do not readily believe him; but 
over and above this, you inquire into accessory circumstances--how often had he 
committed murder; with what weapons, in what place, with what plunder, 
accomplices, and abettors after the fact (was the crime perpetrated)--to the end 
that nothing whatever respecting the criminal might escape detection, and that 
every means should be at hand for arriving at a true verdict. In our case, on 
the contrary, whom you believe to be guilty of more atrocious and numerous 
crimes, you frame your indictments in briefer and lighter terms. I suppose you 
do not care to load with accusations men whom you earnestly wish to get rid of, 
or else you do not think it necessary to inquire into matters which are known to 
you already. It is, however, all the more perverse that you compel us to deny 
charges about which you have the clearest evidence. But, indeed, how much more 
consistent were it with your hatred of us to dispense with all forms of judicial 
process, and to strive with all your might not to urge us to say "No," and so 
have to acquit the objects of your hatred; but to confess all and singular the 
crimes laid to our charge, that your resentments might be the better glutted 
with an accumulation of our punishments, when it becomes known how many of those 
feasts each one of us may have celebrated, and how many incests we may have 
committed under cover of the night! What am I saying? Since your researches for 
rooting out our society must needs be made on a wide scale, you ought to extend 
your inquiry against our friends and companions. Let our infanticides and the 
dressers (of our horrible repasts) be brought out,--ay, and the very dogs which 
minister to our (incestuous) nuptials; then the business (of our trial) would be 
without a fault. Even to the crowds which throng the spectacles a zest would be 
given; for with how much greater eagerness would they resort to the theatre, 
when one had to fight in the lists who had devoured a hundred babies! For since 
such horrid and monstrous crimes are reported of us, they ought, of course, to 
be brought to light, lest they should seem to be incredible, and the public 
detestation of us should begin to cool. For most persons are slow to believe 
such things, feeling a horrible disgust at supposing that our nature could have 
an appetite 111 
for the food of wild beasts, when it has precluded these from all concubinage 
with the race of man. 
CHAP. III.--THE GREAT OFFENCE IN THE CHRISTIANS LIES IN THEIR VERY NAME. 
THE NAME VINDICATED.
Since, therefore, you who are in other cases most scrupulous and persevering 
in investigating charges of far less serious import, relinquish your care in 
cases like ours, which are so horrible, and of such surpassing sin that impiety 
is too mild a word for them, by declining to hear confession, which should 
always be an important process for those who conduct judicial proceedings; and 
failing to make a full inquiry, which should be gone into by such as sue for a 
condemnation, it becomes evident that the crime laid to our charge consists not 
of any sinful conduct, but lies wholly in our name. If, indeed, any real crimes 
were clearly adducible against us, their very names would condemn us, if found 
applicable, so that distinct sentences would be pronounced against us in this 
wise: Let that murderer, or that incestuous criminal, or whatever it be that we 
are charged with, be led to execution, be crucified, or be thrown to the beasts. 
Your sentences, however, import only that one has confessed himself a Christian. 
No name of a crime stands against us, but only the crime of a name. Now this in 
very deed is neither more nor less than the entire odium which is felt against 
us. The name is the cause: some mysterious force intensified by your ignorance 
assails it, so that you do not wish to know for certain that which for certain 
you are sure you know nothing of; and therefore, further, you do not believe 
things which are not submitted to proof, and, lest they should be easily 
refuted, you refuse to make inquiry, so that the odious name is punished under 
the presumption of (real) crimes. In order, therefore, that the issue may be 
withdrawn from the offensive name, we are compelled to deny it; then upon our 
denial we are acquitted, with an entire absolution for the past: we are no 
longer murderers, no longer incestuous, because we have lost that name. But 
since this point is dealt with in a place of its own, do you tell us plainly why 
you are pursuing this name even to extirpation? What crime, what offence, what 
fault is there in a name? For you are barred by the rule which puts it out of 
your power to allege crimes (of any man), which no legal action moots, no 
indictment specifies, no sentence enumerates. In any case which is submitted to 
the judge, inquired into against the defendant, responded to by him or denied, 
and cited from the bench, I acknowledge a legal charge. Concerning, then, the 
merit of a name, whatever offence names may be charged with, whatever 
impeachment words may be amenable to, I for my part think, that not even a 
complaint is due to a word or a name, unless indeed it has a barbarous sound, or 
smacks of ill-luck, or is immodest, or is indecorous for the speaker, or 
unpleasant to the hearer. These crimes in (mere) words and names are just like 
barbarous words and phrases, which have their fault, and their solecism, and 
their absurdity of figure. The name Christian, however, so far as its meaning 
goes, bears the sense of anointing. Even when by a faulty pronunciation you call 
us "Chrestians" (for you are not certain about even the sound of this noted 
name), you in fact lisp out the sense of pleasantness and goodness. You are 
therefore vilifying in harmless men even the harmless name we bear, which is not 
inconvenient for the tongue, nor harsh to the ear, nor injurious to a single 
being, nor rude for our country, being a good Greek word, as many others also 
are, and pleasant in sound and sense. Surely, surely, names are not things which 
deserve punishment by the sword, or the cross, or the beasts. 
CHAP. IV.--THE TRUTH HATED IN THE CHRISTIANS; SO IN MEASURE WAS IT, OF 
OLD, IN SOCRATES. THE VIRTUES OF THE CHRISTIANS.
But the sect, you say, is punished in the name of its founder. Now in the 
first place it is, no doubt a fair and usual custom that a sect should be marked 
out by the name of its founder, since philosophers are called Pythagoreans and 
Platonists after their masters; in the same way physicians are called after 
Erasistratus, and grammarians after Aristarchus. If, therefore, a sect has a bad 
character because its founder was bad, it is punished as the traditional bearer 
of a bad name. But this would be indulging in a rash assumption. 
112 
The first step was to find out what the founder was, that his sect might be 
understood, instead of hindering inquiry into the founder's character from the 
sect. But in our case, by being necessarily ignorant of the sect, through your 
ignorance of its founder, or else by not taking a fair survey of the founder, 
because you make no inquiry into his sect, you fasten merely on the name, just 
as if you vilified in it both sect and founder, whom you know nothing of 
whatever. And yet you openly allow your philosophers the right of attaching 
themselves to any school, and bearing its founder's name as their own; and 
nobody stirs up any hatred against them, although both in public and in private 
they bark out their bitterest eloquence against your customs, rites, ceremonies, 
and manner of life, with so much contempt for the laws, and so little respect 
for persons, that they even flaunt their licentious words 
against the emperors themselves with impunity. And yet it is the truth, which 
is so troublesome to the world, that these philosophers affect, but which 
Christians possess: they therefore who have it in possession afford the greater 
displeasure, because he who affects a thing plays with it; he who possesses it 
maintains it. For example, Socrates was condemned on that side (of his wisdom) 
in which he came nearest in his search to the truth, by destroying your gods. 
Although the name of Christian was not at that time in the world, yet truth was 
always suffering condemnation. Now you will not deny that he was a wise man, to 
whom your own Pythian (god) had borne witness. 
Socrates, he said, was the wisest of men. Truth overbore Apollo, and made him 
pronounce even against himself since he acknowledged that he was no god, when he 
affirmed that that was the wisest man who was denying the gods. However, 
on your principle he was the less wise because he denied the gods, although, 
in truth, he was all the wiser by reason of this denial. It is just in the same 
way that you are in the habit of saying of us: "Lucius Titius is a good man, 
only he is a Christian;" while another says; "I wonder that so worthy 
a man as Caius Seius has become a Christian. " According to the blindness of 
their folly men praise what they know, (and) blame what they are ignorant of; 
and that which they know, they vitiate by that which they do not know. It occurs 
to none (to consider) whether a man is not good and wise because he is a 
Christian, or therefore a Christian because he is wise and good, although it is 
more usual in human conduct to determine obscurities by what is manifest, than 
to prejudice what is manifest by what is obscure. Some persons wonder that those 
whom they had known to be unsteady, worthless, or wicked before they bore this 
name, have been suddenly converted to virtuous courses; and yet they better know 
how to wonder (at the change) than to attain to it; others are so obstinate in 
their strife as to do battle with their own best interests, which they have it 
in their power to secure by intercourse with that hated name. I know more than 
one husband, formerly anxious about their wives' conduct, and unable to bear 
even mice to creep into their bed-room without a groan of suspicion, who have, 
upon discovering the cause of their new assiduity, and their unwonted attention 
to the duties of home, offered the entire loan of their wives to others, 
disclaimed all jealousy, (and) preferred to be the husbands of she-wolves than 
of Christian women: they could commit themselves to a perverse abuse of nature, 
but they could not permit their wives to be reformed for the better! A father 
disinherited his son, with whom he had ceased to find fault. A master sent his 
slave to bridewell, whom he had even found to be indispensable to him. As soon 
as they discovered them to be Christians, they wished they were criminals again; 
for our discipline carries its own evidence in itself, nor are we betrayed by 
anything else than our own goodness, just as bad men also become conspicuous by 
their own evil. Else how is it that we alone are, contrary to the lessons of 
nature, branded as very evil because of our good? 
For what mark do we exhibit except the prime wisdom, which teaches us not to 
worship the frivolous works of the human hand; the temperance, by which we 
abstain from other men's goods; the chastity, which we pollute not even with a 
look; the compassion, which prompts us to help the needy; the truth itself, 
which makes us give offence; and liberty, for which we have even learned to die? 
Whoever wishes to understand who the Christians are, must needs employ these 
marks for their discovery. 
113 
CHAP. V.--THE INCONSISTENT LIFE OF ANY FALSE CHRISTIAN NO MORE 
CONDEMNS 
TRUE DISCIPLES OF CHRIST, THAN A PASSING CLOUD OBSCURES A SUMMER SKY.
As to your saying of us that we are a most shameful set, and utterly steeped 
in luxury, avarice, and depravity, we will not deny that this is true of some. 
It is, however, a sufficient testimonial for our name, that this cannot be said 
of all, not even of the greater part of us. It must happen even in the 
healthiest and purest body, that a mole should grow, or a wart arise on it, or 
freckles disfigure it. Not even the sky itself is clear with so perfect a 
serenity as not to be flecked with some filmy cloud. A slight spot on the face, 
because it is obvious in so conspicuous a part, only serves to show purity of 
the entire complexion. The goodness of the larger portion is well attested by 
the slender flaw. But although you prove that some of our people are evil, you 
do not hereby prove that they are Christians. Search and see whether there is 
any sect to which (a partial shortcoming) is imputed as a general stain. You are 
accustomed in conversation yourselves to say, in disparagement of us, "Why is 
so-and-so deceitful, when the Christians are so self-denying? why merciless, 
when they are so merciful?" You thus bear your testimony to the fact that this 
is not the character of Christians, when you ask, in the way of a retort, how 
men who are reputed to be Christians can be of such and such a disposition. 
There is a good deal of difference between an imputation and a name, between an 
opinion and the truth. For names were appointed for the express purpose of 
setting their proper limits between mere designation and actual condition. How 
many indeed are said to be philosophers, who for all that do not fulfil the law 
of philosophy? All bear the name in respect of their profession; but they hold 
the designation without the excellence of the profession, and they disgrace the 
real thing under the shallow pretence of its name. Men are not straightway of 
such and such a character, because they are said to be so; but when they are 
not, it is vain to say so of them: they only deceive people who attach reality 
to a name, when it is its consistency with fact which decides the condition 
implied in the name. And yet persons of this doubtful stamp do not assemble with 
us, neither do they belong to our communion: by their delinquency they become 
yours once more since we should be unwilling to mix even with them whom your 
violence and cruelty compelled to recant. Yet we should, of course, be more 
ready to have included amongst us those who have unwillingly forsaken our 
discipline than wilful apostates. However, you have no right to call them 
Christians, to whom the Christians themselves deny that name, and who have not 
learned to deny themselves. 
CHAP. VI.--THE INNOCENCE OF THE CHRISTIANS NOT COMPROMISED BY THE 
INIQUITOUS LAWS WHICH WERE MADE AGAINST THEM.
Whenever these statements and answers of ours, which truth suggests of its 
own accord, press and restrain your conscience, which is the witness of its own 
ignorance, you betake yourselves in hot haste to that poor altar of refuge, the 
authority of the laws, because these, of course, would never punish the 
offensive sect, if their deserts had not been fully considered by those who made 
the laws. Then what is it which has prevented a like consideration on the part 
of those who put the laws in force, when, in the case of all other crimes which 
are similarly forbidden and punished by the laws, the penalty is not inflicted 
until it is sought by regular process? Take, for instance, the case of a 
murderer or an adulterer. An examination is ordered touching the particulars of 
the crime, even though it is patent to all what its nature is. Whatever wrong 
has been done by the Christian ought to be brought to light. No law forbids 
inquiry to be made; on the contrary, inquiry is made in the interest of the 
laws. For how are you to keep the law by precautions against that which the law 
forbids, if you neutralize the carefulness of the precaution by your failing to 
perceive what it is yon have to keep? No law must keep to itself the knowledge 
of its own righteousness, but (it owes it) to those from whom it claims 
obedience. The law, however, becomes an object of suspicion when it declines to 
approve itself. Naturally enough, then, are the laws against 114 
the Christians supposed to be just and deserving of respect and observance, 
just as long as men remain ignorant of their aim and purport; but when this is 
perceived, their extreme injustice is discovered, and they are deservedly 
rejected with abhorrence, along with (their instruments of torture)--the swords, 
the crosses, and the lions. An unjust law secures no respect. In my opinion, 
however, there is a suspicion among you that some of these laws are unjust, 
since not a day passes without your modifying their severity and iniquity by 
fresh deliberations and decisions. 
CHAP. VII.--THE CHRISTIANS DEFAMED. A SARCASTIC DESCRIPTION OF FAME; ITS 
DECEPTION AND ATROCIOUS SLANDERS OF THE CHRISTIANS LENGTHILY DESCRIBED.
Whence comes it to pass, you will say to us, that such a character could have 
been attributed to you, as to have justified the lawmakers perhaps by its 
imputation? Let me ask on my side, what voucher they had then, or you now, for 
the truth of the imputation? (You answer,) Fame. Well, now, is not this- "Fama 
malum, quo non aliud velocius ullum?" 
Now, why a plague, if it be always true? It never ceases from lying; nor even 
at the moment when it reports the truth is it so free from the wish to lie, as 
not to interweave the false with the true, by processes of addition, diminution, 
or confusion of various facts. Indeed, such is its condition, that it can only 
continue to exist while it lies. For it lives only just so long as it fails to 
prove anything. As soon as it proves itself true, it falls; and, as if its 
office of reporting news were at an end, it quits its post: thenceforward the 
thing is held to be a fact, and it passes under that name. No one, then, says, 
to take an instance, "The report is that this happened at Rome," or, "The rumour 
goes that he has got a province;" but, "He has got a province," and, "This 
happened at Rome." Nobody mentions a rumour except at an uncertainty, because 
nobody can be sure of a rumour, but only of certain knowledge; and none but a 
fool believes a rumour, because no wise man puts faith in an uncertainty. In 
however wide a circuit a report has been circulated, it must needs have 
originated some time or other from one mouth; afterwards it creeps on somehow to 
ears and tongues which pass it on and so obscures the humble error in which it 
began, that no one considers whether the mouth which first set it a-going 
disseminated a falsehood,--a circumstance which often happens either from a 
temper of rivalry, or a suspicious turn, or even the pleasure of feigning news. 
It is, however, well that time reveals all things, as your own sayings and 
proverbs testify; yea, as nature herself attests, which has so ordered it that 
nothing lies hid, not even that which fame has not reported. See, now, what a 
witness you have suborned against us: it has not been able up to this time to 
prove the report it set in motion, although it has had so long a time to 
recommend it to our acceptance. This name of ours took its rise in the reign of 
Augustus; under Tiberius it was taught with all clearness and publicity; under 
Nero it was ruthlessly condemned, and you may weigh its worth and character even 
from the person of its persecutor. If that prince was a pious man, then the 
Christians are impious; if he was just, if he was pure, then the Christians are 
unjust and impure; if he was not a public enemy, we are enemies of our country: 
what sort of men we are, our persecutor himself shows, since he of course 
punished what produced hostility to himself. Now, although every other 
institution which existed under Nero has been destroyed, yet this of ours has 
firmly remained--righteous, it would seem, as being unlike the author (of its 
persecution). Two hundred and fifty years, then, have not yet passed since our 
life began. During the interval there have been so many criminals; so many 
crosses have obtained immortality; so many infants have been slain; so many 
loaves steeped in blood; so many extinctions of candles; so many dissolute 
marriages. And up to the present time it is mere report which fights against the 
Christians. No doubt it has a strong support in the wickedness of the human 
mind, and utters its falsehoods with more success among cruel and savage men. 
For the more inclined you are to maliciousness, the more ready are you to 
believe evil; in short, men more easily believe the evil that is false, than the 
good which is true. Now, if injustice has left any place within you for the 
exercise of prudence in investigating the truth of reports, justice of course 
demanded 115 
that you should examine by whom the report could have been spread among the 
multitude, and thus circulated through the world. For it could not have been by 
the Christians themselves, I suppose, since by the very constitution and law of 
all mysteries the obligation of silence is imposed. How much more would this be 
the case in such (mysteries as are ascribed to us), which, if divulged, could 
not fail to bring down instant punishment from the prompt resentment of men! 
Since, therefore, the Christians are not their own betrayers, it follows that it 
must be strangers. Now I ask, how could strangers obtain knowledge of us, when 
even true and lawful mysteries exclude every stranger from witnessing them, 
unless illicit ones are less exclusive? 
Well, then, it is more in keeping with the character of strangers both to be 
ignorant (of the true state of a case), and to invent (a false account). Our 
domestic servants (perhaps) listened, and peeped through crevices and holes, and 
stealthily got information of our ways. What, then, shall we say when our 
servants betray them to you? It is better, (to be sure,) for us all not to be 
betrayed by any; but still, if our practices be so atrocious, how much more 
proper is it when a righteous indignation bursts asunder even all ties of 
domestic fidelity? How was it possible for it to endure what horrified the mind 
and affrighted the eye? This is also a wonderful thing, both that he who was so 
overcome with impatient excitement as to turn informer, did not likewise desire 
to prove (what he reported), and that he who heard the informer's story did not 
care to see for himself, since no doubt the reward is equal both for the 
informer who proves what he reports, and for the hearer who convinces himself of 
the credibility of what he hears. But then you say that (this is precisely what 
has taken place): first came the rumour, then the exhibition of the proof; first 
the hearsay, then the inspection; and after this, fame received its commission. 
Now this, I must say, surpasses all admiration, that that was once for all 
detected and divulged which is being for ever repeated, unless, forsooth, we 
have by this time ceased from the reiteration of such things (as are alleged of 
us). But we are called still by the same (offensive) name, and we are supposed 
to be still engaged in the same practices, and we multiply from day to day; the 
more we are, to the more become we objects of hatred. Hatred increases as the 
material for it increases. Now, seeing that the multitude of offenders is ever 
advancing, how is it that the crowd of informers does not keep equal pace 
therewith? To the best of my belief, even our manner of life has become better 
known; you know the very days of our assemblies; therefore we are both besieged, 
and attacked, and kept prisoners actually in our secret congregations. Yet who 
ever came upon a half-consumed corpse (amongst us)? Who has detected the traces 
of a bite in our blood-steeped loaf? Who has discovered, by a sudden light 
invading our darkness, any marks of impurity, I will not say of incest, (in our 
feasts)? If we save ourselves. by a bribe from being dragged out before the 
public gaze with such a character, how is it that we are still oppressed? We 
have it indeed in our own power not to be thus apprehended at all; for who 
either sells or buys information about a crime, if the crime itself has no 
existence? But why need I disparagingly refer to strange spies and informers, 
when you allege against us such charges as we certainly do not ourselves divulge 
with very much noise--either as soon as you hear of them, if we previously show 
them to you, or after you have yourselves discovered them, if they are for the 
time concealed from you? For no doubt, when any desire initiation in the 
mysteries, their custom is first to go to the master or father of the sacred 
rites. Then he will say (to the applicant), You must bring an infant, as a 
guarantee for our rites, to be sacrificed, as well as some bread to be broken 
and dipped in his blood; you also want candles, and dogs tied together to upset 
them, and bits of meat to rouse the dogs. Moreover, a mother too, or a sister, 
is necessary for you. What, however, is to be said if you have neither? I 
suppose in that case you could not be a genuine Christian. Now, do let me ask 
you, Will such things, when reported by strangers, bear to be spread about (as 
charges against us)? It is impossible for such persons to understand proceedings 
in which they take no part. The first step of the process is perpetrated with 
artifice; our feasts and our marriages are invented and detailed by ignorant 
persons, 116 
who had never before heard about Christian mysteries. And though they 
afterwards cannot help acquiring some knowledge of them, it is even then as 
having to be administered by others whom they bring on the scene. Besides, how 
absurd is it that the profane know mysteries which the priest knows not! They 
keep them all to themselves, then, and take them for granted; and so these 
tragedies, (worse than those) of Thyestes or OEdipus, do not at all come forth 
to light, nor find their way to the public. Even more voracious bites take 
nothing away from the credit of such as are initiated, whether servants or 
masters. If, however, none of these allegations can be proved to be true, how 
incalculable must be esteemed the grandeur (of that religion) which is 
manifestly not overbalanced even by the burden of these vast atrocities! O ye 
heathen; who have and deserve our pity, behold, we set before you the promise 
which our sacred system offers. It guarantees eternal life to such as follow and 
observe it; on the other hand, it threatens with the eternal punishment of an 
unending fire those who are profane and hostile; while to both classes alike is 
preached a resurrection from the dead. We are not now concerned about the 
doctrine of these (verities), which are discussed in their proper place. 
Meanwhile, however, believe them, even as we do ourselves, for I want to know 
whether you are ready to reach them, as we do, through such crimes. Come, 
whosoever you are, plunge your sword into an infant; or if that is another's 
office, then simply gaze at the breathing creature dying before it has lived; at 
any rate, catch its fresh blood in which to steep your bread; then feed yourself 
without stint; and whilst this is going on, recline. Carefully distinguish the 
places where your mother or your sister may have made their bed; mark them well, 
in order that, when the shades of night have fallen upon them, putting of course 
to the test the care of every one of you, you may not make the awkward mistake 
of alighting on somebody else: you would have to make an atonement, if you 
failed of the incest. When you have effected all this, eternal life will be in 
store for you. I want you to tell me whether you think eternal life worth such a 
price. No, indeed, you do not believe it: even if you did believe it, I maintain 
that you would be unwilling to give (the fee); or if willing, would be unable. 
But why should others be able if you are unable? Why should you be able if 
others are unable? What would you wish impunity (and) eternity to stand you in? 
Do you suppose that these (blessings) can be bought by us at any price? Have 
Christians teeth of a different sort from others? Have they more ample jaws? Are 
they of different nerve for incestuous lust? I trow not. 
It is enough for us to differ from you in condition by truth alone. 
CHAP. VIII.--THE CALUMNY AGAINST THE CHRISTIANS ILLUSTRATED IN THE 
DISCOVERY OF PSAMMETICHUS. REFUTATION OF THE STORY.
We are indeed said to be the "third race" of men. What, a dog-faced race? Or 
broadly shadow-footed? Or some subterranean Antipodes? If you attach any meaning 
to these names, pray tell us what are the first and the second race, that so we 
may know something of this "third." Psammetichus thought that he had hit upon 
the ingenious discovery of the primeval man. He is said to have removed certain 
new-born infants from all human intercourse, and to have entrusted them to a 
nurse, whom he had previously deprived of her tongue, in order that, being 
completely exiled from all sound of the human voice, they might form their 
speech without hearing it; and thus, deriving it from themselves alone, might 
indicate what that first nation was whose speech was dictated by nature. Their 
first utterance was BEKKOS, a word which means "bread" in the language of 
Phrygia: the Phrygians, therefore, are supposed to be the first of the human 
race. But it will not be out of place if we make one observation, with a view to 
show how your faith abandons itself more to vanities than to verities. 
117 
Can it be, then, at all credible that the nurse retained her life, after the 
loss of so important a member, the very organ of the breath of life,--cut out, 
too, from the very root, with her throat mutilated, which cannot be wounded even 
on the outside without danger, and the putrid gore flowing back to the chest, 
and deprived for so long a time of her food? Come, even suppose that by the 
remedies of a Philomela she retained her life, in the way supposed by wisest 
persons, who account for the dumbness not by cutting out the tongue, but from 
the blush of shame; if on such a supposition she lived, she would still be able 
to blurt out some dull sound. And a shrill inarticulate noise from opening the 
mouth only, without any modulation of the lips, might be forced from the mere 
throat, though there were no tongue to help. This, it is probable, the infants 
readily imitated, and the more so because it was the only sound; only they did 
it a little more neatly, as they had tongues; and then they attached to it a 
definite signification. Granted, then, that the Phrygians were the earliest 
race, it does not follow that the Christians are the third. For how many other 
nations come regularly after the Phrygians? Take care, however, lest those whom 
you call the third race should obtain the first rank, since there is no nation 
indeed which is not Christian. Whatever nation, therefore, was the first, is 
nevertheless Christian now. It is ridiculous folly which makes you say we are 
the latest race, and then specifically call us the third. But it is in respect 
of our religion. not of our nation, that we are supposed to be the third; the 
series being the Romans, the Jews, and the Christians after them. Where, then, 
are the Greeks? or if they are reckoned amongst the Romans in regard to their 
superstition (since it was from Greece that Rome borrowed even her gods), where 
at least are the Egyptians, since these have, so far as I know, a mysterious 
religion peculiar to themselves? Now, if they who belong to the third race are 
so monstrous, what must they be supposed to be who preceded them in the first 
and the second place? 
CHAP. IX.--THE CHRISTIANS ARE NOT THE CAUSE OF PUBLIC CALAMITIES: THERE 
WERE SUCH TROUBLES BEFORE CHRISTIANITY.
But why should I be astonished at your vain imputations? Under the same 
natural form, malice and folly have always been associated in one body and 
growth, and have ever opposed us under the One instigator of error. Indeed, I 
feel no astonishment; and therefore, as it is necessary for my subject, I will 
enumerate some instances, that you may feel the astonishment by the enumeration 
of the folly into which you fall, when you insist on our being the causes of 
every public calamity or injury. If the Tiber has overflowed its banks, if the 
Nile has remained in its bed, if the sky has been still, or the earth been in 
commotion, if death has made its devastations, or famine its afflictions, your 
cry immediately is, "This is the fault of the Christians!" As if they who fear 
the true God could have to fear a light thing, or at least anything else (than 
an earthquake or famine, or such visitations). I suppose it is as despisers of 
your gods that we call down on us these strokes of theirs. As we have remarked 
already, three hundred years have not yet passed in our existence; but what vast 
scourges before that time fell on all the world, on its various cities and 
provinces! what terrible wars, both foreign and domestic! what pestilences, 
famines, conflagrations, yawnings, and quakings of the earth has history 
recorded! Where were the Christians, then, when the Roman state furnished so 
many chronicles of its disasters? Where were the Christians when the islands 
Hiera, Anaphe, and Delos, and Rhodes, and Cea were desolated with multitudes of 
men? or, again, when the land mentioned by Plato as larger than Asia or Africa 
was sunk in the Atlantic Sea? or when fire from heaven overwhelmed Volsinii, and 
flames from their own mountain consumed Pompeii? when the sea of Corinth was 
engulphed by an earthquake? when the whole world was destroyed by the deluge? 
Where then were (I will not say the Christians, who despise your gods, but) your 
gods themselves, who are proved to be of later origin than that great ruin by 
the very places and cities in which they were born, sojourned, and were buried, 
and even those which they founded? For else they would not have remained to the 
present day, unless they had been more recent than that catastrophe, If you do 
not care to peruse and reflect upon these testimonies of history, the record of 
which affects you differently from us, in order 118 
especially that you may not have to tax your gods with extreme injustice, 
since they injure even their worshippers on account of their despisers, do you 
not then prove yourselves to be also in the wrong, when you hold them to be 
gods, who make no distinction between the deserts of yourselves and profane 
persons? If, however, as it is now and then very vainly said, you incur the 
chastisement of your gods because you are too slack in our extirpation, you then 
have settled the question of their weakness and insignificance; for they would 
not be angry with you for loitering over our punishment, if they could do 
anything themselves,--although you admit the same thing indeed in another way, 
whenever by inflicting punishment on us you seem to be avenging them. If one 
interest is maintained by another party, that which defends is the greater of 
the two. What a shame, then, must it be for gods to be defended by a human 
being! 
CHAP. X.--THE CHRISTIANS ARE NOT THE ONLY CONTEMNERS OF THE GODS. CONTEMPT 
OF THEM OFTEN DISPLAYED BY HEATHEN OFFICIAL PERSONS. HOMER MADE THE GODS
CONTEMPTIBLE.
Pour out now all your venom; fling against this name of ours all your shafts 
of calumny: I shall stay no longer to refute them; but they shall by and by be 
blunted, when we come to explain our entire discipline. I shall content myself 
now indeed with plucking these shafts out of our own body, and hurling them back 
on yourselves. The same wounds which you have inflicted on us by your charges I 
shall show to be imprinted on yourselves, that you may fall by your own swords 
and javelins. Now, first, when you direct against us the general charge of 
divorcing ourselves from the institutions of our forefathers, consider again and 
again whether you are not yourselves open to that accusation in common with us. 
For when I look through your life and customs, lo, what do I discover but the 
old order of things corrupted, nay, destroyed by you? Of the laws I have already 
said, that you are daily supplanting them with novel decrees and statutes. As to 
everything else in your manner of life, how great are the changes you have made 
from your ancestors--in your style, your dress, your equipage, your very food, 
and even in your speech; for the old-fashioned you banish, as if it were 
offensive to you! Everywhere, in your public pursuits and private duties, 
antiquity is repealed; all the authority of your forefathers your own authority 
has superseded. To be sure, you are for ever praising old customs; but this is 
only to your greater discredit, for you nevertheless persistently reject them. 
How great must your perverseness have been, to have bestowed approbation on 
your ancestors' institutions, which were too inefficient to be lasting, all the 
while that you were rejecting the very objects of your approbation! But even 
that very heir-loom of your forefathers, which you seem to guard and defend with 
greatest fidelity, in which you actually find your strongest grounds for 
impeaching us as violators of the law, and from which your hatred of the 
Christian name derives all its life--I mean the worship of the gods--I 
shall prove to be undergoing ruin and contempt from yourselves no less than 
(from us),--unless it be that there is no reason for our being regarded as 
despisers of the gods like yourselves, on the ground that nobody despises what 
he knows has absolutely no existence. What certainly exists can be despised. 
That which is nothing, suffers nothing. From those, therefore, to whom it is 
an existing thing, must necessarily proceed the suffering which affects it. 
All the heavier, then, is the accusation which burdens you who believe that 
there are gods and (at the same time) despise them, who worship and also reject 
them, who honour and also assail them. One may also gather the same conclusion 
from this consideration, above all: since you worship various gods, some one and 
some another, you of course despise those which you do not worship. A preference 
for the one is not possible without slighting the other, and no choice can be 
made without a rejection. He who selects some one out of many, has already 
slighted the other which he does not select. But it is impossible that so many 
and so great gods can be worshipped by all. Then you must have exercised your 
contempt (in this matter) even at the beginning, since indeed you were not then 
afraid of so ordering things, that all the gods could not become objects of 
worship to all. For those very wise and prudent ancestors of yours, whose 
institutions you know not how to repeal, especially in respect of your gods, are 
themselves found to have been impious. I am much mistaken, if they did not 
sometimes decree that no general should dedicate a temple, which he may have 
vowed in battle, before the senate gave its sanction; as in the case of Marcus 
AEmilius, who had made 119 
a vow to the god Alburnus. Now is it not confessedly the greatest impiety, 
nay, the greatest insult, to place the honour of the Deity at the will and 
pleasure of human judgment, so that there cannot be a god except the senate 
permit him? Many times have the censors destroyed (a god) without consulting the 
people. Father Bacchus, with all his ritual, was certainly by the consuls, on 
the seate's authority, cast not only out of the city, but out of all Italy; 
whilst Varro informs us that Serapis also, and Isis, and Arpocrates, and Anubis, 
were excluded from the Capitol, and that their altars which the senate had 
thrown down were only restored by the popular violence. The Consul Gabinius, 
however, on the first day of the ensuing January, although he gave a tardy 
consent to some sacrifices, in deference to the crowd which assembled, because 
he had failed to decide about Serapis and Isis, yet held the judgment of the 
senate to be more potent than the clamour of the multitude, and forbade the 
altars to be built. Here, then, you have amongst your own forefathers, if not 
the name, at all events the procedure, of the Christians, which despises the 
gods. If, however, you were even innocent of the charge of treason against them 
in the honour you pay them, I still find that you have made a consistent advance 
in superstition as well as impiety. For how much more irreligious are you found 
to be! There are your household gods, the Lares and the Penates, which you 
possess by a family consecration: you even tread them profanely under foot, you 
and your domestics, by hawking and pawning them for your wants or your whims. 
Such insolent sacrilege might be excusable, if it were not practised against 
your humbler deities; as it is, the case is only the more insolent. There is, 
however, some consolation for your private household gods under these affronts, 
that you treat your public deities with still greater indignity and insolence. 
First of all, you advertise them for auction, submit them to public sale, knock 
them down to the highest bidder, when you every five years bring them to the 
hammer among your revenues. For this purpose you frequent the temple of Serapis 
or the Capitol, hold your sales there, conclude your contracts, as if they were 
markets, with the well-known voice of the crier, (and) the self-same levy of the 
quaestor. Now lands become cheaper when burdened with tribute, and men by the 
capitation tax diminish in value (these are the well-known marks of slavery). 
But the gods, the more tribute they pay, become more holy; or rather, the more 
holy they are, the more tribute do they pay. Their majesty is converted into an 
article of traffic; men drive a business with their religion; the sanctity of 
the gods is beggared with sales and contracts. You make merchandise of the 
ground of your temples, of the approach to your altars, of your offerings, of 
your sacrifices. You sell the whole divinity (of your gods). You will not permit 
their gratuitous worship. The auctioneers necessitate more repairs than the 
priests. It was not enough that you had insolently made a profit of your gods, 
if we would test the amount of your contempt; and you are not content to have 
withheld honour from them, you must also depreciate the little you do render to 
them by some indignity or other. What, indeed, do you do by way of honouring 
your gods, which you do not equally offer to your dead? You build temples for 
the gods, you erect temples also to the dead; you build altars for the gods, you 
build them also for the dead; you inscribe the same superscription over both; 
you sketch out the same lineaments for their statues--as best suits their 
genius, or profession, or age; you make an old man of Saturn, a beardless youth 
of Apollo; you form a virgin from Diana; in Mars you consecrate a soldier, a 
blacksmith in Vulcan. No wonder, therefore, if you slay the same victims and 
burn the same odours for your dead as you do for your gods. What excuse can be 
found for that insolence which classes the dead of whatever sort as equal with 
the gods? Even to your princes there are assigned the services of priests and 
sacred ceremonies, and chariots, and cars, and the honours of the solisternia 
and the lectisternia, holidays and games. Rightly enough, since heaven is open 
to them; still it is none the less contumelious to the gods: in the first place, 
because it could not possibly be decent that other beings should be numbered 
with them, even if it has been given to them to become divine after their birth; 
in the second place, because the witness who beheld the man caught up into 
heaven would not forswear himself so freely and palpably before the people, if 
it were not for the con 120 
tempt felt about the objects sworn to both by himself and those who allow the 
perjury. For these feel of themselves, that what is sworn to is nothing; and 
more than that, they go so far as to fee the witness, because he had the courage 
to publicly despise the avengers of perjury. Now, as to that, who among you is 
pure of the charge of perjury? By this time, indeed, there is an end to all 
danger in swearing by the gods, since the oath by Caesar carries with it more 
influential scruples, which very circumstance indeed tends to the degradation of 
your gods; for those who perjure themselves when swearing by Caesar are more 
readily punished than those who violate an oath to a Jupiter. 
But, of the two kindred feelings of contempt and derision, contempt is the 
more honourable, having a certain glory in its arrogance; for it sometimes 
proceeds from confidence, or the security of consciousness, or a natural 
loftiness of mind. Derision, however, is a more wanton feeling, and so far it 
points more directly to a carping insolence. Now only consider what great 
deriders of your gods you show yourselves to be! I say nothing of your 
indulgence of this feeling during your sacrificial acts, how you offer for your 
victims the poorest and most emaciated creatures; or else of the sound and 
healthy animals only the portions which are useless for food, such as the heads 
and hoofs, or the plucked feathers and hair, and whatever at home you would have 
thrown away. I pass over whatever may seem to the taste of the vulgar and 
profane to have constituted the religion of your forefathers; but then the most 
learned and serious classes (for seriousness and wisdom to some extent profess 
to be derived from learning) are always, in fact, the most irreverent towards 
your gods; and if their learning ever halts, it is only to make up for the 
remissness by a more shameful invention of follies and falsehoods about their 
gods. I will begin with that enthusiastic fondness which you show for him from 
whom every depraved writer gets his dreams, to whom you ascribe as much honour 
as you derogate from your gods, by magnifying him who has made such sport of 
them. I mean Homer by this description. He it is, in my opinion, who has treated 
the majesty of the Divine Being on the low level of human condition, imbuing the 
gods with the falls and the passions of men; who has pitted them against each 
other with varying success, like pairs of gladiators: he wounds Venus with an 
arrow from a human hand; he keeps Mars a prisoner in chains for thirteen months, 
with the prospect of perishing; he parades Jupiter as suffering a like indignity 
from a crowd of celestial (rebels;) or he draws from him tears for Sarpedon; or 
he represents him wantoning with Juno in the most disgraceful way, advocating 
his incestuous passion for her by a description and enumeration of his various 
amours. Since then, which of the poets has not, on the authority of their great 
prince, calumniated the gods, by either betraying truth or feigning falsehood? 
Have the dramatists also, whether in tragedy or comedy, refrained from making 
the gods the authors of the calamities and retributions (of their plays)? I say 
nothing of your philosophers, whom a certain inspiration of truth itself 
elevates against the gods, and secures from all fear in their proud severity and 
stern discipline. Take, for example, Socrates. In contempt of your gods, he 
swears by an oak, and a dog, and a goat. Now, although he was condemned to die 
for this very reason, the Athenians afterwards repented of that condemnation, 
and even put to death his accusers. By this conduct of theirs the testimony of 
Socrates is replaced at its full value, and I am enabled to meet you with this 
retort, that in his case you have approbation bestowed on that which is 
now-a-days reprobated in us. But besides this instance there is Diogenes, who, I 
know not to what extent, made sport of Hercules; whilst Varro, that Diogenes of 
the Roman cut, introduces to our view some three hundred Joves, or, as they 
ought to be called, Jupiters, (and all) without heads. Your other wanton wits 
likewise minister to your pleasures by disgracing the gods. Examine carefully 
the sacrilegious beauties of your Lentuli and Hostii; now, is it the players or 
your gods who become the objects of your mirth in their tricks and jokes? Then, 
again, with what pleasure do you take up the literature of the stage, which 
describes all the foul conduct of the gods! Their majesty is defiled in your 
presence in some unchaste body. The mask of some deity, at your will, covers 
some infamous paltry head. The Sun mourns for the death of his son by a 
lightning-flash amid your rude rejoicing. 
121 
Cybele sighs for a shepherd who disdains her, without raising a blush on your 
cheek; and you quietly endure songs which celebrate the gallantries of Jove. You 
are, of course, possessed of a more religious spirit in the show of your 
gladiators, when your gods dance, with equal zest, over the spilling of human 
blood, (and) over those filthy penalties which are at once their proof and plot 
for executing your criminals, or else (when) your criminals are punished 
personating the gods themselves. We have often witnessed in a mutilated criminal 
your god of Pessinum, Attis; a wretch burnt alive has personated Hercules. We 
have laughed at the sport of your mid-day game of the gods, when Father Pluto, 
Jove's own brother, drags away, hammer in hand, the remains of the gladiators; 
when Mercury, with his winged cap and heated wand, tests with his cautery 
whether the bodies were really lifeless, or only feigning death. Who now can 
investigate every particular of this sort although so destructive of the honour 
of the Divine Being, and so humiliating to His majesty? They all, indeed, have 
their origin in a contempt (of the gods), on the part both of those who practise 
these personations, as well as of those who are susceptible of being so 
represented. I hardly know, therefore, whether your gods have more reason to 
complain of yourselves or of us. After despising them on the one hand, you 
flatter them on the other; if you fail in any duty towards them, you appease 
them with a fee; in short, you allow yourselves to act towards them in any way 
you please. We, however, live in a consistent and entire aversion to them. 
CHAP. XI.--THE ABSURD CAVIL OF THE ASS'S
HEAD DISPOSED OF.
In this matter we are (said to be) guilty not merely of forsaking the 
religion of the community, but of introducing a monstrous superstition; for some 
among you have dreamed that our god is an ass's head,--an absurdity which 
Cornelius Tacitus first suggested. In the fourth book of his histories, where he 
is treating of the Jewish war, he begins his description with the origin of that 
nation, and gives his own views respecting both the origin and the name of their 
religion. He relates that the Jews, in their migration in the desert, when 
suffering for want of water, escaped by following for guides some wild asses, 
which they supposed to be going in quest of water after pasture, and that on 
this account the image of one of these animals was worshipped by the Jews. From 
this, I suppose, it was presumed that we, too, from our close connection with 
the Jewish religion, have ours consecrated under the same emblematic form. The 
same Cornelius Tacitus, however,--who, to say the truth, is most loquacious in 
falsehood--forgetting his later statement, relates how Pompey the Great, after 
conquering the Jews and capturing Jerusalem, entered the temple, but found 
nothing in the shape of an image, though he examined the place carefully. Where, 
then, should their God have been found? Nowhere else, of course than in so 
memorable a temple which was carefully shut to all but the priests, and into 
which there could be no fear of a stranger entering. But what apology must I 
here offer for what I am going to say, when I have no other object at the moment 
than to make a passing remark or two in a general way which shall be equally 
applicable to yourselves? Suppose that our God, then, be an asinine person, will 
you at all events deny that you possess the same characteristics with ourselves 
in that matter? (Not their heads only, but) entire asses, are, to be sure, 
objects of adoration to you, along with their tutelar Epona; and all herds, and 
cattle, and beasts you consecrate, and their stables into the bargain! This, 
perhaps, is your grievance against us, that, when surrounded by 
cattle-worshippers of every kind we are simply devoted to asses! 
CHAP. XII.--THE CHARGE OF WORSHIPPING A CROSS. THE HEATHENS THEMSELVES 
MADE MUCH OF CROSSES IN SACRED THINGS; NAY, THEIR VERY IDOLS WERE FORMED ON A 
CRUCIAL FRAME.
As for him who affirms that we are "the 122 
priesthood of a cross," we shall claim him as our co-religionist. A cross is, 
in its material, a sign of wood; amongst yourselves also the object of worship 
is a wooden figure. Only, whilst with you the figure is a human one, with us the 
wood is its own figure. Never mind for the present what is the shape, provided 
the material is the same: the form, too, is of no importance, if so be it be the 
actual body of a god. If, however, there arises a question of difference on this 
point what, (let me ask,) is the difference between the Athenian Pallas, or the 
Pharian Ceres, and wood formed into a cross, when each is represented by a rough 
stock, without form, and by the merest rudiment of a statue of unformed wood? 
Every piece of timber which is fixed in the ground in an erect position is a 
part of a cross, and indeed the greater portion of its mass. But an entire cross 
is attributed to us, with its transverse beam, of course, and its projecting 
seat. Now you have the less to excuse you, for you dedicate to religion only a 
mutilated imperfect piece of wood, while others consecrate to the sacred purpose 
a complete structure. The truth, however, after all is, that your religion is 
all cross, as I shall show. You are indeed unaware that your gods in their 
origin have proceeded from this hated cross. Now, every image, whether carved 
out of wood or stone, or molten in metal, or produced out of any other richer 
material, must needs have had plastic hands engaged in its formation. Well, 
then, this modeller, before he did anything else, hit upon the form of a wooden 
cross, because even our own body assumes as its natural position the latent and 
concealed outline of a cross. Since the head rises upwards, and the back takes a 
straight direction, and the shoulders project laterally, if you simply place a 
man with his arms and hands outstretched, you will make the general outline of a 
cross. Starting, then, from this rudimental form and prop, as it were, he 
applies a covering of clay, and so gradually completes the limbs, and forms the 
body, and covers the cross within with the shape which he meant to impress upon 
the clay; then from this design, with the help of compasses and leaden moulds, 
he has got all ready for his image which is to be brought out into marble, or 
clay, or whatever the material be of which he has determined to make his god. 
(This, then, is the process:) after the cross-shaped frame, the clay; after the 
clay, the god. In a well-understood routine, the cross passes into a god through 
the clayey medium. The cross then you consecrate, and from it the consecrated 
(deity) begins to derive his origin. By way of example, let us take the case of 
a tree which grows up into a system of branches and foliage, and is a 
reproduction of its own kind, whether it springs from the kernel of an olive, or 
the stone of a peach, or a grain of pepper which has been duly tempered under 
ground. Now, if you transplant it, or take a cutting off its branches for 
another plant, to what will you attribute what is produced by the propagation? 
Will it not be to the grain, or the stone, or the kernel? Because, as the third 
stage is attributable to the second, and the second in like manner to the first, 
so the third will have to be referred to the first, through the second as the 
mean. We need not stay any longer in the discussion of this point, since by a 
natural law every kind of produce throughout nature refers back its growth to 
its original source; and just as the product is comprised in its primal cause, 
so does that cause agree in character with the thing produced. Since, then, in 
the production of your gods, you worship the cross which originates them, here 
will be the original kernel and grain, from which are propagated the wooden 
materials of your idolatrous images. Examples are not far to seek. Your 
victories you celebrate with religious ceremony as deities; and they are the 
more august in proportion to the joy they bring you. The frames on which you 
hang up your trophies must be crosses: these are, as it were, the very core of 
your pageants. Thus, in your victories, the religion of your camp makes even 
crosses objects of worship; your standards it adores, your standards are the 
sanction of its oaths; your standards it prefers before Jupiter himself, But all 
that parade of images, and that display of pure gold, are (as so many) necklaces 
of the crosses. in like manner also, in the banners and ensigns, which your 
soldiers guard with no less sacred care, you have the streamers (and) vestments 
of your crosses. You are ashamed, I suppose, to worship unadorned and simple 
crosses. 
123 
CHAP. XIII.--THE CHARGE OF WORSHIPPING THE SUN MET BY A RETORT.
Others, with greater regard to good manners, it must be confessed, suppose 
that the sun is the god of the Christians, because it is a well-known fact that 
we pray towards the east, or because we make Sunday a day of festivity. What 
then? Do you do less than this? Do not many among you, with an affectation of 
sometimes worshipping the heavenly bodies likewise, move your lips in the 
direction of the sunrise? It is you, at all events, who have even admitted the 
sun into the calendar of the week; and you have selected its day, in preference 
to the preceding day as the most suitable in the week for either an entire 
abstinence from the bath, or for its postponement until the evening, or for 
taking rest and for banqueting. By resorting to these customs, you deliberately 
deviate from your own religious rites to those of strangers. For the Jewish 
feasts an the Sabbath and "the Purification," and Jewish also are the ceremonies 
of the lamps, and the fasts of unleavened bread, and the "littoral prayers," all 
which institutions and practices are of course foreign from your gods. 
Wherefore, that I may return from this digression, you who reproach us with the 
sun and Sunday should consider your proximity to us. We are not far off from 
your Saturn and your days of rest. 
CHAP. XIV.--THE VILE CALUMNY ABOUT ONOCOETES RETORTED ON THE HEATHEN BY 
TERTULLIAN.
Report has introduced a new calumny respecting our God. Not so long ago, a 
most abandoned wretch in that city of yours, a man who had deserted indeed his 
own religion--a Jew, in fact, who had only lost his skin, flayed of course by 
wild beasts, against which he enters the lists for hire day after day with a 
sound body, and so in a condition to lose his skin--carried about in public a 
caricature of us with this label: Onocoetes. This (figure) had ass's ears, and 
was dressed in a toga with a book, having a hoof on one of his feet. And the 
crowd believed this infamous Jew. For what other set of men is the seed-plot of 
all the calumny against us? Throughout the city, therefore, Onocoetes is all the 
talk. As, however, it is less then "a nine days' wonder," and so destitute of 
all authority from time, and weak enough from the character of its author, I 
shall gratify myself by using it simply in the way of a retort. Let us then see 
whether you are not here also found in our company. Now it matters not what 
their form may be, when our concern is about deformed images. You have amongst 
you gods with a dog's head, and a lion's head, with the horns of a cow, and a 
ram, and a goat, goat-shaped or serpent-shaped, and winged in foot, head, and 
back. Why therefore brand our one God so conspicuously? Many an Onocoetes is 
found amongst yourselves. 
CHAP. XV.--THE CHARGE OF INFANTICIDE RETORTED ON THE HEATHEN.
Since we are on a par in respect of the gods, it follows that there is no 
difference between us on the point of sacrifice, or even of worship, if I may be 
allowed to make good our comparison from another sort of evidence. We begin our 
religious service, or initiate our mysteries, with slaying an infant. As for 
you, since your own transactions in human blood and infanticide have faded from 
your memory, you shall be duly reminded of them in the proper place; we now 
postpone most of the instances, that we may not seem to be everywhere handling 
the selfsame topics. Meanwhile, as I have said, the comparison between us does 
not fail in another point of view. For if we are infanticides in one sense, you 
also can hardly be deemed such in any other sense; because, although you are 
forbidden by the laws to slay new-born infants, it so happens that no laws are 
evaded with more impunity or greater safety, with the deliberate knowledge of 
the public, and the suffrages of this entire age. Yet there is no great 
difference between us, only you do not kill your infants in the way of a sacred 
rite, nor (as a service) to God. But then you make away with them in a more 
cruel manner, 124 
because you expose them to the cold and hunger, and to wild beasts, or else 
you get rid of them by the slower death of drowning. If, however, there does 
occur any dissimilarity between us in this matter, you must not overlook the 
fact that it is your own dear children whose life you quench; and this will 
supplement, nay, abundantly aggravate, on your side of the question, whatever is 
defective in us on other grounds. Well, but we are said to sup off our impious 
sacrifice! Whilst we postpone to a more suitable place whatever resemblance even 
to this practice is discoverable amongst yourselves, we are not far removed from 
you in voracity. If in the one case there is unchastity, and in ours cruelty, we 
are still on the same footing (if I may so far admit our guilt) in nature, where 
cruelty is always found in concord with unchastity. But, after all, what do you 
less than we; or rather, what do you not do in excess of us? I wonder whether it 
be a small matter to you to pant for human entrails, because you devour 
full-grown men alive? Is it, forsooth, only a trifle to lick up human blood, 
when you draw out the blood which was destined to live? Is it a light thing in 
your view to feed on an infant, when you consume one wholly before it is come to 
the birth? 
CHAP. XVI.--OTHER CHARGES REPELLED BY THE SAME METHOD. THE STORY OF THE 
NOBLE ROMAN YOUTH AND HIS PARENTS,
I am now come to the hour for extinguishing the lamps, and for using the 
dogs, and practising the deeds of darkness. And on this point I am afraid I must 
succumb to you; for what similar accusation shall I have to bring against you? 
But you should at once commend the cleverness with which we make our incest look 
modest, in that we have devised a spurious night, to avoid polluting the real 
light and darkness, and have even thought it right to dispense with earthly 
lights, and to play tricks also with our conscience. For whatever we do 
ourselves, we suspect in others when we choose (to be suspicious). As for your 
incestuous deeds, on the contrary, men enjoy them at full liberty, in the face 
of day, or in the natural night, or before high Heaven; and in proportion to 
their successful issue is your own ignorance of the result, since you publicly 
indulge in your incestuous intercourse in the full cognizance of broad 
day-light. (No ignorance, however, conceals our conduct from our eyes,) for in 
the very darkness we are able to recognise our own misdeeds. The Persians, you 
know very well, according to Ctesias, live quite promiscuously with their 
mothers, in full knowledge of the fact, and without any horror; whilst of the 
Macedonians it is well known that they constantly do the same thing, and with 
perfect approbation: for once, when the blinded OEdipus came upon their stage, 
they greeted him with laughter and derisive cheers. The actor, taking off his 
mask in great alarm, said, "Gentlemen, have I displeased you?" "Certainly not," 
replied the Macedonians, "you have played your part well enough; but either the 
author was very silly, if he invented (this mutilation as an atonement for the 
incest), or else OEdipus was a great fool for his pains if he really so punished 
himself;" and then they shouted out one to the other, Hlsune eis
thn mhtera. But how insignificant, (say you,) is the stain which 
one or two nations can make on the whole world! As for us, we of course have 
infected the very sun, polluted the entire ocean! Quote, then, one nation which 
is free from the passions which allure the whole race of men to incest! If there 
is a single nation which knows nothing of concubinage through the necessity of 
age and sex--to say nothing of lust and licentiousness--that nation will be a 
stranger to incest. If any nature can be found so peculiarly removed from the 
human state as to be liable neither to ignorance, nor error, nor misfortune, 
that alone may be adduced with any consistency as an answer to the Christians. 
Reflect, therefore, on the licentiousness which floats about amongst men's 
passions as if they were the winds, and consider whether there be any 
communities which the full and strong tides of passion fail to waft to the 
commission of this great sin. In the first place, when you expose your infants 
to the mercy of others, or leave them for adoption to better parents than 
yourselves, do you forget what an opportunity for incest is furnished, how wide 
a scope is opened for its accidental commission? Undoubtedly, such of you as are 
more serious from a principle of self-restraint and careful reflection, abstain 
from lusts which could produce results of such a kind, in whatever place you may 
happen to be, at home or abroad, so that no indiscriminate diffusion of seed, or 
licentious reception thereof, will produce chil 125 
dren to you unawares, such as their very parents, or else other children, 
might encounter in inadvertent incest, for no restraint from age is regarded in 
(the importunities of) lust. All acts of adultery, all cases of fornication, all 
the licentiousness of public brothels, whether committed at home or perpetrated 
out of doors, serve to produce confusions of blood and complications of natural 
relationship, and thence to conduce to incest; from which consummation your 
players and buffoons draw the materials of their exhibitions. It was from such a 
source, too, that so flagrant a tragedy recently burst upon the public as that 
which the prefect Fuscianus had judicially to decide. A boy of noble birth, who, 
by the unintentional neglect of his attendants, had strolled too far from home, 
was decoyed by some passers-by, and carried off. The paltry Greek who had the 
care of him, or somebody else, in true Greek fashion, had gone into the house 
and captured him. Having been taken away into Asia, he is brought, when arrived 
at full age, back to Rome, and exposed for sale. His own father buys him 
unawares, and treats him as a Greek. Afterwards, as was his wont, the youth is 
sent by his master into the fields, chained as a slave. Thither the tutor and 
the nurse had already been banished for punishment. The whole case is 
represented to them; they relate each other's misfortunes: they, on the one 
hand, how they had lost their ward when he was a boy; he, on the other hand, 
that he had been lost from his boyhood. But they agreed in the main, that he was 
a native of Rome of a noble family; perhaps he further gave sure proofs of his 
identity. Accordingly, as God willed it for the purpose of fastening a stain 
upon that age, a presentiment about the time excites him, the periods exactly 
suit his age, even his eyes help to recall his features, some peculiar marks on 
his body are enumerated His master and mistress, who are now no other than his 
own father and mother, anxiously urge a protracted inquiry. The slave-dealer is 
examined, the unhappy truth is all discovered. When their wickedness becomes 
manifest, the parents find a remedy for their despair by hanging themselves; to 
their son, who survives the miserable calamity, their property is awarded by the 
prefect, not as an inheritance, but as the wages of infamy and incest. That one 
case was a sufficient example for public exposure of the sins of this sort which 
are secretly perpetrated among you. Nothing happens among men in solitary 
isolation. But, as it seems to me, it is only in a solitary case that such a 
charge can be drawn out against us, even in the mysteries of our religion. You 
ply us evermore with this charge; yet there are like delinquencies to be traced 
amongst you, even in your ordinary course of life. 
CHAP. XVII.--THE CHRISTIAN REFUSAL TO SWEAR BY THE GENIUS OF CAESAR. 
FLIPPANCY AND IRREVERENCE RETORTED ON THE HEATHEN.
As to your charges of obstinacy and presumption, whatever you allege against 
us, even in these respects, there are not wanting points in which you will bear 
a comparison with us. Our first step in this contumacious conduct concerns that 
which is ranked by you immediately after the worship due to God, that is, the 
worship due to the majesty of the Caesars, in respect of which we are charged 
with being irreligious towards them, since we neither propititate their images 
nor swear by their genius. We are called enemies of the people. Well, be it so; 
yet at the same time (it must not be forgotten, that) the emperors find enemies 
amongst you heathen, and are constantly getting surnames to signalize their 
triumphs--one becoming Parthicus, and another Medicus and Germanicus. On this 
head the Roman people must see to it who they are amongst whom there still 
remain nations which are unsubdued and foreign to their rule. But, at all 
events, you are of us, and yet you conspire against us. (In reply, we need only 
state) a well-known fact, that we acknowledge the fealty of Romans to the 
emperors. No conspiracy has ever broken out from our body: no Caesar's blood has 
ever fixed a stain upon us, in the senate or even in the palace; no assumption 
of the purple has ever in any of the provinces been affected by us. The Syrias 
still exhale the odours of their corpses; still do the Gauls fail to wash away 
(their blood) in the waters of their Rhone. our allegations of our insanity I 
omit, be 126 
cause they do not compromise the Roman name. But I will grapple with the 
charge of sacrilegious vanity, and remind you of the irreverence of your own 
lower classes, and the scandalous lampoons of which the statues are so 
cognizant, and the sneers which are sometimes uttered at the public games, and 
the curses with which the circus resounds. If not in arms, you are in tongue at 
all events always rebellious. But I suppose it is quite another affair to refuse 
to swear by the genius of Caesar? For it is fairly open to doubt as to who are 
perjurers on this point, when you do not swear honestly even by your gods. Well, 
we do not call the emperor God; for on this point sannam facimus, as the saying 
is. But the truth is, that you who call Caesar God both mock him, by calling him 
what he is not, and curse him, because he does not want to be what you call him. 
For he prefers living to being made a god. 
CHAP. XVIII.--CHRISTIANS CHARGED WITH AN OBSTINATE CONTEMPT OF 
DEATH. INSTANCES OF THE SAME ARE FOUND AMONGST THE HEATHEN.
The rest of your charge of obstinacy against us you sum up in this 
indictment, that we boldly refuse neither your swords, nor your crosses, nor 
your wild beasts, nor fire, nor tortures, such is our obduracy and contempt of 
death. But (you are inconsistent in your charges); for in former times amongst 
your own ancestors all these terrors have come in men's intrepidity not only to 
be despised, but even to be held in great praise. How many swords there were, 
and what brave men were willing to suffer by them, it were irksome to enumerate. 
(If we take the torture) of the cross, of which so many instances have occurred, 
exquisite in cruelty, your own Regulus readily initiated the suffering which up 
to his day was without a precedent; a queen of Egypt used wild beasts of her own 
(to accomplish her death); the Carthaginian woman, who in the last extremity of 
her country was more courageous than her husband Asdrubal, only followed the 
example, set long before by Dido herself, of going through fire to her death. 
Then, again, a woman of Athens defied the tyrant, exhausted his tortures, and at 
last, lest her person and sex might succumb through weakness, she bit off her 
tongue and spat out of her mouth the only possible instrument of a confession 
which was now out of her power. But in your own instance you account such deeds 
glorious, in ours obstinate. Annihilate now the glory of your ancestors, in 
order that you may thereby annihilate us also. Be content from henceforth to 
repeal the praises of your forefathers, in order that you may not have to accord 
commendation to us for the same (sufferings). Perhaps (you will say) the 
character of a more robust age may have rendered the spirits of antiquity more 
enduring. Now, however, (we enjoy) the blessing of quietness and peace; so that 
the minds and dispositions of men (should be) more tolerant even towards 
strangers. Well, you rejoin, be it so: you may compare yourselves with the 
ancients; we must needs pursue with hatred all that we find in you offensive to 
ourselves, because it does not obtain currency among us. Answer me, then, on 
each particular case by itself. I am not seeking for examples on a uniform 
scale. Since, forsooth, the sword through their contempt of death produced 
stories of heroism amongst your ancestors, it is not, of course, from love of 
life that you go to the trainers sword in hand and offer yourselves as 
gladiators, (nor) through fear of death do you enrol your names in the army. 
Since an ordinary woman makes her death famous by wild beasts, it cannot but be 
of your own pure accord that you encounter wild beasts day after day in the 
midst of peaceful times. Although no longer any Regulus among you has raised a 
cross as the instrument of his own crucifixion, yet a contempt of the fire has 
even now displayed itself, since one of yourselves very lately has offered for a 
wager to go to any place which may be fixed upon and put on the burning shirt. 
If a woman once defiantly danced beneath the scourge, the same feat has been 
very recently performed again by one of your own (circus-) hunters as he 
traversed the 127 
appointed course, not to mention the famous sufferings of the Spartans. 
CHAP. XIX.--IF CHRISTIANS AND THE HEATHEN THUS RESEMBLE EACH OTHER, THERE 
IS GREAT DIFFERENCE IN THE GROUNDS AND NATURE OF THEIR APPARENTLY SIMILAR 
CONDUCT.
Here end, I suppose, your tremendous charges of obstinacy against the 
Christians. Now, since we are amenable to them in common with yourselves, it 
only remains that we compare the grounds which the respective parties have for 
being personally derided. All our obstinacy, however, is with you a foregone 
conclusion, based on our strong convictions; for we take for granted a 
resurrection of the dead. Hope in this resurrection amounts to a contempt of 
death. Ridicule, therefore, as much as you like the excessive stupidity of such 
minds as die that they may live; but then, in order that you may be able to 
laugh more merrily, and deride us with greater boldness, you must take your 
sponge, or perhaps your tongue, and wipe away those records of yours every now 
and then cropping out, which assert in not dissimilar terms that souls will 
return to bodies. But how much more worthy of acceptance is our belief which 
maintains that they will return to the same bodies! And how much more ridiculous 
is your inherited conceit, that the human spirit is to reappear in a dog, or a 
mule, or a peacock! Again, we affirm that a judgment has been ordained by God 
according to the merits of every man. This you ascribe to Minos and 
Rhadamanthus, while at the same time you reject Aristides, who was a juster 
judge than either. By the award of the judgment, we say that the wicked will 
have to spend an eternity in endless fire, the pious and innocent in a region of 
bliss. In your view likewise an unalterable condition is ascribed to the 
respective destinations of Pyriphlegethon and Elysium. Now they are not merely 
your composers of myth and poetry who write songs of this strain; but your 
philosophers also speak with all confidence of the return of souls to their 
former state, and of the twofold award of a final judgment. 
CHAP. XX.--TRUTH AND REALITY PERTAIN TO CHRISTIANS ALONE. THE HEATHEN 
COUNSELLED TO EXAMINE AND EMBRACE IT.
How long therefore, O most unjust heathen, will you refuse to acknowledge us, 
and (what is more) to execrate your own (worthies), since between us no 
distinction has place, because we are one and the same? Since you do not (of 
course) hate what you yourselves are, give us rather your right hands in 
fellowship, unite your salutations, mingle your embraces, sanguinary with the 
sanguinary, incestuous with the Incestuous, conspirators with conspirators, 
obstinate and vain with those of the selfsame qualities. In company with each 
other, we have been traitors to the majesty of the gods; and together do we 
provoke their indignation. You too have your "third race;" not indeed third in 
the way of religious rite, but a third race in sex, and, made up as it is of 
male and female in one, it is more fitted to men and women (for offices of 
lust). Well, then, do we offend you by the very fact of our approximation and 
agreement? Being on a par is apt to furnish unconsciously the materials for 
rivalry. Thus "a potter envies a potter, and a smith a smith." But we must now 
discontinue this imaginary confession. Our conscience has returned to the truth, 
and to the consistency of truth. For all those points which you allege (against 
us) will be really found in ourselves alone; and we alone can rebut them, 
against whom they are adduced, by getting you to listen to the other side of the 
question, whence that full knowledge is learnt which both inspires counsel and 
directs the judgment. Now it is in fact your own maxim, that no one should 
determine a cause without hearing both sides of it; and it is only in our own 
case that you neglect (the equitable principle). You indulge to the full that 
fault of human nature, that those things which you do not disallow in yourselves 
you condemn in others, or you boldly charge against others those things the 
guilt of which you retain a lasting consciousness of in yourselves. The course 
of life in which you will choose to occupy yourselves is different from ours: 
whilst chaste in the eyes of others, you are 128 
unchaste towards your own selves; whilst vigorous against vice out of doors, 
you succumb to it at home. This is the injustice (which we have to suffer), 
that, knowing truth, we are condemned by those who know it not; free from guilt, 
we are judged by those who are implicated in it. Remove the mote, or rather the 
beam, out of your own eye, that you may be able to extract the mote from the 
eyes of others. Amend your own lives first, that you may be able to punish the 
Christians. Only so far as you shall have effected your own reformation, will 
you refuse to inflict punishment on them--nay, so far will you have become 
Christians yourselves; and as you shall have become Christians, so far will you 
have compassed your own amendment of life. Learn what that is which you accuse 
in us, and you will accuse no longer; search out what that is which you do not 
accuse in yourselves, and you will become self-accusers. From these very few and 
humble remarks, so far as we have been able to open out the subject to you, you 
will plainly get some insight into (your own) error, and some discovery of our 
truth. Condemn that truth if you have the heart, but only after you have 
examined it; and approve the error still, if you are so minded, only first 
explore it. But if your prescribed rule is to love error and hate truth, why, 
(let me ask,) do you not probe to a full discovery the objects both of your love 
and your hatred? 
AD NATIONES.
BOOK II. 
CHAP. I.--THE HEATHEN GODS FROM HEATHEN AUTHORITIES. VARRO HAS WRITTEN A 
WORK
ON THE SUBJECT. HIS THREEFOLD CLASSIFICATION. THE CHANGEABLE CHARACTER OF 
THAT
WHICH OUGHT TO BE FIXED AND CERTAIN.
OUR defence requires that we should at this point discuss with you the 
character of your gods, O ye heathen, fit objects of our pity, appealing even to 
your own conscience to determine whether they be truly gods, as you would have 
it supposed, or falsely, as you are unwilling to have proved. Now this is the 
material part of human error, owing to the wiles of its author, that it is never 
free from the ignorance of error, whence your guilt is all the greater. Your 
eyes are open, yet they see not; your ears are unstopped, yet they hear not; 
though your heart beats, it is yet dull, nor does your mind understand that of 
which it is cognizant. If indeed the enormous perverseness (of your worship) 
could be broken up by a single demurrer, we should have our objection ready to 
hand in the declaration that, as we know all those gods of yours to have been 
instituted by men, all belief in the true Deity is by this very circumstance 
brought to nought; because, of course, nothing which some time or other had a 
beginning can rightly seem to be divine. But the fact is, there are many things 
by which tenderness of conscience is hardened into the callousness of wilful 
error. Truth is beleaguered with the vast force (of the enemy), and yet how 
secure she is in her own inherent strength! And naturally enough when from her 
very adversaries she gains to her side whomsoever she will, as her friends and 
protectors, and prostrates the entire host of her assailants. It is therefore 
against these things that our contest lies--against the institutions of our 
ancestors, against the authority of tradition, the laws of our governors, and 
the reasonings of the wise; against antiquity, custom, submission; 
against precedents, prodigies, miracles,--all which things have had their 
part in consolidating that spurious system of your gods. Wishing, then, to 
follow step by step your own commentaries which you have drawn out of your 
theology of every sort (because the authority of learned men goes further with 
you in matters of this kind than the testimony of facts), I have taken and 
abridged the works of Varro; for he in his treatise Concerning Divine Things, 
collected out of ancient digests, has shown himself a serviceable guide for us. 
Now, if I inquire of him who were the subtle inventors of the gods, he points to 
either the philosophers, the peoples, or the poets. For he has made a threefold 
distinction in classifying the gods: one being the physical class, of which the 
philosophers treat; another the mythic class, which is the constant burden of 
the poets; the third, the gentile class, which the nations have adopted each one 
for itself. When, therefore, the philosophers have ingeniously composed their 
physical (theology) out of their 130 
own conjectures, when the poets have drawn their mythical from fables, and 
the (several) nations have forged their gentile (polytheism) according to their 
own will, where in the world must truth be placed? In the conjectures? Well, but 
these are only a doubtful conception. In the fables? But they are at best an 
absurd story. In the popular accounts? This sort of opinion, however, is only 
promiscuous and municipal. Now all things with the philosophers are uncertain, 
because of their variation with the poets all is worthless, because immoral; 
with the nations all is irregular and confused, because dependent on their mere 
choice. The nature of God, however, if it be the true one with which you are 
concerned, is of so definite a character as not to be derived from uncertain 
speculations, nor contaminated with worthless fables, nor determined by 
promiscuous conceits. It ought indeed to be regarded, as it really is, as 
certain, entire, universal, because it is in truth the property of all. Now, 
what god shall I believe? One that has been gauged by vague suspicion? One that 
history has divulged? One that a community has invented? It would be a far 
worthier thing if I believed no god, than one which is open to doubt, or full of 
shame, or the object of arbitrary selection. 
CHAP. II.--PHILOSOPHERS HAD NOT SUCCEEDED! IN DISCOVERING GOD. THE 
UNCERTAINTY AND CONFUSION OF THEIR SPECULATIONS.
But the authority of the physical philosophers is maintained among you as the 
special property. of wisdom. You mean of course, that pure and simple wisdom of 
the philosophers which attests its own weakness mainly by that variety of 
opinion which proceeds from an ignorance of the truth. Now what wise man is so 
devoid of truth, as not to know that God is the Father and Lord of wisdom itself 
and truth? Besides, there is that divine oracle uttered by Solomon: "The fear of 
the Lord," says he," is the beginning of wisdom." But fear has its origin in 
knowledge; for how will a man fear that of which he knows nothing? Therefore he 
who shall have the fear of God, even if he be ignorant of all things else, if he 
has attained to the knowledge and truth of God, will possess full and perfect 
wisdom. This, however, is what philosophy has not clearly realized. For 
although, in their inquisitive disposition to search into all kinds of learning, 
the philosophers may seem to have investigated the sacred Scriptures themselves 
for their antiquity, and to have derived thence some of their opinions; yet 
because they have interpolated these deductions they prove that they have either 
despised them wholly or have not fully believed them, for in other cases also 
the simplicity of truth is shaken by the over-scrupulousness of an irregular 
belief, and that they therefore changed them, as their desire of glory grew, 
into products of their own mind. The consequence of this is, that even that 
which they had discovered degenerated into uncertainty, and there arose from one 
or two drops of truth a perfect flood of argumentation. For after they had 
simply found God, they did not expound Him as they found Him, but rather 
disputed about His quality, and His nature, and even about His abode. The 
Platonists, indeed, (held) Him to care about wordly things, both as the disposer 
and judge thereof. The Epicureans regarded Him as apathetic and inert, and (so 
to say) a non-entity. The Stoics believed Him to be outside of the world; the 
Platonists, within the world. The God whom they had so imperfectly admitted, 
they could neither know nor fear; and therefore they could not be wise, since 
they wandered away indeed from the beginning of wisdom," that is, "the fear of 
God." Proofs are not wanting that among the philosophers there was not only an 
ignorance, but actual doubt, about the divinity. Diogenes, when asked what was 
taking place in heaven, answered by saying, "I have never been up there." Again, 
whether there were any gods, he replied, "I do not know; only there ought to be 
gods." When Croesus inquired of Thales of Miletus what he thought of the gods, 
the latter having taken some time to consider, answered by the word "Nothing." 
Even Socrates denied with an air of certainty those gods of yours. Yet he with a 
like certainty requested that a cock should be sacrificed to AEsculapius. And 
therefore when philosophy, in its practice of defining about God, is detected in 
such uncertainty and inconsistency, 131 
what "fear" could it possibly have had of Him whom it was not competent 
clearly to determine? We have been taught to believe of the world that it is 
god. For such the physical class of theologizers conclude it to be, since they 
have handed down such views about the gods that Dionysius the Stoic divides them 
into three kinds. The first, he supposes, includes those gods which are most 
obvious, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars; the next, those which are not apparent, as 
Neptune; the remaining one, those which are said to have passed from the human 
state to the divine, as Hercules and Amphiaraus. In like manner, Arcesilaus 
makes a threefold form of the divinity--the Olympian, the Astral, the 
Titanian--sprung from Coelus and Terra; from which through Saturn and Ops came 
Neptune, Jupiter, and Orcus, and their entire progeny. Xenocrates, of the 
Academy, makes a twofold division--the Olympian and the Titanian, which descend 
from Coelus and Terra. Most of the Egyptians believe that there are four 
gods--the Sun and the Moon, the Heaven and the Earth. Along with all the 
supernal fire Democritus conjectures that the gods arose. Zeno, too, will have 
it that their nature resembles it. Whence Varro also makes fire to be the soul 
of the world, that in the world fire governs all things, just as the soul does 
in ourselves. But all this is most absurd. For he says, Whilst it is in us, we 
have existence; but as soon as it has left us, we die. Therefore, when fire 
quits the world in lightning, the world comes to its end. 
CHAP. III.--THE PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHERS MAINTAINED THE DIVINITY OF THE 
ELEMENTS; THE ABSURDITY OF THE TENET EXPOSED.
From these developments of opinion, we see that your physical class of 
philosophers are driven to the necessity of contending that the elements are 
gods, since it alleges that other gods are sprung from them; for it is only from 
gods that gods could be born. Now, although we shall have to examine these other 
gods more fully in the proper place, in the mythic section of the poets, yet, 
inasmuch as we must meanwhile treat of them in their connection with the present 
class, we shall probably even from their present class, when once we turn to the 
gods themselves, succeed in showing that they can by no means appear to be gods 
who are said to be sprung from the elements; so that we have at once a 
presumption that the elements are not gods, since they which are born of the 
elements are not gods. In like manner, whilst we show that the elements are not 
gods, we shall, according to the law of natural relationship, get a presumptive 
argument that they cannot rightly be maintained to be gods whose parents (in 
this case the elements) are not gods. It is a settled point that a god is born 
of a god, and that what lacks divinity is born of what is not divine. Now, so 
far as the world of which your philosophers treat (for I apply this term to the 
universe in the most comprehensive sense) contains the elements, ministering to 
them as its component parts (for whatever its own condition may be, the same of 
course will be that of its elements and constituent portions), it must needs 
have been formed either by some being, according to the enlightened view of 
Plato, or else by none, according to the harsh opinion of Epicurus; and since it 
was formed, by having a beginning, it must also have an end. That, therefore, 
which at one time before its beginning had no existence, and will by and by 
after its end cease to have an existence, cannot of course, by any possibility, 
seem to be a god, wanting as it does that essential character of divinity, 
eternity,which is reckoned to be without beginning, and without end. If, 
however, it is in no wise formed, and therefore ought to be accounted 
divine--since, as divine, it is subject neither to a beginning nor an end of 
itself--how is it that some assign generation to the elements, which they hold 
to be gods, when the Stoics deny that anything can be born of a god? Likewise, 
how is it that they wish those beings, whom they suppose to be born of the 
elements, to be regarded as gods, when they deny that a god can be born? Now, 
what must hold good of the universe will have to be predicated of the elements, 
I mean of heaven, and of earth, and of the stars, and of fire, which Varro has 
vainly proposed that you should believe to be gods, and the parents of gods, 
contrary to that generation and nativity which he had declared to be impossible 
in a god. Now this same Varro had shown that the earth and the 132 
stars were animated. But if this be the case, they must needs be also mortal, 
according to the condition of animated nature; for although the soul is 
evidently immortal, this attribute is limited to it alone: it is not extended to 
that with which it is associated, that is, the body. Nobody, however, will deny 
that the elements have body, since we both touch them and are touched by them, 
and we see certain bodies fall down from them. If, therefore, they are animated, 
laying aside the principle of a soul, as befits their condition as bodies, they 
are mortal--of course not immortal. And yet whence is it that the elements 
appear to Varro to be animated? Because, forsooth, the elements have motion. And 
then, in order to anticipate what may be objected on the other side, that many 
things else have motion--as wheels, as carriages, as several other machines--he 
volunteers the statement that he believes only such things to be animated as 
move of themselves, without any apparent mover or impeller from without, like 
the apparent mover of the wheel, or propeller of the carriage, or director of 
the machine. If, then, they are not animated, they have no motion of themselves. 
Now, when he thus alleges a power which is not apparent, he points to what it 
was his duty to seek after, even the creator and controller of the motion for it 
does not at once follow that, because we do not see a thing, we believe that it 
does not exist. Rather, it is necessary the more profoundly to investigate what 
one does not see, in order the better to understand the character of that which 
is apparent. Besides if (you admit) only the existence of those things which 
appear and are supposed to exist simply because they appear, how is it that you 
also admit them to be gods which do not appear? If, moreover, those things seem 
to have existence which have none, why may they not have existence also which do 
not seem to have it? Such, for instance, as the Mover of the heavenly beings. 
Granted, then, that things are animated because they move of themselves, and 
that they move of themselves when they are not moved by another: still it does 
not follow that they must straightway be gods, because they are animated, nor 
even because they move of themselves; else what is to prevent all animals 
whatever being accounted gods, moving as they do of themselves? This, to be 
sure, is allowed to the Egyptians, but their superstitious vanity has another 
basis. 
CHAP. IV.--WRONG DERIVATION OF THE WORD Qeos. THE NAME INDICATIVE 
OF THE TRUE DEITY. GOD WITHOUT SHAPE AND IMMATERIAL. ANECDOTE OF 
THALES.
Some affirm that the gods (i.e. qeoi) were so called because the verbs 
qeein and seisqai signify to run and to be moved. This term, then, 
is not indicative of any majesty, for it is derived from running and motion, not 
from any dominion of godhead. But inasmuch as the Supreme God whom we worship is 
also designated Qeos, without however the appearance of any course or 
motion in Him, because He is not visible to any one, it is clear that that word 
must have had some other derivation, and that the property of divinity, innate 
in Himself, must have been discovered. Dismissing, then, that ingenious 
interpretation, it is more likely that the gods were not called qeoi from 
running and motion, but that the term was borrowed from the designation of the 
true God; so that you gave the name qeoi to the gods, whom you had in 
like manner forged for yourselves. Now, that this is the case, a plain proof is 
afforded in the fact that you actually give the common appellation qeoi 
to all those gods of yours, in whom there is no attribute of course or motion 
indicated. 
When, therefore, you call them both qeoi and immoveable with equal 
readiness, there is a deviation as well from the meaning of the word as from the 
idea of godhead, which is set aside if measured by the notion of course and 
motion. But if that sacred name be peculiarly significant of deity, and be 
simply true and not of a forced interpretation in the case of the true God, but 
transferred in a borrowed sense to those other objects which you choose to call 
gods, then you ought to show to us that there is also a community of character 
between them, so that their common designation may rightly depend on their union 
of essence. But the true God, on the sole ground that He is not an object of 
sense, is incapable of being compared with those false deities which are 
cognizable to sight and sense (to sense indeed is sufficient); for this amounts 
to a clear statement of the difference between an obscure proof and a manifest 
one. Now, since the elements are obvious to all, (and) since God, on the 
contrary, is visible to none, how will it be in your power from that part 133 
which you have not seen to pass to a decision on the objects which you see? 
Since, therefore, you have not to combine them in your perception or your 
reason, why do you combine them in name with the purpose of combining them also 
in power? For see how even Zeno separates the matter of the world from God: he 
says that the latter has percolated through the former, like honey through the 
comb. God, therefore, and Matter are two words (and) two things. Proportioned to 
the difference of the words is the diversity of the things; the condition also 
of matter follows its designation. Now if matter is not God, because its very 
appellation teaches us so, how can those things which are inherent in 
matter--that is, the elements--be regarded as gods, since the component members 
cannot possibly be heterogeneous from the body? But what concern have I with 
physiological conceits? It were better for one's mind to ascend above the state 
of the world, not to stoop down to uncertain speculations. Plato's form for the 
world was round. Its square, angular shape, such as others had conceived it to 
be, he rounded off, I suppose, with compasses, from his labouring to have it 
believed to be simply without a beginning. Epicurus, however, who had said, 
"What is above us is nothing to us," wished notwithstanding to have a peep at 
the sky, and found the sun to be a foot in diameter. Thus far you must confess 
men were niggardly in even celestial objects. In process of time their ambitious 
conceptions advanced, and so the sun too enlarged its disk. Accordingly, the 
Peripatetics marked it out as a larger world. Now, pray tell me, what wisdom is 
there in this hankering after conjectural speculations? What proof is afforded 
to us, notwithstanding the strong confidence of its assertions, by the useless 
affectation of a scrupulous curiosity, which is tricked out with an artful show 
of language? It therefore served Thales of Miletus quite right, when, 
star-gazing as he walked with all the eyes he had, he had the mortification of 
falling into a well, and was unmercifully twitted by an Egyptian, who said to 
him, "Is it because you found nothing on earth to look at, that you think you 
ought to confine your gaze to the sky?" His fall, therefore, is a figurative 
picture of the philosophers; of those, I mean, who persist in applying their 
studies to a vain purpose, since they indulge a stupid curiosity on natural 
objects, which they ought rather (intelligently to direct) to their Creator and 
Governor. 
CHAP. V.--THE PHYSICAL THEORY CONTINUED. FURTHER REASONS ADVANCED 
AGAINST THE DIVINITY OF THE ELEMENTS.
Why, then, do we not resort to that far more reasonable opinion, which has 
clear proof of being derived from men's common sense and unsophisticated 
deduction? Even Varro bears it in mind, when he says that the elements are 
supposed to be divine, because nothing whatever is capable, without their 
concurrence, of being produced, nourished, or applied to the sustenance of man's 
life and of the earth, since not even our bodies and souls could have sufficed 
in themselves without the modification of the elements. By this it is that the 
world is made generally habitable,--a result which is harmoniously secured by 
the distribution into zones, except where human residence has been rendered 
impracticable by intensity of cold or heat. On this account, men have accounted 
as gods--the sun, because it imparts from itself the light of day, ripens the 
fruit with its warmth, and measures the year with its stated periods; the moon, 
which is at once the solace of the night and the controller of the months by its 
governance; the stars also, certain indications as they are of those seasons 
which are to be observed in the tillage of our fields; lastly, the very heaven 
also under which, and the earth over which, as well as the intermediate space 
within which, all things conspire together for the good of man. Nor is it from 
their beneficent influences only that a faith in their divinity has been deemed 
compatible with the elements, but from their opposite qualities also, such as 
usually happen from what one might call their wrath and anger--as thunder, and 
hail, and drought, and pestilential winds, floods also, and openings of the 
ground, and earthquakes: these are all fairly enough accounted gods, whether 
their nature becomes the object of reverence as being favourable, or of fear 
because terrible--the sovereign dispenser, in fact, both of help and of hurt. 
But in the practical conduct of 134 
social life, this is the way in which men act and feel: they do not show 
gratitude or find fault with the very things from which the succour or the 
injury proceeds, so much as with them by whose strength and power the operation 
of the things is effected. For even in your amusements you do not award the 
crown as a prize to the flute or the harp, but to the musician who manages the 
said flute or harp by the power of his delightful skill. In like manner, when 
one is in ill-health, you do not bestow your acknowledgments on the flannel 
wraps, or the medicines, or the poultices, but on the doctors by whose care and 
prudence the remedies become effectual. So again, in untoward events, they who 
are wounded with the sword do not charge the injury on the sword or the spear, 
but on the enemy or the robber; whilst those whom a falling house covers do not 
blame the tiles or the stones, but the oldness of the building; as again 
shipwrecked sailors impute their calamity not to the rocks and waves, but to the 
tempest. And rightly too; for it is certain that everything which happens must 
be ascribed not to the instrument with which, but to the agent by whom, it takes 
place; inasmuch as he is the prime cause of the occurrence, who appoints both 
the event itself and that by whose instrumentality it comes to pass (as there 
are in all things these three particular elements--the fact itself, its 
instrument, and its cause), because he himself who wills the occurrence of a 
thing comes into notice prior to the thing which he wills, or the instrument by 
which it occurs. On all other occasions therefore, your conduct is right enough, 
because you consider the author; but in physical phenomena your rule is opposed 
to that natural principle which prompts you to a wise judgment in all other 
cases, removing out of sight as you do the supreme position of the author, and 
considering rather the things that happen, than him by whom they happen. Thus it 
comes to pass that you suppose the power and the dominion to belong to the 
elements, which are but the slaves and functionaries. Now do we not, in thus 
tracing out an artificer and master within, expose the artful structure of their 
slavery out of the appointed functions of those elements to which you ascribe 
(the attributes) of power? But gods are not slaves; therefore whatever things 
are servile in character are not gods. Otherwise they should prove to us that, 
according to the ordinary course of things, liberty is promoted by irregular 
licence, despotism by liberty, and that by despotism divine power is meant. For 
if all the (heavenly bodies) overhead forget not to fulfil their courses in 
certain orbits, in regular seasons, at proper distances, and at equal 
intervals--appointed in the way of a law for the revolutions of time, and for 
directing the guidance thereof--can it fail to result from the very observance 
of their conditions and the fidelity of their operations, that you will be 
convinced both by the recurrence of their orbital courses and the accuracy of 
their mutations, when you bear in mind how ceaseless is their recurrence, that a 
governing power presides over them, to which the entire management of the world 
is obedient, reaching even to the utility and injury of the human race? For you 
cannot pretend that these (phenomena) act and care for themselves alone, without 
contributing anything to the advantage of mankind, when you maintain that the 
elements are divine for no other reason than that you experience from them 
either benefit or injury to yourself. For if they benefit themselves only, you 
are under no obligation to them. 
CHAP. VI.--THE CHANGES OF THE HEAVENLY BODIES, PROOF THAT THEY ARE 
NOT DIVINE. TRANSITION FROM THE PHYSICAL TO THE MYTHIC CLASS OF GODS.
Come now, do you allow that the Divine Being not only has nothing servile in 
His course, but exists in unimpaired integrity, and ought not to be diminished, 
or suspended, or destroyed? Well, then, all His blessedness would disappear, if 
He were ever subject to change. Look, however, at the stellar bodies; they both 
undergo change, and give clear evidence of the fact. The moon tells us how great 
has been its loss, as it recovers its full form; its greater losses you are 
already accustomed to measure in a mirror of water; so that I need not any 
longer believe in anywise what magians have asserted. The sun, too, is 
frequently put to the trial of an eclipse. Explain as best you may the modes of 
these celestial casualties, it is impossible for God 135 
either to become less or to cease to exist. Vain, therefore, are those 
supports of human learning, which, by their artful method of weaving 
conjectures, belie both wisdom and truth. Besides, it so happens, indeed, 
according to your natural way of thinking, that he who has spoken the best is 
supposed to have spoken most truly, instead of him who has spoken the truth 
being held to have spoken the best. Now the man who shall carefully look into 
things, will surely allow it to be a greater probability that those 
elements which we have been discussing are under some rule and direction, 
than that they have a motion of their own, and that being under government they 
cannot be gods. If, however, one is in error in this matter, it is better to err 
simply than speculatively, like your physical philosophers. But, at the same 
time, if you consider the character of the mythic school, (and compare it with 
the physical,) the error which we have already seen frail men 
making in the latter is really the more respectable one, since it ascribes a 
divine nature to those things which it supposes to be superhuman in their 
sensibility, whether in respect of their position, their power, their magnitude, 
or their divinity. For that which you suppose to be higher than man, you believe 
to be very near to God. 
CHAP. VII.--THE GODS OF THE MYTHIC CLASS. THE POETS A VERY POOR AUTHORITY 
IN SUCH MATTERS. HOMER AND THE MYTHIC POETS. WHY IRRELIGIOUS.
But to pass to the mythic class of gods, which we attributed to the poets, I 
hardly know whether I must only seek to put them on a par with our own human 
mediocrity, or whether they must be affirmed to be gods, with proofs of 
divinity, like the African Mopsus and the Boeotian Amphiaraus. I must now indeed 
but slightly touch on this class, of which a fuller view will be taken in the 
proper place. Meanwhile, that these were only human beings, is clear from the 
fact that you do not consistently call them gods, but heroes. Why then discuss 
the point? Although divine honours had to be ascribed to dead men, it was not to 
them as such, of course. Look at your own practice, when with similar excess of 
presumption you sully heaven with the sepulchres of your kings: is it not such 
as are illustrious for justice, virtue, piety, and every excellence of this 
sort, that you honour with the blessedness of deification, contented even to 
incur contempt if you forswear yourselves for such characters? And, on the other 
hand, do you not deprive the impious and disgraceful of even the old prizes of 
human glory, tear up their decrees and titles, pull down their statues, and 
deface their images on the current coin? Will He, however, who beholds all 
things, who approves, nay, rewards the good, prostitute before all men the 
attribute of His own inexhaustible grace and mercy? And shall men be allowed an 
especial mount of care and righteousness, that they may be wise in selecting and 
multiplying their deities? Shall attendants on kings and princes be more pure 
than those who wait on the Supreme God? You turn your back in horror, indeed, on 
outcasts and exiles, on the poor and weak, on the obscurely born and the 
low-lived; but yet you honour, even by legal sanctions, 
unchaste men, adulterers, robbers, and parricides. Must we regard it as a 
subject of ridicule or indignation, that such characters are believed to be gods 
who are not fit to be men? Then, again, in this mythic class of yours which the 
poets celebrate, how uncertain is your conduct as to purity of conscience and 
the maintenance thereof! For whenever we hold up to execration the wretched, 
disgraceful and atrocious (examples) of your gods, you defend them as mere 
fables, on the pretence of poetic licence; whenever we volunteer a silent 
contempt of this said poetic licence, then you are not only troubled with no 
horror of it, but you go so far as to show it respect, and to hold it as one of 
the indispensable (fine) arts; nay, you carry out the studies of your higher 
classes by its means, as the very foundation of your literature. Plato was of 
opinion that poets ought to be banished, as calumniators of the gods; he would 
even have) Homer himself expelled from his republic, although, as you are aware, 
he was the crowned head of them all. But 136 
while you admit and retain them thus, why should you not believe them when 
they disclose such things respecting your gods? And if you do believe your 
poets, how is it that you worship such gods (as they describe)? you worship them 
simply because you do not believe the poets, why do you bestow praise on such 
lying authors, without any fear of giving offence to those whose calumniators 
you honour? A regard for truth is not, of course, to be expected of poets. But 
when you say that they only make men into gods after their death, do you not 
admit that before death the said gods were merely human? Now what is there 
strange in the fact, that they who were once men are subject to the dishonour of 
human casualties, or crimes, or fables? Do you not, in fact, put faith in your 
poets, when it is in accordance with their rhapsodies that you have arranged in 
some instances your very rituals? How is it that the priestess of Ceres is 
ravished, if it is not because Ceres suffered a similar outrage? Why are the 
children of others sacrificed to Saturn, if it is not because he spared not his 
own? Why is a male mutilated in honour of the Idaean goddess Cybele, unless it 
be that the (unhappy) youth who was too disdainful of her advances was 
castrated, owing to her vexation at his daring to cross her love? Why was not 
Hercules "a dainty dish" to the good ladies of Lanuvium, if it was not for the 
primeval offence which women gave to him? The poets, no doubt, are liars. Yet it 
is not because of their telling us that your gods did such things when they were 
human beings, nor because they predicated divine scandals of a divine state, 
since it seemed to you more credible that gods should exist, though not of such 
a character, than that there should be such characters, although not gods. 
CHAP. VIII.--THE GODS OF THE DIFFERENT NATIONS. VARRO'S GENTILE CLASS. 
THEIR INFERIORITY. A GOOD DEAL OF THIS PERVERSE THEOLOGY TAKEN FROM 
SCRIPTURE. SERAPIS A PERVERSION OF JOSEPH.
There remains the gentile class of gods amongst the several nations: these 
were adopted out of mere caprice, not from the knowledge of the truth; and our 
information about them comes from the private notions of different races. God, I 
imagine, is everywhere known, everywhere present, powerful everywhere--an object 
whom all ought to worship, all ought to serve. Since, then, it happens that even 
they, whom all the world worships in common, fail in the evidence of their true 
divinity, how much more must this befall those whom their very votaries have not 
succeeded in discovering! For what useful authority could possibly precede a 
theology of so defective a character as to be wholly unknown to fame? How many 
have either seen or heard of the Syrian Atargatis, the African Coelestis, the 
Moorish Varsutina, the Arabian Obodas and Dusaris, or the Norican Belenus, or 
those whom Varro mentions--Deluentinus of Casinum, Visidianus of Narnia, 
Numiternus of Atina, or Ancharia of Asculum? And who have any clear notions of 
Nortia of Vulsinii? There is no difference in the worth of even their names, 
apart from the human surnames which distinguish them. I laugh often enough at 
the little coteries of gods in each municipality, which have their honours 
confined within their own city walls. To what lengths this licence of adopting 
gods has been pushed, the superstitious practices of the Egyptians show us; for 
they worship even their native animals, such as cats, crocodiles, and their 
snake. It is therefore a small matter that they have also deified a man--him, I 
mean, whom not Egypt only, or Greece, but the whole world worships, and the 
Africans swear by; about whose state also all that helps our conjectures and 
imparts to our knowledge the semblance of truth is stated in our own (sacred) 
literature. For that Serapis of yours was originally one of our own saints 
called Joseph. The youngest of his brethren, but superior to them in intellect, 
he was from envy sold into Egypt, and became a slave in the family of Pharaoh 
king of the country. Importuned by the unchaste queen, when he refused to comply 
with her desire, she turned upon him and reported him to the king, by whom he is 
put into prison. There he displays the power of his divine inspiration, by 
interpreting aright the dreams of some (fellow-prisoners). Meanwhile the king, 
too, has some terrible dreams. Joseph being brought 137 
before him, according to his summons, was able to expound them. Having 
narrated the proofs of true interpretation which he had given in the prison, he 
opens out his dream to the king: those seven fat-fleshed and well-favoured kine 
signified as many years of plenty; in like manner, the seven lean-fleshed 
animals predicted the scarcity of the seven following years. He accordingly 
recommends precautions to be taken against the future famine from the previous 
plenty. The king believed him. The issue of all that happened showed how wise he 
was, how invariably holy, and now how necessary. So Pharaoh set him over all 
Egypt, that he might secure the provision of corn for it, and thenceforth 
administer its government. They called him Serapis, from the turban which 
adorned his head. The peck-like shape of this turban marks the memory of his 
corn-provisioning; whilst evidence is given that the care of the supplies was 
all on his head, by the very ears of corn which embellish the border of the 
head-dress. For the same reason, also, they made the sacred figure of a dog, 
which they regard (as a sentry) in Hades, and put it under his right hand, 
because the care of the Egyptians was concentrated s under his hand. And they 
put at his side Pharia, whose name shows her to have been the king's daughter. 
For in addition to all the rest of his kind gifts and rewards, Pharaoh had given 
him his own daughter in marriage. Since, however, they had begun to worship both 
wild animals and human beings, they combined both figures under one form Anubis, 
in which there may rather be seen clear proofs of its own character and 
condition enshrined by a nation at war with itself, refractory to its kings, 
despised among foreigners, with even the appetite of a slave and the filthy 
nature of a dog. 
CHAP. IX. THE POWER OF ROME. ROMANIZED ASPECT OF ALL THE HEATHEN 
MYTHOLOGY. VARRO'S THREEFOLD DISTRIBUTION CRITICISED. ROMAN HEROES (AENEAS 
INCLUDED,) UNFAVOURABLY REVIEWED.
Such are the more obvious or more remarkable points which we had to mention 
in connection with Varro's threefold distribution of the gods, in order that a 
sufficient answer might seem to be given touching the physical, the poetic, and 
the gentile classes. Since, however, it is no longer to the philosophers, nor 
the poets, nor the nations that we owe the substitution of all (heathen worship 
for the true religion) although they transmitted the superstition, but to the 
dominant Romans, who received the tradition and gave it wide authority, another 
phase of the widespread error of man must now be encountered by us; nay, another 
forest must be felled by our axe, which has obscured the childhood of the de 
generate worship with germs of superstitions gathered from all quarters. Well, 
but even the gods of the Romans have received from (the same) Varro a threefold 
classification into the certain, the uncertain, and the select. What absurdity! 
What need had they of uncertain gods, when they possessed certain ones? Unless, 
forsooth, they wished to commit themselves to such folly as the Athenians did; 
for at Athens there was an altar with this inscription: "To THE UNKNOWN GODS." 
Does, then, a man worship that which he knows nothing of? Then, again, as they 
had certain gods, they ought to have been contented with them, without requiring 
select ones. In this want they are even found to be irreligious! For if gods are 
selected as onions are, then such as are not chosen are declared to be 
worthless. Now we on our part allow that the Romans had two sets of gods, common 
and proper; in other words, those which they had in common with other nations, 
and those which they themselves devised. And were not these called the public 
and the foreign gods? Their altars tell us so; there is (a specimen) of the 
foreign gods at the lane of Carna, of the public gods in the Palatium. Now, 
since their common gods are comprehended in both the physical and the mythic 
classes, we have already said enough concerning them. I should like to speak of 
their particular kinds of deity. We ought then to admire the Romans for that 
third set of the gods of their enemies, because no other nation ever discovered 
for itself so large a mass of superstition. Their other deities we arrange in 
two classes: those which have become gods from human beings, and those which 
have had their origin in some other way. Now, since there is advanced the same 
colourable pretext for the deification of the dead, that their lives were 
meritorious, we are compelled to urge the same reply against them, that no one 
of them was worth so much 138 
pains. Their fond father Aeneas, in whom they believed, was never glorious, 
and was felled with a stone--a vulgar weapon, to pelt a dog withal, inflicting a 
wound no less ignoble! But this Aeneas turns out a traitor to his country; yes, 
quite as much as Antenor. And if they will not believe this to be true of him, 
he at any rate deserted his companions when his country was in flames, and must 
be held inferior to that woman of Carthage, who, when her husband Hasdrubal 
supplicated the enemy with the mild pusillanimity of our Aeneas, refused to 
accompany him, but hurrying her children along with her, disdained to take her 
beautiful self and father's noble heart s into exile, but plunged into the 
flames of the burning Carthage, as if rushing into the embraces of her (dear 
but) ruined country. Is he "pious Aeneas" for (rescuing) his young only son and 
decrepid old father, but deserting Priam and Astyanax? But the Romans ought 
rather to detest him; for in defence of their princes and their royal house, 
they surrender even children and wives, and every dearest pledge. They deify the 
son of Venus, and this with the full knowledge and consent of her husband 
Vulcan, and without opposition from even Juno. Now, if sons have seats in heaven 
owing to their piety to their parents, why are not those noble youths of Argos 
rather accounted gods, because they, to save their mother from guilt in the 
performance of some sacred rites, with a devotion more than human, yoked 
themselves to her car and dragged her to the temple? Why not make a goddess, for 
her exceeding piety, of that daughter who from her own breasts nourished her 
father who was famishing in prison? What other glorious achievement can be 
related of Aeneas, but that he was nowhere seen in the fight on the field of 
Laurentum? Following his bent, perhaps he fled a second time as a fugitive from 
the battle. In like manner, Romulus posthumously becomes a god. Was it because 
he rounded the city? Then why not others also, who have built cities, counting 
even women? To be sure, Romulus slew his brother in the bargain, and trickishly 
ravished some foreign virgins. Therefore of course he becomes a god, and 
therefore a Quirinus ("god of the spear"), because then their fathers had to use 
the spear on his account. What did Sterculus do to merit deification? 
If he worked hard to enrich the fields stercoribus, (with manure,) Augias had 
more dung than he to bestow on them. If Faunus, the son of Picus, used to do 
violence to law and right, because struck with madness, it was more fit that he 
should be doctored than deified. If the daughter of Faunus so excelled in 
chastity, that she would hold no conversation with men, it was perhaps from 
rudeness, or a consciousness of deformity, or shame for her father's insanity. 
How much worthier of divine honour than this "good goddess" was Penelope, who, 
although dwelling among so many suitors of the vilest character, preserved with 
delicate tact the purity which they assailed! There is Sanctus, too, who for his 
hospitality had a temple consecrated to him by king Plotius; and even Ulysses 
had it in his power to have bestowed one more god upon you in the person of the 
most refined Alcinous. 
CHAP. X.--A DISGRACEFUL FEATURE OF THE ROMAN MYTHOLOGY. IT HONOURS SUCH 
INFAMOUS CHARACTERS AS LARENTINA.
I hasten to even more abominable cases. Your writers have not been ashamed to 
publish that of Larentina. She was a hired prostitute, whether as the nurse of 
Romulus, and therefore called Lupa, because she was a prostitute, or as the 
mistress of Hercules, now deceased, that is to say, now deified. They relate 
that his temple-warder happened to be playing at dice in the temple alone; and 
in order to represent a partner for himself in the game, in the absence of an 
actual one, he began to play with one hand for Hercules and the other for 
himself. (The condition was,) that if he won the stakes from Hercules, he should 
with them procure a supper and a prostitute; if Hercules, however, proved the 
winner, I mean his other hand, then he should provide the same for Hercules. The 
hand of Hercules won. That achievement might well have been added to his twelve 
labours! The temple-warden buys a supper for the hero, and hires Larentina to 
play the whore. The fire which dissolved the 139 
body of even a Hercules enjoyed the supper, and the altar consumed 
everything. Larentina sleeps alone in the temple; and she a woman from the 
brothel, boasts that in her dreams she had submitted herself to the pleasure of 
Hercules; and she might possibly have experienced this, as it passed through her 
mind, in her sleep. In the morning, on going out of the temple very early, she 
is solicited by a young man--"a third Hercules," so to speak. He invites her 
home. She complies, remembering that Hercules had told her that it would be for 
her advantage. He then, to be sure, obtains permission that they should be 
united in lawful wedlock (for none was allowed to have intercourse with the 
concubine of a god without being punished for it); the husband makes her his 
heir. By and by, just before her death, she bequeathed to the Roman people the 
rather large estate which she had obtained through Hercules. After this she 
sought deification for her daughters too, whom indeed the divine Larentina ought 
to have appointed her heirs also. The gods, of the Romans received an accession 
in her dignity. For she alone of all the wives of Hercules was dear to him, 
because she alone was rich; and she was even far more fortunate than Ceres, who 
contributed to the pleasure of the (king of the) dead. After so many examples 
and eminent names among you, who might not have been declared divine? Who, in 
fact, ever raised a question as to his divinity against Antinous? Was even 
Ganymede more grateful and dear than he to (the supreme god) who loved him? 
According to you, heaven is open to the dead. You prepare a way from Hades to 
the stars. Prostitutes mount it in all directions, so that you must not suppose 
that you are conferring a great distinction upon your kings. 
CHAP. XI.--THE ROMANS PROVIDED GODS FOR BIRTH, NAY, EVEN BEFORE BIRTH, TO 
DEATH. MUCH INDELICACY IN THIS SYSTEM,
And you are not content to assert the divinity of such as were once known to 
you, whom you heard and handled, and whose portraits have been painted, and 
actions recounted, and memory retained amongst you; but men insist upon 
consecrating with a heavenly life I know not what incorporeal, inanimate 
shadows, and the mere names of things--dividing man's entire existence amongst 
separate powers even from his conception in the womb: so that there is a god 
Consevius, to preside over concubital generation; and Fluviona, to preserve the 
(growth of the) infant in the womb; after these come Vitumnus and Sentinus, 
through whom the babe begins to have life and its earliest sensation; then 
Diespiter, by whose office the child accomplishes its birth. But when women 
begin their parturition, Candelifera also comes in aid, since childbearing 
requires the light of the candle; and other goddesses there are "who get their 
names from the parts they bear in the stages of travail. There were two 
Carmentas likewise, according to the general view: to one of them, called 
Postverta, belonged the function of assisting the birth of the introverted 
child; while the other, Prosa, executed the like office for the rightly born. 
The god Farinus was so called from (his inspiring) the first utterance; while 
others believed in Locutius from his gift of speech. Cunina is present as the 
protector of the child's deep slumber, and supplies to it refreshing rest. To 
lift them (when fallen) there is Levana, and along with her Rumina. It is a 
wonderful oversight that no gods were appointed for cleaning up the filth of 
children. Then, to preside over their first pap and earliest drink you have 
Potina and Edula; to teach the child to stand erect is the work of Statina, 
whilst Adeona helps him to come to dear Mramma, and Abeona to toddle off again; 
then there is Domiduca, (to bring home the bride;) and the goddess Mens, to 
influence the mind to either good or evil. They have likewise Volumnus and 
Voleta, to control the will; Paventina, (the goddess) of fear; Venilia, of hope; 
Volupia, of pleasure; Praestitia, of beauty. Then, again, they give his name to 
Peragenor, from his teaching men to go through their work; to Consus, from his 
sug 140 
gesting to them counsel. Juventa is their guide on assuming the manly gown, 
and "bearded Fortune" when they come to full manhood. If I must touch on their 
nuptial duties, there is Afterenda whose appointed function is to see to the 
offering of the dower; but fie on you! you have your Mutunus and Tutunus and 
Pertunda and Subigus and the goddess Prema and likewise Perfica. O spare 
yourselves, ye impudent gods! No one is present at the secret struggles of 
married life. Those very few persons who have a wish that way, go away and blush 
for very shame in the midst of their joy. 
CHAP. XII.--THE ORIGINAL DEITIES WERE HUMAN--WITH SOME VERY QUESTIONABLE 
CHARACTERISTICS. SATURN OR TIME WAS HUMAN. INCONSISTENCIES OF OPINION ABOUT 
HIM.
Now, how much further need I go in recounting your gods--because I want to 
descant on the character of such as you have adopted? It is quite uncertain 
whether I shall laugh at your absurdity, or upbraid you for your blindness. For 
how many, and indeed what, gods shall I bring forward? Shall it be the greater 
ones, or the lesser? The old ones, or the novel? The male, or the female? The 
unmarried, or such as are joined in wedlock? The clever, or the unskilful? The 
rustic or the town ones? The national or the foreign? For the truth is, there 
are so many families, so many nations, which require a catalogue (of gods), that 
they cannot possibly be examined, or distinguished, or described. But the more 
diffuse the subject is, the more restriction must we impose on it. As, 
therefore, in this review we keep before us but one object--that of proving that 
all these gods were once human beings (not, indeed, to instruct you in the fact, 
for your conduct shows that you have forgotten it)--let us adopt our compendious 
summary from the most natural method of conducting the examination, even by 
considering the origin of their race. For the origin characterizes all that 
comes after it. Now this origin of your gods dates, I suppose, from Saturn. And 
when Varro mentions Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, as the most ancient of the gods, 
it ought not to have escaped our notice, that every father is more ancient than 
his sons, and that Saturn therefore must precede Jupiter, even as Coelus does 
Saturn, for Saturn was sprung from Coelus and Terra. I pass by, however, the 
origin of Coelus and Terra. They led in some unaccountable way single lives, and 
had no children. Of course they required a long time for vigorous growth to 
attain to such a stature. By and by, as soon as the voice of Coelus began to 
break, and the breasts of Terra to become firm, they contract marriage with one 
another. I suppose either Heaven came down to his spouse, or Earth went up to 
meet her lord. Be that as it may, Earth conceived seed of Heaven, and when her 
year was fulfilled brought forth Saturn in a wonderful manner. Which of his 
parents did he resemble? Well, then, even after parentage began, it is certain 
that they had no child previous to Saturn, and only one daughter 
afterwards--Ops; thenceforth they ceased to procreate. The truth is, Saturn 
castrated Coelus as he was sleeping. We read this name Coelus as of the 
masculine gender. And for the matter of that, how could he be a father unless he 
were a male? But with what instrument was the castration effected? He had a 
scythe. What, so early as that? For Vulcan was not yet an artificer in iron. The 
widowed Tetra, however, although still quite young, was in no hurry to marry 
another. Indeed, there was no second Coeus for her. What but Ocean offers her an 
embrace? But he savours of brackishness, and she has been accustomed to fresh 
water. And so Saturn is the sole male child of Coelus and Tetra. When grown to 
puberty, he marries his own sister. No laws as yet prohibited incest, nor 
punished parricide. Then, when male children were born to him, he would devour 
them; better himself (should take them) than the wolves, (for to these would 
they become a prey) if he exposed them. He was, no doubt, afraid that one of 
them might learn the lesson of his father's scythe. When Jupiter was born in 
course of time, he was removed out of the way: (the father) swallowed a stone 
instead of the son, as was pretended. This artifice secured his safety for a 
time; but at length the son, whom 141 
he had not devoured, and who had grown up in secret, fell upon him, and 
deprived him of his kingdom. Such, then, is the patriarch of the gods whom 
Heaven and Earth produced for you, with the poets officiating as midwives. Now 
some persons with a refined imagination are of opinion that, by this allegorical 
fable of Saturn, there is a physiological representation of Time: (they think) 
that it is because all things are destroyed by Time, that Coelus and Tetra were 
themselves parents without having any of their own, and that the (fatal) scythe 
was used, and that (Saturn) devoured his own offspring, because he, in fact, 
absorbs within himself all things which have issued from him. They call in also 
the witness of his name; for they say that he is called Kronos in Greek, 
meaning the same thing as kronos. His Latin name also they derive from 
seed-sowing; for they suppose him to have been the actual procreator--that the 
seed, in fact, was dropt down from heaven to earth by his means. They unite him 
with Ops, because seeds produce the affluent treasure (Opem) of actual life, and 
because they develope with labour (Opus). Now I wish that you would explain this 
metaphorical statement. It was either Saturn or Time. If it was Time, how could 
it be Saturn? If he, how could it be Time? For you cannot possibly reckon both 
these corporeal subjects as co-existing in one person. What, however, was there 
to prevent your worshipping Time under its proper quality? Why not make a human 
person, or even a mythic man, an object of your adoration, but each in its 
proper nature not in the character of Time? What is the meaning of that conceit 
of your mental ingenuity, if it be not to colour the foulest matters with the 
feigned appearance of reasonable proofs? Neither, on the one hand, do you mean 
Saturn to be Time, because you say he is a human being; nor, on the other hand, 
whilst portraying him as Time, do you on that account mean that he was ever 
human. No doubt, in the accounts of remote antiquity your god Saturn is plainly 
described as living on earth in human guise. Anything whatever may obviously be 
pictured as incorporeal which never had an existence; there is simply no room 
for such fiction, where there is reality. Since, therefore, there is clear 
evidence that Saturn once existed, it is in vain that you change his character. 
He whom you will not deny to have once been man, is not at your disposal to be 
treated anyhow, nor can it be maintained that he is either divine or Time. In 
every page of your literature the origin of Saturn is conspicuous. We read of 
him in Cassius Severus and in the Corneliuses, Nepes and Tacitus, and, amongst 
the Greeks also, in Diodorus, and all other compilers of ancient annals. No more 
faithful records of him are to be traced than in Italy itself. For, after 
(traversing) many countries, and (enjoying) the hospitality of Athens, he 
settled in Italy, or, as it was called, OEnotria, having met with a kind welcome 
from Janus, or Janes, as the Salii call him. The hill on which he settled had 
the name Saturnius, whilst the city which he rounded still bears the name 
Saturnia; in short, the whole of Italy once had the same designation. Such is 
the testimony derived from that country which is now the mistress of the world: 
whatever doubt prevails about the origin of Saturn, his actions tell us plainly 
that he was a human being. Since, therefore, Saturn was human, he came 
undoubtedly from a human stock; and more, because he was a man, he, of course, 
came not of Coelus and Terra. Some people, however, found it easy enough to call 
him, whose parents were unknown, the son of those gods from whom all may in a 
sense seem to be derived. For who is there that does not speak under a feeling 
of reverence of the heaven and the earth as his own father and mother? Or, in 
accordance with a custom amongst men, which induces them to say of any who are 
unknown or suddenly apparent, that "they came from the sky?" Hence it happened 
that, because a stranger appeared suddenly everywhere, it became the custom to 
call him a heaven-born man,--just as we also commonly call earth-born all those 
whose descent is unknown. I say nothing of the fact that such was the state of 
antiquity, when men's eyes and minds were so habitually rude, that they were 
excited by the appearance of every newcomer as if it were that of a god: much 
more would this be the case with a king, and that the primeval one. I will 
linger some time longer over the case of Saturn, because by fully discussing his 
primordial history I shall beforehand furnish a compendious answer for all other 
cases; and I do not wish to omit the more convincing testimony of your sacred 
literature, the credit of which ought to be the greater in proportion to its 
antiquity. Now earlier than all liters 142 
ture was the Sibyl; that Sibyl, I mean, who was the true prophetess of truth, 
from whom you borrow their title for the priests of your demons. She in senarian 
verse expounds the descent of Saturn and his exploits in words to this effect: 
"In the tenth generation of men, after the flood had overwhelmed the former 
race, reigned Saturn, and Titan, and Japetus, the bravest of the sons of Tetra 
and Coelus." Whatever credit, therefore, is attached to your older writers and 
literature, and much more to those who were the simplest as belonging to that 
age, it becomes sufficiently certain that Saturn and his family were human 
beings. We have in our possession, then, a brief principle which amounts to a 
prescriptive rule about their origin serving for all other cases, to prevent our 
going wrong in individual instances. The particular character of a posterity is 
shown by the original founders of the race--mortal beings (come) from mortals, 
earthly ones from earthly; step after step comes in due relation--marriage, 
conception, birth--country, settlements, kingdoms, all give the clearest proofs. 
They, therefore who cannot deny the birth of men, must also admit their death; 
they who allow their mortality must not suppose them to be gods. 
CHAP. XIII.--THE GODS HUMAN AT FIRST. WHO HAD THE AUTHORITY TO MAKE THEM 
DIVINE? JUPITER NOT ONLY HUMAN, BUT IMMORAL.
Manifest cases, indeed, like these have a force peculiarly their own. Men 
like Varro and his fellow-dreamers admit into the ranks of the divinity those 
whom they cannot assert to have been in their primitive condition anything but 
men; (and this they do) by affirming that they became gods after their death. 
Here, then, I take my stand. If your gods were elected to this dignity and 
deity, just as you recruit the ranks of your senate, you cannot help conceding, 
in your wisdom, that there must be some one supreme sovereign who has the power 
of selecting, and is a kind of Caesar; and nobody is able to confer on others a 
thing over which he has not absolute control. Besides, if they were able to make 
gods of themselves after their death, pray tell me why they chose to be in an 
inferior condition at first? Or, again, if there is no one who made them gods, 
how can they be said to have been made such, if they could only have been made 
by some one else? There is therefore no ground afforded you for denying that 
there is a certain wholesale distributor of divinity. Let us accordingly examine 
the reasons for despatching mortal beings to heaven. I suppose you will produce 
a pair of them. Whoever, then, is the awarder (of the divine honours), exercises 
his function, either that he may have some supports, or defences, or it may be 
even ornaments to his own dignity; or from the pressing claims of the 
meritorious, that he may reward all the deserving. No other cause is it 
permitted us to conjecture. Now there is no one who, when bestowing a gift on 
another, does not act with a view to his own interest or the other's. This 
conduct, however, cannot be worthy of the Divine Being, inasmuch as His power is 
so great that He can make gods outright; whilst His bringing man into such 
request, on the pretence that he requires the aid and support of certain, even 
dead persons, is a strange conceit, since He was able from the very first to 
create for Himself immortal beings. He who has compared human things with divine 
will require no further arguments on these points. And yet the latter opinion 
ought to be discussed, that God conferred divine honours in consideration of 
meritorious claims. Well, then, if the award was made on such grounds, if heaven 
was opened to men of the primitive age because of their deserts, we must reflect 
that after that time no one was worthy of such honour; except it be, that there 
is now no longer such a place for any one to attain to. Let us grant that 
anciently men may have deserved heaven by reason of their great merits. Then let 
us consider whether there really was such merit. Let the man who alleges that it 
did exist declare his own view of merit. Since the actions of men done in the 
very infancy of time are a valid claim for their deification, you consistently 
admitted to the honour the brother and sister who were stained with the sin of 
incest--Ops and Saturn. Your Jupiter too, stolen in his infancy, was unworthy of 
both the home and the nutriment accorded to human beings; and, as he deserved 
for so bad a child, he had to live in Crete. Afterwards, when full-grown, he 
dethrones his own father, who, whatever his parental character may have been, 
was most prosperous in his reign, king as he was of the golden age. Under him, a 
stranger to toil and want, 143 
peace maintained its joyous and gentle sway; under him- "Nulli subigebant 
arva coloni" 
"No swains would bring the fields beneath their sway;" 
and without the importunity of any one the earth would bear all crops 
spontaneously. But he hated a father who had been guilty of incest, and had once 
mutilated his grandfather. And yet, behold, he himself marries his own sister; 
so that I should suppose the old adage was made for him: Toou
patros--" Father's own child." There was "not a pin to choose" between 
the father's piety and the son's. If the laws had been just even at that early 
time, Jupiter ought to have been "sewed up in both sacks." After this 
corroboration of his lust with incestuous gratification, why should he hesitate 
to indulge himself lavishly in the lighter excesses of adultery and debauchery? 
Ever since poetry sported thus with his character, in some such way as is usual 
when a runaway slave is posted up in public, we have been in the habit of 
gossiping without restraint of his tricks in our chat with passers-by; sometimes 
sketching him out in the form of the very money which was the fee of his 
debauchery--as when (he personated) a bull, or rather paid the money's worth of 
one, and showered (gold. into the maiden's chamber, or rather forced his way in 
with a bribe; sometimes (figuring him) in the very likenesses of the parts which 
were acted--as the eagle which ravished (the beautiful youth), and the swan 
which sang (the enchanting song). Well now, are not such fables as these made up 
of the most disgusting intrigues and the worst of scandals? or would not the 
morals and tempers of men be likely to become wanton from such examples? In what 
manner demons, the offspring of evil angels who have been long engaged in their 
mission, have laboured to turn men aside from the faith to unbelief and to such 
fables, we must not in this place speak of to any extent. As indeed the general 
body (of your gods), which took their cue from their kings, and princes, and 
instructors, was not of the self-same nature, it was in some other way" that 
similarity of character was exacted by their authority. But how much the worst 
of them was he who (ought to have been, but) was not, the best of them? By a 
title peculiar to him, you are indeed in the habit of calling Jupiter "the 
Best,"" whilst in Virgil he is "AEquus Jupiter." All therefore were like 
him--incestuous towards their own kith and kin, unchaste to strangers, impious, 
unjust! Now he whom mythic story left untainted with no conspicuous infamy, was 
not worthy to be made a god. 
CHAP. XIV.--GODS, THOSE WHICH WERE CONFESSEDLY ELEVATED TO THE DIVINE
CONDITION, WHAT PRE-EMINENT RIGHT HAD THEY TO SUCH HONOUR? HERCULES AN
INFERIOR CHARACTER.
But since they will have it that those who have been admitted from the human 
state to the honours of deification should be kept separate from others, and 
that the distinction which Dionysius the Stoic drew should be made between the 
native and the factitious gods, I will add a few words concerning this last 
class also. I will take Hercules himself for raising the gist of a reply (to the 
question) whether he deserved heaven and divine honours? For, as men choose to 
have it, these honours are awarded to him for his merits. If it was for his 
valour in destroying wild beasts with intrepidity, what was there in that so 
very memorable? Do not criminals condemned to the games, though they are even 
consigned to the contest of the vile arena, despatch several of these animals at 
one time, and that with more earnest zeal? If it was for his world-wide travels, 
how often has the same thing been accomplished by the rich at their pleasant 
leisure, or by philosophers in their slave-like poverty? Is it forgotten that 
the cynic Asclepiades on a single sorry cow, riding on her back, and sometimes 
nourished at her udder, surveyed the whole world with a personal inspection? 
Even if Hercules visited the infernal regions, who does not know that the way to 
Hades is open to all? If you have deified him on account of his much carnage and 
many battles, a much greater number of victories was gained by the 144 
illustrious Pompey, the conqueror of the pirates who had not spared Ostia 
itself in their ravages; and (as to carnage), how many thousands, let me ask, 
were cooped up in one corner of the citadel of Carthage, and slain by Scipio? 
Wherefore Scipio has a better claim to be considered a fit candidate for 
deification than Hercules. You must be still more careful to add to the claims 
of (our) Hercules his debaucheries with concubines and wives, and the swathes of 
Omphale, and his base desertion of the Argonauts because he had lost his 
beautiful boy. To this mark of baseness add for his glorification likewise his 
attacks of madness, adore the arrows which slew his sons and wife. This was the 
man who, after deeming himself worthy of a funeral pile in the anguish of his 
remorse for his parricides, deserved rather to die the unhonoured death which 
awaited him, arrayed in the poisoned robe which his wife sent him on account of 
his lascivious attachment (to another). You, however, raised him from the pyre 
to the sky, with the same facility with which (you have distinguished in like 
manner) another hero also, who was destroyed by the violence of a fire from the 
gods. He having devised some few experiments, was said to have restored the dead 
to life by his cures. He was the son of Apollo, half human, although the 
grandson of Jupiter, and great-grandson of Saturn (or rather of spurious origin, 
because his parentage was uncertain, as Socrates of Argon has related; he was 
exposed also, and found in a worse tutelage than even Jove's, suckled even at 
the dugs of a dog); nobody can deny that he deserved the end which befell him 
when he perished by a stroke of lightning. In this transaction, however, your 
most excellent Jupiter is once more found in the wrong--impious to his grandson, 
envious of his artistic skill. Pindar, indeed, has not concealed his true 
desert; according to him, he was punished for his avarice and love of gain, 
influenced by which he would bring the living to their death, rather than the 
dead to life, by the perverted use of his medical art which he put up for sale. 
It is said that his mother was killed by the same stroke, and it was only right 
that she, who had bestowed so dangerous a beast on the world, should escape to 
heaven by the same ladder. And yet the Athenians will not be at a loss how to 
sacrifice to gods of such a fashion, for they pay divine honours to Aesculapius 
and his mother amongst their dead (worthies). As if, too, they had not ready to 
hand their own Theseus to worship, so highly deserving a god's distinction! 
Well, why not? Did he not on a foreign shore abandon the preserver of his life, 
with the same indifference, nay heartlessness, with which he became the cause of 
his father's death? 
CHAP. XV.--THE CONSTELLATIONS AND THE GENII VERY INDIFFERENT GODS. 
THE ROMAN MONOPOLY OF GODS UNSATISFACTORY. OTHER NATIONS REQUIRE DEITIES QUITE 
AS MUCH.
It would be tedious to take a survey of all those, too, whom you have buried 
amongst the constellations, and audaciously minister to as gods. I suppose your 
Castors, and Perseus, and Erigona, have just the same claims for the honours of 
the sky as Jupiter's own big boy had. But why should we wonder? You have 
transferred to heaven even dogs, and scorpions, and crabs. I postpone all 
remarks concerning those whom you worship in your oracles. That this worship 
exists, is attested by him who pronounces the oracle. 
Why; you will have your gods to be spectators even of sadness, as is Viduus, 
who makes a widow of the soul, by parting it from the body, and whom you have 
condemned, by not permitting him to be enclosed within your city-walls; there is 
Caeculus also, to deprive the eyes of their perception; and Orbana, to bereave 
seed of its vital power; moreover, there is the goddess of death herself. To 
pass hastily by all others, you account as gods the sites of places or of the 
city; such are Father Janus (there being, moreover, the archer-goddess Jana), 
and Septimontius of the seven hills. 
Men sacrifice to the same Genii, whilst 145 
they have altars or temples in the same places; but to others besides, when 
they dwell in a strange place, or live in rented houses. I say nothing about 
Ascensus, who gets his name for his climbing propensity, and Clivicola, from her 
sloping (haunts); I pass silently by the deities called Forculus from doors, and 
Cardea from hinges, and Limentinus the god of thresholds, and whatever others 
are worshipped by your neighbours as tutelar deities of their street doors. 
There is nothing strange in this, since men have their respective gods in their 
brothels, their kitchens, and even in their prison. Heaven, therefore, is 
crowded with innumerable gods of its own, both these and others belonging to the 
Romans, which have distributed amongst them the functions of one's whole life, 
in such a way that there is no want of the others gods. Although, it is true, 
the gods which we have enumerated are reckoned as Roman peculiarly, and as not 
easily recognised abroad; yet how do all those functions and circumstances, over 
which men have willed their gods to preside, come about, in every part of the 
human race, and in every nation, where their guarantees are not only without an 
official recognition, but even any recognition at all? 
CHAP. XVI.--INVENTORS OF USEFUL ARTS UNWORTHY OF DEIFICATION. THEY 
WOULD
BE THE FIRST TO ACKNOWLEDGE A CREATOR. THE ARTS CHANGEABLE FROM TIME TO 
TIME, AND SOME BECOME OBSOLETE.
Well, but certain men have discovered fruits and sundry necessaries of life, 
(and hence are worthy of deification). Now let me ask, when you call these 
persons "discoverers," do you not confess that what they discovered was already 
in existence? Why then do you not prefer to honour the Author, from whom the 
gifts really come, instead of converting the Author into mere discoverers? 
Previously he who made the discover, the inventor himself no doubt expressed his 
gratitude to the Author; no doubt, too, he felt that He was God, to whom really 
belonged the religious service, as the Creator (of the gift), by whom also both 
he who discovered and that which was discovered were alike created. The green 
fig of Africa nobody at Rome had heard of when Cato introduced it to the Senate, 
in order that he might show how near was that province of the enemy whose 
subjugation he was constantly urging. The cherry was first made common in Italy 
by Cn. Pompey, who imported it from Pontus. I might possibly have thought the 
earliest introducers of apples amongst the Romans deserving of the public honour 
of deification. This, however, would be as foolish a ground for making gods as 
even the invention of the useful arts. And yet if the skilful men of our own 
time be compared with these, how much more suitable would deification be to the 
later generation than to the former! For, tell me, have not all the extant 
inventions superseded antiquity, whilst daily experience goes on adding to the 
new stock? Those, therefore, whom you regard as divine because of their arts, 
you are really injuring by your very arts, and challenging (their divinity) by 
means of rival attainments, which cannot be surpassed. 
CHAP. XVII.--CONCLUSION, THE ROMANS OWE NOT THEIR IMPERIAL POWER TO THEIR 
GODS. THE GREAT GOD ALONE DISPENSES KINGDOMS, HE IS THE GOD OF THE 
CHRISTIANS.
In conclusion, without denying all those whom antiquity willed and posterity 
has believed to be gods, to be the guardians of your religion, there yet remains 
for our consideration that very large assumption of the Roman superstitions 
which we have to meet in opposition to you, O heathen, viz. that the Romans have 
become the lords and masters of the whole world, because by their religious 
offices they have merited this dominion to such an extent that they are within a 
very little of excelling even their own gods in power. One cannot wonder that 
Sterculus, and Mutunus, and Larentina, have severally advanced this empire to 
its height! The Roman people has been by its gods alone ordained to such 
dominion. For I could not imagine that any foreign gods would have preferred 
doing more for a strange nation than for their own people, and so by such 
conduct become the deserters and neglecters, nay, the betrayers of the native 
land wherein they were born and bred, and ennobled and buried. Thus not even 
Jupiter 146 
could suffer his own Crete to be subdued by the Roman fasces, forgetting that 
cave of Ida, and the brazen cymbals of the Corybantes, and the most pleasant 
odour of the goat which nursed him on that dear spot. Would he not have made 
that tomb of his superior to the whole Capitol, so that that land should most 
widely rule which covered the ashes of Jupiter? Would Juno, too, be willing that 
the Punic city, for the love of which she even neglected Samos, should be 
destroyed, and that, too, by the fires of the sons of AEneas? Although I am well 
aware that "Hic illius arma, Hic currus fuit, hoc regnum des gentibus ease, Si 
qua fata sinant, jam tunc tenditque fovetque." 
Here were her arms, her chariot here, Here goddess-like, to fix one day The 
seat of universal sway, Might fate be wrung to yield assent, E'en then her 
schemes, her cares were bent." 
Still the unhappy (queen of gods) had no power against the fates! And yet the 
Romans did not accord as much honour to the fates, although they gave them 
Carthage, as they did to Larentina. But surely those gods of yours have not the 
power of conferring empire. For when Jupiter reigned in Crete, and Saturn in 
Italy, and Isis in Egypt, it was even as men that they reigned, to whom also 
were assigned many to assist them. Thus he who serves also makes masters, and 
the bond-slave of Admetus aggrandizes with empire the citizens of Rome, although 
he destroyed his own liberal votary Croesus by deceiving him with ambiguous 
oracles. Being a god, why was he afraid boldly to foretell to him the truth that 
he must lose his kingdom. Surely those who were aggrandized with the power of 
wielding empire might always have been able to keep an eye, as it were, on their 
own cities. If they were strong enough to confer empire on the Romans, why did 
not Minerva defend Athens from Xerxes? Or why did not Apollo rescue Delphi out 
of the hand of Pyrrhus? They who lost their own cities preserve the city of 
Rome, since (forsooth) the religiousness of Rome has merited the protection! But 
is it not rather the fact that this excessive devotion has been devised since 
the empire has attained its glory by the increase of its power? No doubt sacred 
rites were introduced by Numa, but then your proceedings were not marred by a 
religion of idols and temples. Piety was simple, and worship humble; altars were 
artlessly reared, and the vessels (thereof) plain, and the incense from them 
scant, and the god himself nowhere. Men therefore were not religious before they 
achieved greatness, (nor great) because they were religious. But how can the 
Romans possibly seem to have acquired their empire by an excessive religiousness 
and very profound respect for the gods, when that empire was rather increased 
after the gods had been slighted? Now, if I am not mistaken, every kingdom or 
empire is acquired and enlarged by wars, whilst they and their gods also are 
injured by conquerors. For the same ruin affects both city-walls and temples; 
similar is the carnage both of civilians and of priests; identical the plunder 
of profane things and of sacred. To the Romans belong as many sacrileges as 
trophies; and then as many triumphs over gods as over nations. Still remaining 
are their captive idols amongst them; and certainly, if they can only see their 
conquerors, they do not give them their love. Since, however, they have no 
perception, they are injured with impunity; and since they are injured with 
impunity, they are worshipped to no purpose. The nation, therefore, which has 
grown to its powerful height by victory after victory, cannot seem to have 
developed owing to the merits of its religion--whether they have injured the 
religion by augmenting their power, or augmented their power by injuring the 
religion. All nations have possessed empire, each in its proper time, as the 
Assyrians, the Medes, the Persians, the Egyptians; empire is even now also in 
the possession of some, and yet they that have lost their power used not to 
behave without attention to religious services and the worship of the gods, even 
after these had become unpropitious to them, until at last almost universal 
dominion has accrued to the Romans. It is the fortune of the times that has thus 
constantly shaken kingdoms with revolution. Inquire who has ordained these 
changes in the times. It is the same (great Being) who dispenses kingdoms, and 
has now put the supremacy of them into the hands of the Romans, very much as if 
the tribute of many nations were after its exaction amassed in one (vast) 
coffer. What He has determined concerning it, they know who are the nearest to 
Him. 

