
Tertullian












TERTULLIAN 
THE FIVE BOOKS AGAINST MARCION.
BOOK II. 
WHEREIN TERTULLIAN SHOWS THAT THE CREATOR, OR DEMIURGE, WHOM MARCION 
CALUMNIATED, IS THE TRUE AND GOOD GOD.
CHAP. I.--THE METHODS OF MARCION'S ARGUMENT INCORRECT AND ABSURD. 
THE PROPER COURSE OF THE ARGUMENT.
THE Occasion of reproducing this little work, the fortunes of which we 
noticed in the preface of our first book, has furnished us with the opportunity 
of distinguishing, in our treatment of the subject of two Gods in opposition to 
Marcion, each of them with a description and section of his own, according to 
the division of the subject-matter, defining one of the gods to have no 
existence at all, and maintaining of the Other that He is rightly God; thus far 
keeping pace with the heretic of Pontus, who has been pleased to admit one unto, 
and exclude the other. For he could not build up his mendacious scheme without 
pulling down the system of truth. He found it necessary to demolish some other 
thing, in order to build up the theory which he wished. This process, however, 
is like constructing a house without preparing suitable materials. The 
discussion ought to have been directed to this point alone, that he is no god 
who supersedes the Creator. Then, when the false god had been excluded by 
certain rules which prescriptively settle what is the character of the One only 
perfect Divinity, there could have remained no longer any question as to the 
true God. The proof of His existence would have been clear, and that, too, amid 
the failure of all evidence in support of any other god; and still clearer would 
have seemed the point as to the honour in which He ought without controversy to 
be held: that He ought to be worshipped rather than judged; served reverentially 
rather than handled critically, or even dreaded for His severity. For what was 
more fully needed by man than a careful estimate of the true God, on whom, so to 
speak, he had alighted, because there was no other god? 
CHAP. II.--THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF GOD THE CREATOR. THE HERETICS 
PRETENDED TO A KNOWLEDGE OF THE DIVINE BEING, OPPOSED TO AND SUBVERSIVE OF 
REVELATION. GOD'S NATURE AND WAYS PAST HUMAN DISCOVERY. ADAM'S HERESY.
We have now, then, cleared our way to the contemplation of the Almighty God, 
the Lord and Maker of the universe. His greatness, as I think, is shown in this, 
that from the beginning He made Himself known: He never hid Himself, but always 
shone out brightly, even before the time of Romulus, to say nothing of that of 
Tiberius; with the exception indeed that the heretics, and they alone, know Him 
not, although they take such pains about Him. They on this account suppose that 
another god must be assumed to exist, because they are more able to censure than 
deny Him whose existence is so evident, deriving all their thoughts about God 
from the deductions of sense; just as if some blind man, or a man of imperfect 
vision, chose to assume some other sun of milder and healthier ray, because he 
sees not that which is the object of sight. There is, O 
298 
man, but one sun which rules this world and even when you think otherwise of 
him, he is best and useful; and although to you he may seem too fierce and 
baneful, or else, it may be, too sordid and corrupt, he yet is true to the laws 
of his own existence. Unable as you are to see through those laws, you would be 
equally impotent to bear the rays of any other sun, were there one, however 
great and good. Now, you whose sight is defective in respect of the inferior 
god, what is your view of the sublimer One? Really you are too lenient to your 
weakness; and set not yourself to the proof of things, holding God to be 
certainly, undoubtedly, and therefore sufficiently known, the very moment you 
have discovered Him to exist, though you know Him not except on the side where 
He has willed His proofs to lie. But you do not even deny God intelligently, you 
treat of Him ignorantly; nay, you accuse Him with a semblance of intelligence, 
whom if you did but know Him, you would never accuse, nay, never treat of. You 
give Him His name indeed, but you deny the essential truth of that name, that 
is, the greatness which is called God; not acknowledging it to be such as, were 
it possible for it to have been known to man in every respect, would not be 
greatness. Isaiah even so early, with the clearness of an apostle, foreseeing 
the thoughts of heretical hearts, asked, "Who hath known the mind of the Lord? 
or who hath been His counsellor? With whom took He counsel? ... or who taught 
Him knowledge, and showed to Him the way of understanding?" With whom the 
apostle agreeing exclaims, "Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding 
out!" "His judgments unsearchable," as being those of God the Judge; and "His 
ways past finding out," as comprising an understanding and knowledge which no 
man has ever shown to Him, except it may be those critics of the Divine Being, 
who say, God ought not to have been this, and He ought rather to have been that; 
as if any one knew what is in God, except the Spirit of God. Moreover, having 
the spirit of the world, and "in the wisdom of God by wisdom knowing not God," 
they seem to themselves to be wiser than God; because, as the wisdom of the 
world is foolishness with God, so also the wisdom of God is folly in the world's 
esteem. We, however, know that "the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and 
the weakness of God is stronger than men." Accordingly, God is then especially 
great, when He is small to man; then especially good, when not good in man's 
judgment; then especially unique, when He seems to man to be two or more. Now, 
if from the very first "the natural man, not receiving the things of the Spirit 
of God," has deemed God's law to be foolishness, and has therefore neglected to 
observe it; and as a further consequence, by his not having faith, "even that 
which he seemeth to have hath been taken from him"--such as the grace of 
paradise and the friendship of God, by means of which he might have known all 
things of God, if he had continued in his obedience--what wonder is it, if he, 
reduced to his material nature, and banished to the toil of tilling the ground, 
has in his very labour, downcast and earth-gravitating as it was, handed on that 
earth-derived spirit of the world to his entire race, wholly natural and 
heretical as it is, and not receiving the things which belong to God? Or who 
will hesitate to declare the great sin of Adam to have been heresy, when he 
committed it by the choice of his own will rather than of God's? Except that 
Adam never said to his fig-tree, Why hast thou made me thus? He confessed that 
he was led astray; and he did not conceal the seducer. He was a very rude 
heretic. He was disobedient; but yet he did not blaspheme his Creator, nor blame 
that Author of his being, Whom from the beginning of his life he had found to be 
so good and excellent, and Whom he had perhaps made his own judge from the very 
first. 
CHAP. III.--GOD KNOWN BY HIS WORKS. HIS GOODNESS SHOWN IN HIS CREATIVE 
ENERGY; BUT EVERLASTING IN ITS NATURE; INHERENT IN GOD, PREVIOUS TO ALL 
EXHIBITION OF IT. THE FIRST STAGE OF THIS GOODNESS PRIOR TO MAN.
It will therefore be right for us, as we enter on the examination of the 
known God, when 299 
the question arises, in what condition He is known to us, to begin with His 
works, which are prior to man; so that His goodness, being discovered 
immediately along with Himself, and then constituted and prescriptively settled, 
may suggest to us some sense whereby we may understand how the subsequent order 
of things came about. The disciples of Marcion, moreover, may possibly be able, 
while recognising the goodness of our God, to learn how worthy it is likewise of 
the Divine Being, on those very grounds whereby we have proved it to be unworthy 
in the case of their god. Now this very point, which is a material one in their 
scheme, Marcion did not find in any other god, but eliminated it for himself out 
of his own god. The first goodness, then, was that of the Creator, whereby God 
was unwilling to remain hidden for ever; in other words, (unwilling) that there 
should not be a something by which God should become known. For what, indeed, is 
so good as the knowledge and fruition of God? Now, although it did not 
transpires that this was good, because as yet there existed nothing to which it 
could transpire, yet God foreknew what good would eventually transpire, and 
therefore He set Himself about developing His own perfect goodness, for the 
accomplishment of the good which was to transpire; not, indeed, a sudden 
goodness issuing m some accidental boon or in some excited impulse, such as must 
be dated simply from the moment when it began to operate. For if it did itself 
produce its own beginning when it began to operate, it had not, in fact, a 
beginning itself when it acted. When, however, an initial act had been once done 
by it, the scheme of temporal seasons began, for distinguishing and noting 
which, the stars and luminaries of heaven were arranged in their order. 
"Let them be," says God, "for seasons, and for days, and years." Previous, 
then, to this temporal course, (the goodness) which created time had not time; 
nor before that beginning which the same goodness originated, had it a 
beginning. Being therefore without aIl order of a beginning, and all mode of 
time, it will be reckoned to possess an age, measureless in extent and endless 
in duration; nor will it be possible to regard it as a sudden or adventitious or 
impulsive emotion, because it has nothing to occasion such an estimate of 
itself; in other words, no sort of temporal sequence. It must therefore be 
accounted an eternal attribute, inbred in God, and everlasting, and on this 
account worthy of the Divine Being, putting to shame for ever the benevolence of 
Marcion's god, subsequent as he is to (I will not say) all beginnings and times, 
but to the very malignity of the Creator, if indeed malignity could possibly 
have been found in goodness. 
CHAP. IV.--THE NEXT STAGE OCCURS IN THE CREATION OF MAN BY THE ETERNAL 
WORD. SPIRITUAL AS WELL AS PHYSICAL GIFTS TO MAN. THE BLESSINGS OF MAN'S 
FREE-WILL.
The goodness of God having, therefore, provided man for the pursuit of the 
knowledge of Himself, added this to its original notification, that it first 
prepared a habitation for him, the vast fabric (of the world) to begin with, and 
then afterwards the vaster one (of a higher world,) that he might on a great as 
well as on a smaller stage practise and advance in his probation, and so be 
promoted from the good which God had given him, that is, from his high position, 
to God's best; that is, to some higher abode. In this good work God employs a 
most excellent minister, even His own Word. "My heart" He says, "hath emitted my 
most excellent Word." Let Marcion take hence his first lesson on the noble fruit 
of this truly most excellent tree. But, like a most clumsy clown, he has grafted 
a good branch on a bad stock. The sapling, however, of his blasphemy shall be 
never strong: it shall wither with its planter, and thus shall be manifested the 
nature of the good tree. Look at the total result: how fruitful was the Word! 
God issued His fiat, and it was done: God also saw that it was 300 
good; not as if He were ignorant of the good until He saw it; but because it 
was good, He therefore saw it, and honoured it, and set His seal upon it; and 
consummated the goodness of His works by His vouchsafing to them that 
contemplation. Thus God blessed what He made good, in order that He might 
commend Himself to you as whole and perfect, good both in word and act. As yet 
the Word knew no malediction, because He was a stranger to malefaction. We shall 
see what reasons required this also of God. Meanwhile the world consisted of all 
things good, plainly foreshowing how much good was preparing for him for whom 
all this was provided. Who indeed was so worthy of dwelling amongst the works of 
God, as he who was His own image and likeness? That image was wrought out by a 
goodness even more operative than its wont, with no imperious word, but with 
friendly hand preceded by an almost affable utterance: "Let us make man in our 
image, after our likeness." Goodness spake the word; Goodness formed man of the 
dust of the ground into so great a substance of the flesh, built up out of one 
material with so many qualities; Goodness breathed into him a soul, not dead but 
living. Goodness gave him dominion over all things, which he was to enjoy and 
rule over, and even give names to. In addition to this, Goodness annexed 
pleasures to man so that, while master of the whole world, he might tarry among 
higher delights, being translated into paradise, out of the world into the 
Church. The self-same Goodness provided also a help meet for him, that there 
might be nothing in his lot that was not good. For, said He, that the man be 
alone is not good. He knew full well what a blessing to him would be the sex of 
Mary, and also of the Church. The law, however, which you find fault with, and 
wrest into a subject of contention, was imposed on man by Goodness, aiming at 
his happiness, that he might cleave to God, and so not show himself an abject 
creature rather than a free one, nor reduce himself to the level of the other 
animals, his subjects, which were free from God, and exempt from all tedious 
subjection; but might, as the sole human being, boast that he alone was worthy 
of receiving laws from God; and as a rational being, capable of intelligence and 
knowledge, be restrained within the bounds of rational liberty, subject to Him 
who had subjected all things unto him. To secure the observance of this law, 
Goodness likewise took counsel by help of this sanction: "In the day that thou 
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die." For it was a most benignant act of His 
thus to point out the issues of transgression, lest ignorance of the danger 
should encourage a neglect of obedience. Now, since it was given as a reason 
previous to the imposition of the law, it also amounted to a motive for 
subsequently observing it, that a penalty was annexed to its transgression; a 
penalty, indeed, which He who proposed it was still unwilling that it should be 
incurred. Learn then the goodness of our God amidst these things and up to this 
point; learn it from His excellent works, from His kindly blessings, from His 
indulgent bounties, from His gracious providences, from His laws and warnings, 
so good and merciful. 
CHAP. V.--MARCION'S CAVILS CONSIDERED. HIS OBJECTION REFUTED, I.E., MAN'S 
FALL SHOWED FAILURE IN GOD. THE PERFECTION OF MAN'S BEING LAY IN HIS LIBERTY, 
WHICH GOD PURPOSELY BESTOWED ON HIM. THE FALL IMPUTABLE TO MAN'S OWN 
CHOICE.
Now then, ye dogs, whom the apostle puts outside, and who yelp at the God of 
truth, let us come to your various questions. These are the bones of contention, 
which you are perpetually gnawing! If God is good, and prescient of the future, 
and able to avert evil, why did He permit man, the very image and likeness of 
Himself, and, by the origin of his soul, His own substance too, to be deceived 
by the devil, and fall from obedience of the law into death? For if He had been 
good, and so unwilling that such a catastrophe should happen, and prescient, so 
as not to be ignorant of what was to come to pass, and powerful enough to hinder 
its occurrence, that issue would never have come about, which should be 
impossible under these three conditions of the divine greatness. Since, however, 
it has occurred, the contrary proposition is most certainly true, that God must 
301 
be deemed neither good, nor prescient, nor powerful. For as no such issue 
could have happened had God been such as He is reputed--good, and prescient, and 
mighty--so has this issue actually happened, because He is not such a God. In 
reply, we must first vindicate those attributes in the Creator which are called 
in question--namely, His goodness and foreknowledge, and power. But I shall not 
linger long over this point for Christ's own definition comes to our aid at 
once. From works must proofs be obtained. The Creator's works testify at once to 
His goodness, since they are good, as we have shown, and to His power, since 
they are mighty, and spring indeed out of nothing. And even if they were made 
out of some (previous) matter, as some will have it, they are even thus out of 
nothing, because they were not what they are. In short, both they are great 
because they are good; and God is likewise mighty, because all things are His 
own, whence He is almighty. But what shall I say of His prescience, which has 
for its witnesses as many prophets as it inspired? After all, what title to 
prescience do we look for in the Author of the universe, since it was by this 
very attribute that He foreknew all things when He appointed them their places, 
and appointed them their places when He fore knew them? There is sin itself. If 
He had not foreknown this, He would not have proclaimed a caution against it 
under the penalty of death. Now if there were in God such attributes as must 
have rendered it both impossible and improper for any evil to have happened to 
man, and yet evil did occur, let us consider man's condition also--whether it 
were not, in fact, rather the cause why that came to pass which could not have 
happened through God. I find, then, that man was by God constituted free, master 
of his own will and power; indicating the presence of God's image and likeness 
in him by nothing so well as by this constitution of his nature. For it was not 
by his face, and by the lineaments of his body, though they were so varied in 
his human nature, that he expressed his likeness to the form of God; but he 
showed his stamp in that essence which he derived from God Himself (that is, the 
spiritual, which answered to the form of God), and in the freedom and power of 
his will. This his state was confirmed even by the very law which God then 
imposed upon him. For a law would not be imposed upon one who had it not in his 
power to render that obedience which is due to law; nor again, would the penalty 
of death be threatened against sin, if a contempt of the law were impossible to 
man in the liberty of his will. So in the Creator's subsequent laws also you 
will find, when He sets before man good and evil, life and death, that the 
entire course of discipline is arranged in precepts by God's calling men from 
sin, and threatening and exhorting them; and this on no other ground than that 
man is free, with a will either for obedience or resistance. 
CHAP. VI.--THIS LIBERTY VINDICATED IN RESPECT OF ITS ORIGINAL CREATION; 
SUITABLE ALSO FOR EXHIBITING THE GOODNESS AND THE PURPOSE OF GOD. REWARD AND 
PUNISHMENT IMPOSSIBLE IF MAN WERE GOOD OR EVIL THROUGH NECESSITY AND 
NOT CHOICE.
But although we shall be understood, from our argument, to be only so 
affirming man's unshackled power over his will, that what happens to him should 
be laid to his own charge, and not to God's, yet that you may not object, even 
now, that he ought not to have been so constituted, since his liberty and power 
of will might turn out to be injurious, I will first of all maintain that he was 
rightly so constituted, that I may with the greater confidence commend both his 
actual constitution, and the additional fact of its being worthy of the Divine 
Being; the cause which led to man's being created with such a constitution being 
shown to be the better one. Moreover, man thus constituted will be protected by 
both the goodness of God and by His purpose, both of which are always found in 
concert in our God. For His purpose is no purpose without goodness; nor is His 
goodness goodness without a purpose, except forsooth in the case of Marcion's 
god, who is purposelessly good, as we have shown. Well, then, it was proper that 
God should be known; it was no doubt a good and reasonable thing. Proper also 
was it that there should be something worthy of knowing God. What could be found 
so worthy as the image and likeness of God? This also was undoubtedly good and 
reasonable. Therefore it was proper that (he who is) the image and likeness of 
God should be formed with a free will and a mastery of him 302 
self; so that this very thing--namely, freedom of will and 
self-command--might be reckoned as the image and likeness of God in him. For 
this purpose such an essence was adapted to man as suited this character, even 
the afflatus of the Deity, Himself free and uncontrolled. But if you will take 
some other view of the case, how came it to pass that man, when in possession of 
the whole world, did not above all things reign in self-possession--a master 
over others, a slave to himself? The goodness of God, then, you can learn from 
His gracious gift to man, and His purpose from His disposal of all things. At 
present, let God's goodness alone occupy our attention, that which gave so large 
a gift to man, even the liberty of his will. God's purpose claims some other 
opportunity of treatment, offering as it does instruction of like import. Now, 
God alone is good by nature. For He, who has that which is without beginning, 
has it not by creation, but by nature. Man, however, who exists entirely by 
creation, having a beginning, along with that beginning obtained the form in 
which he exists; and thus he is not by nature disposed to good, but by creation, 
not having it as his own attribute to be good, because, (as we have said,) it is 
not by nature, but by creation, that he is disposed to good, according to the 
appointment of his good Creator, even the Author of all good. In order, 
therefore, that man might have a goodness of his own, bestowed on him by God, 
and there might be henceforth in man a property, and in a certain sense a 
natural attribute of goodness, there was assigned to him in the constitution of 
his nature, as a formal witness of the goodness which God bestowed upon him, 
freedom and power of the will, such as should cause good to be performed 
spontaneously by man, as a property of his own, on the ground that no less than 
this would be required in the matter of a goodness which was to be voluntarily 
exercised by him, that is to say, by the liberty of his will, without either 
favour or servility to the constitution of his nature, so that man should be 
good just up to this point, if he should display his goodness in accordance with 
his natural constitution indeed, but still as the result of his will, as a 
property of his nature; and, by a similar exercise of volition, should show 
himself to be too strong in defence against evil also (for even this God, of 
course, foresaw), being free, and master of himself; because, if he were wanting 
in this prerogative of self-mastery, so as to perform even good by necessity and 
not will, he would, in the helplessness of his servitude, become subject to the 
usurpation of evil, a slave as much to evil as to good. Entire freedom of will, 
therefore, was conferred upon him in both tendencies; so that, as master of 
himself, he might constantly encounter good by spontaneous observance of it, and 
evil by its spontaneous avoidance; because, were man even otherwise 
circumstanced, it was yet his bounden duty, in the judgment of God, to do 
justice according to the motions of his will regarded, of course, as free. But 
the reward neither of good nor of evil could be paid to the man who should be 
found to have been either good or evil through necessity and not choice. In this 
really lay the law which did not exclude, but rather prove, human liberty by a 
spontaneous rendering of obedience, or a spontaneous commission of iniquity; so 
patent was the liberty of man's will for either issue. Since, therefore, both 
the goodness and purpose of God are discovered in the gift to man of freedom in 
his will, it is not right, after ignoring the original definition of goodness 
and purpose which it was necessary to determine previous to any discussion of 
the subject, on subsequent facts to presume to say that God ought not in such a 
way to have formed man, because the issue was other than what was assumed to be 
proper for God. We ought rather, after duly considering that it behoved God so 
to create man, to leave this consideration unimpaired, and to survey the other 
aspects of the case. It is, no doubt, an easy process for persons who take 
offence at the fall of man, before they have looked into the facts of his 
creation, to impute the blame of what happened to the Creator, without any 
examination of His purpose. To conclude: the goodness of God, then fully 
considered from the beginning of His works, will be enough to convince us that 
nothing evil could 303 
possibly have come forth from God; and the liberty of man will, after a 
second thought, show us that it alone is chargeable with the fault which itself 
committed. 
CHAP. VII.--IF GOD HAD ANYHOW CHECKED MAN'S LIBERTY, MARCION WOULD HAVE 
BEEN READY WITH ANOTHER AND OPPOSITE CAVIL. MAN'S FALL FORESEEN BY GOD. 
PROVISION MADE FOR IT REMEDIALLY AND CONSISTENTLY WITH HIS TRUTH AND 
GOODNESS.
By such a conclusion all is reserved unimpaired to God; both His natural 
goodness, and the purposes of His governance and foreknowledge, and the 
abundance of His power. You ought, however, to deduct from God's attributes both 
His supreme earnestness of purpose and most excellent truth in His whole 
creation, if you would cease to inquire whether anything could have happened 
against the will of God. For, while holding this earnestness and truth of the 
good God, which are indeed capable of proof from the rational creation, you will 
not wonder at the fact that God did not interfere to prevent the occurrence of 
what He wished not to happen, in order that He might keep from harm what He 
wished. For, since He had once for all allowed (and, as we have shown, worthily 
allowed) to man freedom of will and mastery of himself, surely He from His very 
authority in creation permitted these gifts to be enjoyed: to be enjoyed, too, 
so far as lay in Himself, according to His own character as God, that is, for 
good (for who would permit anything hostile to himself?); and, so far as lay in 
man, according to the impulses of his liberty (for who does not, when giving 
anything to any one to enjoy, accompany the gift with a permission to enjoy it 
with all his heart and will?). The necessary consequence, therefore, was, that 
God must separate from the liberty which He had once for all bestowed upon man 
(in other words, keep within Himself), both His foreknowledge and power, through 
which He might have prevented man's falling into danger when attempting wrongly 
to enjoy his liberty. Now, if He had interposed, He would have rescinded the 
liberty of man's will, which He had permitted with set purpose, and in goodness. 
But, suppose God had interposed; suppose Him to have abrogated man's liberty, by 
warning him from the tree, and keeping off the subtle serpent from his interview 
with the woman; would not Marcion then exclaim, What a frivolous, unstable, and 
faithless Lord, cancelling the gifts He had bestowed! Why did He allow any 
liberty of will, if He afterwards withdrew it? Why withdraw it after allowing 
it? Let Him choose where to brand Himself with error, either in His original 
constitution of man, or in His subsequent abrogation thereof! If He had checked 
(man's freedom), would He not then seem to have been rather deceived, through 
want of foresight into the future? But in giving it full scope, who would not 
say that He did so in ignorance of the issue of things? God, however, did 
fore-know that man would make a bad use of his created constitution; and yet 
what can be so worthy of God as His earnestness of purpose, and the truth of His 
created works, be they what they may? Man must see, if he failed to make the 
most of the good gift he had received, how that he was himself guilty in respect 
of the law which he did not choose to keep, and not that the Lawgiver was 
committing a fraud against His own law, by not permitting its injunctions to be 
fulfilled. Whenever you are inclined to indulge in such censure (and it is the 
most becoming for you) against the Creator, recall gently to your mind in His 
behalf His earnestness, and endurance, and truth, in having given completeness 
to His creatures both as rational and good. 
CHAP. VIII.--MAN, ENDUED WITH LIBERTY, SUPERIOR TO THE ANGELS. OVERCOMES 
EVEN THE ANGEL WHICH LURED HIM TO HIS FALL, WHEN REPENTANT AND RESUMING 
OBEDIENCE TO GOD.
For it was not merely that he might live the natural life that God had 
produced man, but that he should live virtuously, that is, in relation to God 
and to His law. Accordingly, God gave him to live when he was formed into a 
living soul; but He charged him to live virtuously when he was required to obey 
a law. So also God shows that man was not constituted for death, by now wishing 
that he should be restored to life, preferring the sinner's repentance to his 
death. As, therefore, God designed for man a condition of life, so man brought 
on himself a state of death; and this, too, neither through infirmity nor 
through ignorance, so that no blame can be imputed to the Creator. No doubt it 
was an angel who was the seducer; but then the victim of that seduction was 
free, and master of himself; 304 
and as being the image and likeness of God, was stronger than any angel; and 
as being, too, the afflatus of the Divine Being, was nobler than that material 
spirit of which angels were made. Who maketh, says he, His angels spirits, and 
His ministers a flame of fire. He would not have made all things subject to man, 
if he had been too weak for the dominion, and inferior to the angels, to whom He 
assigned no such subjects; nor would He have put the burden of law upon him, if 
he had been incapable of sustaining so great a weight; nor, again, would He have 
threatened with the penalty of death a creature whom He knew to be guiltless on 
the score of his helplessness: in short, if He had made him infirm, it would not 
have been by liberty and independence of will, but rather by the withholding 
from him these endowments. And thus it comes to pass, that even now also, the 
same human being, the same substance of his soul, the same condition as Adam's, 
is made conqueror over the same devil by the self-same liberty and power of his 
will, when it moves in obedience to the laws of God. 
CHAP. IX.--ANOTHER CAVIL ANSWERED, I.E., THE FALL IMPUTABLE TO GOD, 
BECAUSE MAN'S SOUL IS A PORTION OF THE SPIRITUAL ESSENCE OF THE CREATOR. THE 
DIVINE AFFLATUS NOT IN FAULT IN THE SIN OF MAN, BUT THE HUMAN WILL WHICH
WAS ADDITIONAL TO IT.
But, you say, in what way soever the substance of the Creator is found to be 
susceptible of fault, when the afflatus of God, that is to say, the soul, 
offends in man, it cannot but be that that fault of the portion is referrible to 
the original whole. Now, to meet this objection, we must explain the nature of 
the soul. We must at the outset hold fast the meaning of the Greek scripture, 
which has afflatus, not spirit. Some interpreters of the Greek, without 
reflecting on the difference of the words, and careless about their exact 
meaning, put spirit for afflatus; they thus afford to heretics an opportunity of 
tarnishing the Spirit of God, that is to say, God Himself, with default. And now 
comes the question. Afflatus, observe then, is less than spirit, although it 
comes from spirit; it is the spirit's gentle breeze, but it is not the spirit. 
Now a breeze is rarer than the wind; and although it proceeds from wind, yet a 
breeze is not the wind. One may call a breeze the image of the spirit. In the 
same manner, man is the image of God, that is, of spirit; for God is spirit. 
Afflatus is therefore the image of the spirit. Now the image is not in any case 
equal to the very thing. It is one thing to be like the reality, and another 
thing to be the reality itself. So, although the afflatus is the image of the 
spirit, it is yet not possible to compare the image of God in such a way, that, 
because the reality--that is, the spirit, or in other words, the Divine 
Being--is faultless, therefore the afflatus also, that is to say, the image, 
ought not by any possibility to have done wrong. In this respect will the image 
be less than the reality, and the afflatus inferior to the spirit, in that, 
while it possesses beyond doubt the true lineaments of divinity, such as an 
immortal soul, freedom and its own mastery over itself, foreknowledge in a great 
degree, reasonableness, capacity of understanding and knowledge, it is even in 
these respects an image still, and never amounts to the actual power of Deity, 
nor to absolute exemption from fault,--a property which is only conceded to God, 
that is, to the reality, and which is simply incompatible with an image. An 
image, although it may express all the lineaments of the reality, is yet wanting 
in its intrinsic power; it is destitute of motion. In like manner, the soul, the 
image of the spirit, is unable to express the simple power thereof, that is to 
say, its happy exemption from sinning. Were it otherwise, it would not be soul, 
but spirit; not man, who received a soul, but God. Besides, to take another view 
of the matter, not everything which pertains to God will be regarded as God, so 
that you would not maintain that His afflatus was God, that is, exempt from 
fault, because it is the breath of God. And in an act of your own, such as 
blowing into a flute, you would not thereby make the flute human, although it 
was your own human breath which you breathed into it, precisely as God breathed 
of His own Spirit, In fact, the Scripture, by expressly saying that God breathed 
into man's nostrils the breath of life, and that man became thereby a living 
soul, not a life-giving spirit, has distinguished that soul from the condition 
of the Creator. The work must 305 
necessarily be distinct from the workman, and it is inferior to him. The 
pitcher will not be the potter, although made by the potter; nor in like manner, 
will the afflatus, because made by the spirit, be on that account the spirit. 
The soul has often been called by the same name as the breath. You should also 
take care that no descent be made from the breath to a still lower quality. So 
you have granted (you say) the infirmity of the soul, which you denied before! 
Undoubtedly, when you demand for it an equality with God, that is, a freedom 
from fault, I contend that it is infirm. But when the comparison is challenged 
with an angel, I am compelled to maintain that the head over all things is the 
stronger of the two, to whom the angels are ministers, who is destined to be the 
judge of angels, if he shall stand fast in the law of God--an obedience which he 
refused at first. Now this disobedience it was possible for the afflatus of God 
to commit: it was possible, but it was not proper. The possibility lay in its 
slenderness of nature, as being the breath and not the spirit; the impropriety, 
however, arose from its power of will, as being free, and not a slave. It was 
furthermore assisted by the warning against committing sin under the threat of 
incurring death, which was meant to be a support for its slender nature, and a 
direction for its liberty of choice. So that the soul can no longer appear to 
have sinned, because it has an affinity with God, that is to say, through the 
afflatus, but rather through that which was an addition to its nature, that is, 
through its free-will, which was indeed given to it by God in accordance with 
His purpose and reason, but recklessly employed by man according as he chose. 
This, then, being the case, the entire course of God's action is purged from all 
imputation to evil. For the liberty of the will will not retort its own wrong on 
Him by whom it was bestowed, but on him by whom it was improperly used. What is 
the evil, then, which you want to impute to the Creator? If it is man's sin, it 
will not be God's fault, because it is man's doing; nor is that Being to be 
regarded as the author of the sin, who turns out to be its forbidder, nay, its 
condemner. If death is the evil, death will not give the reproach of being its 
own author to Him who threatened it, but to him who despised it. For by his 
contempt he introduced it, which assuredly would not have appeared had man not 
despised it. 
CHAP. X.--ANOTHER CAVIL MET, I.E., THE DEVIL WHO INSTIGATED MAN TO SIN 
HIMSELF THE CREATURE OF GOD. NAY, THE PRIMEVAL CHERUB ONLY WAS GOD'S 
WORK. THE DEVILISH NATURE SUPERADDED BY WILFULNESS. IN MAN'S RECOVERY THE DEVIL 
IS VANQUISHED IN A CONFLICT ON HIS OWN GROUND.
If, however, you choose to transfer the account of evil from man to the devil 
as the instigator of sin, and in this way, too, throw the blame on the Creator, 
inasmuch as He created the devil,--for He maketh those spirtual beings, the 
angels--then it will follow that what was made, that is to say, the angel, will 
belong to Him who made it; while that which was not made by God, even the devil, 
or accuser, cannot but have been made by itself; and this by false detraction 
from God: first, how that God had forbidden them to eat of every tree; then, 
with the pretence that they should not die if they ate; thirdly, as if God 
grudged them the property of divinity. Now, whence originated this malice of 
lying and deceit towards man, and slandering of God? Most certainly not from 
God, who made the angel good after the fashion of His good works. Indeed, before 
he became the devil, he stands forth the wisest of creatures; and wisdom is no 
evil. if you turn to the prophecy of Ezekiel, you will at once perceive that 
this angel was both by creation good and by choice corrupt. For in the person of 
the prince of Tyre it is said in reference to the devil: "Moreover, the word of 
the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king 
of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God: Thou sealest up the sum, 
full of wisdom, perfect in beauty" (this belongs to him as the highest of the 
angels, the archangel, the wisest of all); "amidst the delights of the paradise 
of thy God wast thou born" (for it was there, where God had made the angels in a 
shape which resembled the figure of animals). "Every precious stone was thy 
covering, the sardius, the topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the 
jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle; and with gold hast thou 
filled thy barns and thy treasuries. From the day when thou wast created, when I 
set thee, a cherub, upon the holy mountain of God, thou wast in the midst of 
stones of fire, thou wast irreproachable in thy days, from the day of thy 
creation, until thine iniquities were discovered. By the abundance of thy 306 
merchandise thou hast filled thy storehouses, and thou hast sinned," etc. 
This description, it is manifest, properly belongs to the transgression of the 
angel, and not to the prince's: for none among human beings was either born in 
the paradise of God, not even Adam himself, who was rather translated thither; 
nor placed with a cherub upon God's holy mountain, that is to say, in the 
heights of heaven, from which the Lord testifies that Satan fell; nor detained 
amongst the stones of fire, and the flashing rays of burning conStellations, 
whence Satan was cast down like lightning. No, it is none else than the very 
author of sin who was denoted in the person of a sinful man: he was once 
irreproachable, at the time of his creation, formed for good by God, as by the 
good Creator of irreproachable creatures, and adorned with every angelic glory, 
and associated with God, good with the Good; but afterwards of his own accord 
removed to evil. From the day when thine iniquities, says he, were 
discovered,--attributing to him those injuries wherewith he injured man when he 
was expelled from his allegiance to God,--even from that time did he sin, when 
he propagated his sin, and thereby plied "the abundance of his merchandise," 
that is, of his Wickedness, even the tale of his transgressions, because he was 
himself as a spirit no less (than man) created, with the faculty of free-will. 
For God would in nothing fail to endow a being who was to be next to Himself 
with a liberty of this kind. Nevertheless, by precondemning him, God testified 
that he had departed from the condition of his created nature, through his own 
lusting after the wickedness which was spontaneously conceived within him; and 
at the same time, by conceding a permission for the operation of his designs, He 
acted consistently with the purpose of His own goodness, deferring the devil's 
destruction for the self-same reason as He postponed the restitution of man. For 
He afforded room for a conflict, wherein man might crush his enemy with the same 
freedom of his will as had made him succumb to him (proving that the fault was 
all his own, not God's), and so worthily recover his salvation by a victory; 
wherein also the devil might receive a more bitter punishment, through being 
vanquished by him whom he had previously injured; and wherein God might be 
discovered to be so much the more good, as waiting for man to return from his 
present life to a more glorious paradise, with a right to pluck of the tree of 
life. 
CHAP. XI.--IF, AFTER MAN'S SIN, GOD EXERCISED HIS ATTRIBUTE OF JUSTICE 
AND
JUDGMENT, THIS WAS COMPATIBLE WITH HIS GOODNESS, AND ENHANCES THE TRUE 
IDEA OF
THE PERFECTION OF GOD'S CHARACTER.
Up to the fall of man, therefore, from the beginning God was simply good; 
after that He became a judge both severe and, as the Marcionites will have it, 
cruel. Woman is at once condemned to bring forth in sorrow, and to serve her 
husband, although before she had heard without pain the increase of her race 
proclaimed with the blessing, Increase and multiply, and although she had been 
destined to be a help and not a slave to her male partner. Immediately the earth 
is also cursed, which before was blessed. Immediately spring up briers and 
thorns, where once had grown grass, and herbs, and fruitful trees. Immediately 
arise sweat and labour for bread, where previously on every tree was yielded 
spontaneous food and untilled nourishment. Thenceforth it is "man to the 
ground," and not as before, "from the ground; to death thenceforth, but before, 
to life; thenceforth with coats of skins, but before, nakedness without a blush. 
Thus God's prior goodness was from nature, His subsequent severity from a cause. 
The one was innate, the other accidental; the one His own, the other adapted; 
the one issuing from Him, the other admitted by Him. But then nature could not 
have rightly permitted His goodness to have gone on inoperative, nor the cause 
have allowed His severity to have escaped in disguise or concealment. God 
provided the one for Himself, the other for the occasion. You should now set 
about showing also that the position of a judge is allied with evil, who have 
been dreaming of another god as a purely good one--solely because you cannot 
understand the Deity to be a judge; although we have proved God to be also a 
judge. Or if not a judge, at any rate a perverse and useless originator of a 
discipline which is not to be vindicated--in other words, not to be judged. You 
do not, however, disprove God's being a judge, who have no proof to show that He 
is a judge. You will undoubtedly have to accuse justice herself, which provides 
the judge, or else to reckon her among the species 307 
of evil, that is, to add injustice to the titles of goodness. But then 
justice is an evil, if injustice is a good. And yet you are forced to declare 
injustice to be one of the worst of things, and by the same rule are constrained 
to class justice amongst the most excellent. Since there is nothing hostile to 
evil which is not good, and no enemy of good which is not evil. It follows, 
then, that as injustice is an evil, so in the same degree is justice a good. Nor 
should it be regarded as simply a species of goodness, but as the practical 
observance of it, because goodness (unless justice be so controlled as to be 
just) will not be goodness, if it be unjust. For nothing is good which is 
unjust; while everything, on the other hand, which is just is good. 
CHAP. XII.--THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOODNESS AND JUSTICE SHOULD NOT BE 
SEPARATED. THEY ARE COMPATIBLE IN THE TRUE GOD. THE FUNCTION OF JUSTICE IN THE 
DIVINE BEING DESCRIBED.
Since, therefore, there is this union and agreement between goodness and 
justice, you cannot prescribes their separation. With what face will you 
determine the separation of your two Gods, regarding in their separate condition 
one as distinctively the good God, and the other as distinctively the just God? 
Where the just is, there also exists the good. in short, from the very first the 
Creator was both good and also just. And both His attributes advanced together. 
His goodness created, His justice arranged, the world; and in this process it 
even then decreed that the world should be formed of good materials, because it 
took counsel with goodness. The work of justice is apparent, in the separation 
which was pronounced between light and darkness, between day and night, between 
heaven and earth, between the water above and the water beneath, between the 
gathering together of the sea and the mass of the dry land, between the greater 
lights and the lesser, between the luminaries of the day and those of the night, 
between male and female, between the tree of knowledge of death and of life, 
between the world and paradise, between the aqueous and the earth-born animals. 
As goodness conceived all things, so did justice discriminate them. With the 
determination of the latter, everything was arranged and set in order. Every 
site and quality of the elements, their effect, motion, and state, the rise and 
setting of each, are the judicial determinations of the Creator. Do not suppose 
that His function as a judge must be defined as beginning I when evil began, and 
so tarnish His justice i with the cause of evil. By such considerations, then, 
do we show that this attribute advanced in company with goodness, the author s 
of all things,--worthy of being herself, too, deemed innate and natural, and not 
as accidentally accruing to God, inasmuch as she was found to be in Him, her 
Lord, the arbiter of His works. 
CHAP. XIII.--FURTHER DESCRIPTION OF THE DIVINE JUSTICE; SINCE THE FALL OF 
MAN IT HAS REGULATED THE DIVINE GOODNESS, GOD'S CLAIMS ON OUR LOVE AND OUR 
FEAR RECONCILED.
But yet, when evil afterwards broke out, and the goodness of God began now to 
have an adversary to contend against, God's justice also acquired another 
function, even that of directing His goodness according to men's application for 
it. And this is the result: the divine goodness, being interrupted in that free 
course whereby God was spontaneously good, is now dispensed according to the 
deserts of every man; it is offered to the worthy, denied to the unworthy, taken 
away from the unthankful, and also avenged on all its enemies. Thus the entire 
office of justice in this respect becomes an agency for goodness: whatever it 
condemns by its judgment, whatever it chastises by its condemnation, whatever 
(to use your phrase) it ruthlessly pursues, it, in fact, benefits with good 
instead of injuring. Indeed, the fear of judgment contributes to good, not to 
evil. For good, now contending with an enemy, was not strong enough to recommend 
itself by itself alone. At all events, if it could do so much, it could not keep 
its ground; for it had lost its impregnability through the foe, unless some 
power of fear supervened, such as might compel the very unwilling to seek after 
good, and take care of it. But who, when so many incentives to evil were 
assailing him, would desire that good, which he could despise with impunity? 
Who, again, would take care of what he could lose without danger? You read bow 
broad is the road to evil, how thronged in comparison with the opposite: would 
not all glide down that road were there nothing in it to fear? We dread the 
Creator's tremendous threats, and yet scarcely turn away from 308 
evil. What, if He threatened not? Will you call this justice an evil, when it 
is all unfavourable to evil? Will you deny it to be a good, when it has its eye 
towards good? What sort of being ought you to wish God to be? Would it be right 
to prefer that He should be such, that sins might flourish under Him, and the 
devil make mock at Him? Would you suppose Him to be a good God, who should be 
able to make a man worse by security in sin? Who is the author of good, but He 
who also requires it? In like manner who is a stranger to evil, except Him who 
is its enemy? Who its enemy, besides Him who is its conqueror? Who else its 
conqueror, than He who is its punisher? Thus God is wholly good, because in all 
things He is on the side of good. In fact, He is omnipotent, because able both 
to help and to hurt. Merely to profit is a comparatively small matter, because 
it can do nothing else than a good turn. From such a conduct with what 
confidence can I hope for good, if this is its only ability? How can I follow 
after the reward of innocence, if I have no regard to the requital of 
wrong-doing? I must needs have my doubts whether he might not fail in 
recompensing one or other alternative, who was unequal in his resources to meet 
both. Thus far, then, justice is the very fulness of the Deity Himself, 
manifesting God as both a perfect father and a perfect master: a father in His 
mercy, a master in His discipline; a father in the mildness of His power, a 
master in its severity; a father who must be loved with dutiful affection, a 
master who must needs be feared; be loved, because He prefers mercy to 
sacrifice; be feared because He dislikes sin; be loved, because He prefers the 
sinner,s repentance to his death; be feared, because He dislikes the sinners who 
do not repent. Accordingly, the divine law enjoins duties in respect of both 
these attributes: Thou shalt love God, and, Thou shalt fear God. It proposed one 
for the obedient man, the other for the transgressor. 
CHAP. XIV.--EVIL OF TWO KINDS, PENAL AND CRIMINAL. IT IS NOT OF THE LATTER 
SORT THAT GOD IS THE AUTHOR, BUT ONLY OF THE FORMER, WHICH ARE PENAL, AND 
INCLUDED IN HIS JUSTICE.
On all occasions does God meet you: it is He who smites, but also heals; who 
kills, but also makes alive; who humbles, and yet exalts; who "creates 
evil," but also "makes peace;"--so that from these very (contrasts Of HiS 
providence) I may get an answer to the heretics. Behold, they say, how He 
acknowledges Himself to be the creator of evil in the passage, "It is I who 
create evil." They take a word whose one form reduces to confusion and ambiguity 
two kinds of evils (because both sins and punishments are called evils), and 
will have Him in every passage to be understood as the creator of all evil 
things, in order that He may be designated the author of evil. We, on the 
contrary, distinguish between the two meanings of the word in question, and, by 
separating evils of sin from penal evils, mala culpoe from mala poenoe, confine 
to each of the two classes its own author,--the devil as the author of the 
sinful evils (culpoe), and God as the creator of penal evils (poenoe); so that 
the one class shall be accounted as morally bad, and the other be classed as the 
operations of justice passing penal sentences against the evils of sin. Of the 
latter class of evils which are compatible with justice, God is therefore 
avowedly the creator. They are, no doubt, evil to those by whom they are 
endured, but still on their own account good, as being just and defensive of 
good and hostile to sin. In this respect they are, moreover, worthy of God. Else 
prove them to be unjust, in order to show them deserving of a place in the 
sinful class, that is to say, evils of injustice; because if they turn out to 
belong to justice, they will be no longer evil things, but good--evil only to 
the bad, by whom even directly good things are condemned as evil. In this case, 
you must decide that man, although the wilful contemner of the divine law, 
unjustly bore the doom which he would like to have escaped; that the wickedness 
of those days was unjustly smitten by the deluge, afterwards by the fire (of 
Sodom); that Egypt, although most depraved and superstititious, and, worse 
still, the harasser of its guest-population, was unjustly stricken with the 
chastisement of its ten plagues. God hardens the heart of Pharaoh. He deserved, 
however, to be influenced to his destruction, who had already denied God, 
already in his pride so often rejected His ambassadors, accumulated heavy 
burdens on His people, and (to sum up all) as an Egyptian, had long been guilty 
before God of Gentile idolatry, worshipping the ibis and the crocodile in 
preference to the living God. Even His own people did God visit in their 
ingratitude. 
Against young lads, too, 309 
did He send forth bears, for their irreverence to the prophet. 
CHAP. XV.--THE SEVERITY OF GOD COMPATIBLE WITH REASON AND JUSTICE. 
WHEN INFLICTED, NOT MEANT TO BE ARBITRARY, BUT REMEDIAL.
Consider well, then, before all things the justice of the Judge; and if its 
purpose be clear, then the severity thereof, and the operations of the severity 
in its course, will appear compatible with reason and justice. Now, that we may 
not linger too long on the point, (I would challenge you to) 
assert the other reasons also, that you may condemn the Judge's sentences; 
extenuate the delinquencies of the sinner, that you may blame his judicial 
conviction. Never mind censuring the Judge; rather prove Him to be an unjust 
one. Well, then, even though He required the sins of the fathers at the hands of 
the children, the hardness of the people made such remedial measures necessary s 
for them, in order that, having their posterity in view, they might obey the 
divine law. For who is there that feels not a greater care for his children than 
for himself? Again, if the blessing of the fathers was destined likewise for 
their offspring, previous to any merit on the part of these, why might not the 
guilt of the fathers also redound to their children? 
As was the grace, so was the offence; so that the grace and the offence 
equally ran down through the whole race, with the reservation, indeed, of that 
subsequent ordinance by which it became possible to refrain from saying, that 
"the fathers had eaten a sour grape, and the children's teeth were set on edge:" 
in other words, that the father should not bear the iniquity of the son, nor the 
son the iniquity of the father, but that every man should be chargeable with his 
own sin; so that the harshness of the law having been reduced after the hardness 
of the people, justice was no longer to judge the race, but individuals. If, 
however, you accept the gospel of truth, you will discover on whom recoils the 
sentence of the Judge, when requiting on sons the sins of their fathers, even on 
those who had been (hardened enough) 
to imprecate spontaneously on themselves this condemnation: "His blood be on 
us, and on our children." This, therefore, the providence of God has ordered 
throughout its course, even as it had heard it. 
CHAP. XVI.--TO THE SEVERITY OF GOD THERE BELONG ACCESSORY QUALITIES, 
COMPATIBLE WITH JUSTICE. IF HUMAN PASSIONS ARE PREDICATED OF GOD, THEY MUST NOT 
BE MEASURED ON THE SCALE OF HUMAN IMPERFECTION.
Even His severity then is good, because just: when the judge is good, that is 
just. Other. qualities likewise are good, by means of which the good work of a 
good severity runs out its course, whether wrath, or jealousy, or sternness. For 
all these are as indispensable to severity as severity is to justice. The 
shamelessness of an age, which ought to have been reverent, had to be avenged. 
Accordingly, qualities which pertain to the judge, when they are actually free 
from blame, as the judge himself is, will never be able to be charged upon him 
as a fault. What would be said, if, when you thought the doctor necessary, you 
were to find fault with his instruments, because they cut, or cauterize, or 
amputate, or tighten; whereas there could be no doctor of any value without his 
professional tools? Censure, if you please, the practitioner who cuts badly, 
amputates clumsily, is rash in his cautery; and even blame his implements as 
rough tools of his art. Your conduct is equally unreasonable, when you allow 
indeed that God is a judge, but at the same time destroy those operations and 
dispositions by which He discharges His judicial functions. We are taught God by 
the prophets, and by Christ, not by the philosophers nor by Epicurus. We who 
believe that God really lived on earth, and took upon Him the low estate of 
human form, for the purpose of man's salvation, are very far from thinking as 
those do who refuse to believe that God cares for anything. Whence has found its 
way to the heretics an argument of this kind: If God is angry, and jealous, and 
roused, and grieved, He must therefore be corrupted, and must therefore die. 
Fortunately, however, it is a part of the creed of Christians even to believe 
that God did die, and yet that He is alive for evermore. Superlative is their 
folly, who prejudge divine things from human; so 310 
that, because in man's corrupt condition there are found passions of this 
description, therefore there must be deemed to exist in God also sensations of 
the same kind. Discriminate between the natures, and assign to them their 
respective senses, which are as diverse as their natures require, although they 
seem to have a community of designations. We read, indeed, of God's right hand, 
and eyes, and feet: these must not, however, be compared with those of human 
beings, because they are associated in one and the same name. Now, as great as 
shall be the difference between the divine and the human body, although their 
members pass under identical names, so great will also be the diversity between 
the divine and the human soul, notwithstanding that their sensations are 
designated by the same names. These sensations in the human being are rendered 
just as corrupt by the corruptibility of man's substance, as in God they are 
rendered incorruptible by the incorruption of the divine essence. Do you really 
believe the Creator to be God? By all means, is your reply. How then do you 
suppose that in God there is anything human, and not that all is divine? Him 
whom you do not deny to be God, you confess to be not human; because, when you 
confess Him to be God, you have, in fact, already determind that He is 
undoubtedly diverse from every sort of human conditions. Furthermore, although 
you allow, with others, that man was inbreathed by God into a living soul, not 
God by man, it is yet palpably absurd of you to be placing human characteristics 
in God rather than divine ones in man, and clothing God in the likeness of man, 
instead of man in the image of God. And this, therefore, is to be deemed the 
likeness of God in man, that the human soul have the same emotions and 
sensations as God, although they are not of the same kind; differing as they do 
both in their conditions and their issues according to their nature. Then, 
again, with respect to the opposite sensations,--I mean meekness, patience, 
mercy, and the very parent of them all, goodness,--why do you form your opinion 
of the divine displays of these (from the human qualities)? For we indeed do not 
possess them in perfection, because it is God alone who is perfect. So also in 
regard to those others,--namely, anger and irritation. we are not affected by 
them in so happy a manner, because God alone is truly happy, by reason of His 
property of incorruptibility. Angry He will possibly be, but not irritated, nor 
dangerously tempted; He will be moved, but not subverted. All appliances He must 
needs use, because of all contingencies; as many sensations as there are causes: 
anger because of the wicked, and indignation because of the ungrateful, and 
jealousy because of the proud, and whatsoever else is a hinderance to the evil. 
So, again, mercy on account of the erring, and patience on account of the 
impenitent, and pre-eminent resources on account of the meritorious, and 
whatsoever is necessary to the good. All these affections He is moved by in that 
peculiar manner of His own, in which it is profoundly fit that He should be 
affected; and it is owing to Him that man is also similarly affected in a way 
which is equally his own. 
CHAP. XVII.--TRACE GOD'S GOVERNMENT IN HISTORY AND IN HIS PRECEPTS, AND 
YOU
WILL FIND IT FULL OF HIS GOODNESS.
These considerations show that the entire order of God as Judge is an 
operative one, and (that I may express myself in worthier words) protective of 
His Catholic and supreme goodness, which, removed as it is from judiciary 
emotions, and pure in its own condition, the Marcionites refuse to acknowledge 
to be in one and the same Deity, "raining on the just and on the unjust, and 
making His sun to rise on the evil and on the good,"--a bounty which no other 
god at all exercises. It is true that Marcion has been bold enough to erase from 
the gospel this testimony of Christ to the Creator; but yet the world itself is 
inscribed with the goodness of its Maker, and the inscription is read by each 
man's conscience. Nay, this very long-suffering of the Creator will tend to the 
condemnation of Marcion; that patience, (I mean,) which waits for the sinner's 
repentance rather than his death, which prefers mercy to sacrifice, averting 
from the Ninevites the ruin which had been already denounced against them, and 
vouchsafing to Hezekiah's tears an extension of his life, and restoring his 
kingly state to the monarch of Babylon after his complete repentance; that 
mercy, too, which conceded to the devotion of the people the son of Saul when 
about to die, and gave free forgiveness to David on his confessing his sins 
against 311 
the house of Uriah; which also restored the house of Israel as often as it 
condemned it, and addressed to it consolation no less frequently than reproof. 
Do not therefore look at God simply as Judge, but turn your attention also to 
examples of His conduct as the Most Good. Noting Him, as you do, when He takes 
vengeance, consider Him likewise When He shows mercy. In the scale, against His 
severity place His gentleness. When you shall have discovered both qualities to 
co-exist in the Creator, you will find in Him that very circumstance which 
induces you to think there is another God. Lastly, come and examine into His 
doctrine, discipline, precepts, and counsels. You will perhaps say that there 
are equally good prescriptions in human laws. But Moses and God existed before 
all your Lycurguses and Solons. There is not one after-age which does not take 
from primitive sources. At any rate, my Creator did not learn from your God to 
issue such commandments as: Thou shalt not kill; thou shalt not commit adultery; 
thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not bear false witness; thou shalt not covet 
what is thy neighbour's; honour thy father and thy mother; and, thou shalt love 
thy neighbour as thyself. To these prime counsels of innocence, chastity, and 
justice, and piety, are also added prescriptions of humanity, as when every 
seventh year slaves are released for liberty; when at the same period the land 
is spared from tillage; a place is also granted to the needy; and from the 
treading ox's mouth the muzzle is removed, for the enjoyment of the fruit of his 
labour before him, in order that kindness first shown in the case of animals 
might be raised from such rudiments to the refreshment of men. 
CHAP. XVIII.--SOME OF GOD'S LAWS DEFENDED AS GOOD, WHICH THE 
MARCIONITES
IMPEACHED, SUCH AS THE LEX TALIONIS. USEFUL PURPOSES IN A SOCIAL AND 
MORAL
POINT OF VIEW OF THIS, AND SUNDRY OTHER ENACTMENTS.
But what parts of the law can I defend as good with a greater confidence than 
those which heresy has shown such a longing for?--as the statute of retaliation, 
requiring eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and stripe for stripe. Now there is not 
here any smack of a permission to mutual injury; but rather, on the whole, a 
provision for restraining violence. To a people which was very obdurate, and 
wanting in faith towards God, it might seem tedious, and even incredible, to 
expect from God that vengeance which was subsequently to be declared by the 
prophet: "Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." Therefore, in the 
meanwhile, the commission of wrong was to be checked by the fear of a 
retribution immediately to happen; and so the permission of this retribution was 
to be the prohibition of provocation, that a stop might thus be put to all 
hot-blooded injury, whilst by the permission of the second the first is 
prevented by fear, and by this deterring of the first the second fails to be 
committed. By the same law another result is also obtained, even the more ready 
kindling of the fear of retaliation by reason of the very savour of passion 
which is in it. There is no more bitter thing, than to endure the very suffering 
which you have inflicted upon others. When, again, the law took somewhat away 
from men's food, by pronouncing unclean certain animals which were once blessed, 
you should understand this to be a measure for encouraging continence, and 
recognise in it a bridle imposed on that appetite which, while eating angels' 
food, craved after the cucumbers and melons of the Egyptians. Recognise also 
therein a precaution against those companions of the appetite, even lust and 
luxury, which are usually chilled by the chastening of the appetite. For "the 
people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play." Furthermore, that an 
eager wish for money might be restrained, so far as it is caused by the need of 
food, the desire for costly meat and drink was taken out of their power. Lastly, 
in order that man might be more readily educated by God for fasting, he was 
accustomed to such articles of food as were neither plentiful nor sumptuous, and 
not likely to pamper the appetite of the luxurious. Of course the Creator 
deserved all the greater blame, because it was from His own people that He took 
away food, rather than from the more ungrateful Marcionites. As for the 
burdensome sacrifices also, and the troublesome scrupulousness of their 
ceremonies and oblations, no one should blame them, as if God specially required 
them for Himself: for He plainly asks, "To what purpose is the multitude of your 
sacrifices unto me?" and, 312 
"Who hath required them at your hand?" But he should see herein a careful 
provision on God's part, which showed His wish to bind to His own religion a 
people who were prone to idolatry and transgression by that kind of services 
wherein consisted the superstition of that period; that He might call them away 
therefrom, while requesting it to be performed to Himself, as if He desired that 
no sin should be committed in making idols. 
CHAP.XIX.--THE MINUTE PRESCRIPTIONS OF THE LAW MEANT TO KEEP THE 
PEOPLE
DEPENDENT ON GOD. THE PROPHETS SENT BY GOD IN PURSUANCE OF HIS GOODNESS. 
MANY
BEAUTIFUL PASSAGES FROM THEM QUOTED IN ILLUSTRATION OF THIS ATTRIBUTE.
But even in the common transactions of life, and of human intercourse at home 
and in public, even to the care of the smallest vessels, He in every possible 
manner made distinct arrangement; in order that, when they everywhere 
encountered these legal instructions, they might not be at any moment out of the 
sight of God. For what could better tend to make a man happy, than having "his 
delight in the law of the Lord?" "In that law would he meditate day and night. 
It was not in severity that its Author promulgated this law, but in the interest 
of the highest benevolence, which rather aimed at subduing the nation's hardness 
of heart, and by laborious services hewing out a fealty which was (as yet) 
untried in obedience: for I purposely abstain from touching on the mysterious 
senses of the law, considered in its spiritual and prophetic relation, and as 
abounding in types of almost every variety and sort. It is enough at present, 
that it simply bound a man to God, so that no one ought to find fault with it, 
except him who does not choose to serve God. To help forward this beneficent, 
not onerous, purpose of the law, the prophets were also ordained by the 
self-same goodness of God, teaching precepts worthy of God, how that men should 
"cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, judge the fatherless, and 
plead for the widow:" be fond of the divine expostulations: avoid contact with 
the wicked: "let the oppressed go free:" dismiss the unjust sentence. "deal 
their bread to the hungry; bring the outcast into their house; cover the naked, 
when they see him; nor hide themselves from their own flesh and kin:" "keep 
their tongue from evil, and their lips from speaking guile: depart from evil, 
and do good; seek peace, and pursue it:" be angry, and sin not; that is, not 
persevere in anger, or be enraged: "walk not in the counsel of the ungodly; nor 
stand in the way of sinners; nor sit in the seat of the scornful." Where then? 
"Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in 
unity;" meditating (as they do) day and night in the law of the Lord, because 
"it is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man; better to hope 
in the Lord than in man." For what recompense shall man receive from God? "He 
shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his 
fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he doeth 
shall prosper." "He that hath clean hands and a pure heart, who hath not taken 
God's name in vain, nor sworn deceitfully to his neighbour, he shall receive 
blessing from the Lord, and mercy from the God of his salvation." "For the eyes 
of the Lord are upon them that fear Him, upon them that hope in His mercy, to 
deliver their souls from death," even eternal death, "and to nourish them in 
their hunger," that is, after eternal life. "Many are the afflictions of the 
righteous, but the Lord delivereth them out of them all." "Precious in the sight 
of the Lord is the death of His saints." "The Lord keepeth all their bones; not 
one of them shall be broken." The Lord will redeem the souls of His servants. We 
have adduced these few quotations from a mass of the Creator's Scriptures; and 
no more, I suppose, are wanted to prove Him to be a most good God, for they 
sufficiently indicate both the precepts of His goodness and the first-fruits 
thereof. 
CHAP. XX.--THE MARCIONITES CHARGED GOD WITH HAVING INSTIGATED THE HEBREWS 
TO SPOIL THE EGYPTIANS. DEFENCE OF THE DIVINE DISPENSATION IN THAT MATTER.
But these "saucy cuttles" (of heretics) 
under the figure of whom the law about things to be eaten prohibited this 
very kind of piscatory ailment, as soon as they find themselves confuted, eject 
the black venom of their blasphemy, and so spread about in all directions the 
object which (as is now plain) they severally have in view, when they put forth 
such assertions and protestations as shall obscure and tarnish the rekindled 
light of the Creator's bounty. We will, however, follow their wicked design, 
even through these black clouds, and drag to light their tricks of dark calumny, 
laying to the Creator's charge with especial emphasis the fraud and theft of 
gold and silver which the Hebrews were commanded by Him to practise against the 
Egyptians. Come, unhappy heretic, I cite even you as a witness; first look at 
the case of the two nations, and then you will form a judgment of the Author of 
the command. The Egyptians put in a claim on the Hebrews for these gold and 
silver vessels. The Hebrews assert a counter claim, alleging that by the bond of 
their respective fathers, attested by the written engagement of both parties, 
there were due to them the arrears of that laborious slavery of theirs, for the 
bricks they had so painfully made, and the cities and palaces s which they had 
built. What shall be your verdict,you discoverer of the most good God? That the 
Hebrews must admit the fraud, or the Egyptians the compensation? For they 
maintain that thus has the question been settled by the advocates on both sides, 
of the Egyptians demanding their vessels, and the Hebrews claiming the requital 
of their labours. But for all they say, the Egyptians justly renounced their 
restitution-claim then and there; while the Hebrews to this day, in spite of the 
Marcionites, re-assert their demand for even greater damages, insisting that, 
however large was their loan of the gold and silver, it would not be 
compensation enough, even if the labour of six hundred thousand men should be 
valued at only "a farthing" a day a piece. Which, however, were the more in 
number--those who claimed the vessel, or those who dwelt in the palaces and 
cities? Which, too, the greater--the grievance of the Egyptians against the 
Hebrews, or "the favour" which they displayed towards them? Were free men 
reduced to servile labour, in order that the Hebrews might simply proceed 
against the Egyptians by action at law for injuries; or in order that their 
officers might on their benches sit and exhibit their backs and shoulders 
shamefully mangled by the fierce application of the scourge? It was not by a few 
plates and cup--in all cases the property, no doubt, of still fewer rich 
men--that any one would pronounce that compensation should have been awarded to 
the Hebrews, but both by all the resources of these and by the contributions of 
all the people. If, therefore, the case of the Hebrews be a good one, the 
Creator's case must likewise be a good one; that is to say, his command, when He 
both made the Egyptians unconsciously grateful, and also gave His own people 
their discharge in full at the time of their migration by the scanty comfort of 
a tacit requital of their long servitude. It was plainly less than their due 
which He commanded to be exacted. The Egyptians ought to have given back their 
men-children also to the Hebrews. 
CHAP. XXI.--THE LAW OF THE SABBATH-DAY EXPLAINED. THE EIGHT DAYS' 
PROCESSION AROUND JERICHO. THE GATHERING OF STICKS A VIOLATION.
Similarly on other points also, you reproach Him with fickleness and 
instability for contradictions in His commandments, such as that He forbade work 
to be done on Sabbath-days, and yet at the siege of Jericho ordered the ark to 
be carried round the walls during eight days; in other words, of course, 
actually on a Sabbath. You do not, however, consider the law of the Sabbath: 
they are human works, not divine, which it prohibits. For it says, "Six days 
shalt thou labour, and do all thy work; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of 
314 
the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work." What work? Of course 
your own. The conclusion is, that from the Sabbath-day He removes those works 
which He had before enjoined for the six days, that is, your own works; in other 
words, human works of daily life. Now, the carrying around of the ark is 
evidently not an ordinary daily duty, nor yet a human one; but a rare and a 
sacred work, and, as being then ordered by the direct precept of God, a divine 
one. And t might fully explain what this signified, were it not a tedious 
process to open out the forms of all the Creator's proofs, which you would, 
moreover, probably refuse to allow. It is more to the point, if you be confuted 
on plain matters by the simplicity of truth rather than curious reasoning. Thus, 
in the present instance, there is a clear distinction respecting the Sabbath's 
prohibition of human labours, not divine ones. Accordingly, the man who went and 
gathered sticks on the Sabbath-day was punished with death. For it was his own 
work which he did; and this the law forbade. They, however, who on the Sabbath 
carried the ark round Jericho, did it with impunity. For it was not their own 
work, but God's, which they executed, and that too, from His express 
commandment. 
CHAP. XXII.--THE BRAZEN SERPENT AND THE GOLDEN CHERUBIM WERE NOT 
VIOLATIONS OF THE SECOND COMMANDMENT. THEIR MEANING.
Likewise, when forbidding the similitude to be made of all things which are 
in heaven, and in earth, and in the waters, He declared also the reasons, as 
being prohibitory of all material exhibition of a latent idolatry. For He adds: 
"Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor serve them." The form, however, of the 
brazen serpent which the Lord afterwards commanded Moses to make, afforded no 
pretext for idolatry, but was meant for the cure of those who were plagued with 
the fiery serpents? I say nothing of what was figured by this cure. Thus, too, 
the golden Cherubim and Seraphim were purely an ornament in the figured fashion 
of the ark; adapted to ornamentation for reasons totally remote from all 
condition of idolatry, on account of which the making a likeness is prohibited; 
and they are evidently not at variance with this law of prohibition, because 
they are not found in that form of similitude, in reference to which the 
prohibition is given. We have spoken of the rational institution of the 
sacrifices, as calling off their homage from idols to God; and if He afterwards 
rejected this homage, saying, "To what purpose is the multitude of your 
sacrifices unto me?"--He meant nothing else than this to be understood, that He 
had never really required such homage for Himself. For He says, "I will not eat 
the flesh of bulls;" and in another passage: "The everlasting God shall neither 
hunger nor thirst." Although He had respect to the offerings of Abel, and 
smelled a sweet savour from the holocaust of Noah, yet what pleasure could He 
receive from the flesh of sheep, or the odour of burning victims? And yet the 
simple and God-fearing mind of those who offered what they were receiving from 
God, both in the way of food and of a sweet smell, was favourably accepted 
before God, in the sense of respectful homage to God, who did not so much want 
what was offered, as that which prompted the offering. Suppose now, that some 
dependant were to offer to a rich man or a king, who was in want of nothing, 
some very insignificant gift, will the amount and quality of the gift bring 
dishonour to the rich man and the king; or will the consideration of the homage 
give them pleasure? Were, however, the dependant, either of his own accord or 
even in compliance with a command, to present to him gifts suitably to his rank, 
and were he to observe the solemnities due to a king, only without faith and 
purity of heart, and without any readiness for other acts of obedience, will not 
that king or rich man consequently exclaim: "To what purpose is the multitude of 
your sacrifices unto me? I am full of your solemnities, your feast-days, and 
your Sabbaths." By calling them yours, as having been performed after the 
giver's own will, and not according to the religion of God (since he displayed 
them as his own, and not as God's), the Almighty in this passage, demonstrated 
how suitable to the conditions of the case, and how reasonable, was His 
rejection of those very offerings which He had commanded to be made to Him. 
CHAP. XXIII.--GOD'S PURPOSES IN ELECTION AND REJECTION OF THE SAME MEN, 
SUCH AS KING SAUL, EXPLAINED, IN ANSWER TO THE MARCIONITE CAVIL.
Now, although you will have it that He is inconstant in respect of persons, 
sometimes disapproving where approbation is deserved; or else wanting in 
foresight, bestowing approbation on men who ought rather to be reprobated, as if 
He either censured His own past judgments, or could not forecast His future 
ones; yet s nothing is so consistent for even a good judge as both to reject and 
to choose on the merits of the present moment. Saul is chosen, but he is not yet 
the despiser of the prophet Samuel. Solomon is rejected; but he is now become a 
prey to foreign women, and a slave to the idols of Moab and Sidon. What must the 
Creator do, in order to escape the censure of the Marcionites? Must He 
prematurely condemn men, who are thus far correct in their conduct, because of 
future delinquencies? But it is not the mark of a good God to condemn beforehand 
persons who have not yet deserved condemnation. Must He then refuse to eject 
sinners, on account of their previous good deeds? But it is not the 
characteristic of a just judge to forgive sins in consideration of former 
virtues which are no longer practised. 
Now, who is so faultless among men, that God could always have him in His 
choice, and never be able to reject him? Or who, on the other hand, is so void 
of any good work, that God could reject him for ever, and never be able to 
choose him? Show me, then, the man who is always good, and he will not be 
rejected; show me, too, him who is always evil, and he will never be chosen. 
Should, however, the same man, being found on different occasions in the 
pursuit of both (good and evil) be recompensed in both directions by God, who is 
both a good and judicial Being, He does not change His judgments through 
inconstancy or want of foresight, but dispenses reward according to the deserts 
of each case with a most unwavering and provident decision. 
CHAP. XXIV.--INSTANCES OF GOD'S REPENTANCE, AND NOTABLY IN THE CASE OF 
THE
NINEVITES, ACCOUNTED FOR AND VINDICATED.
Furthermore, with respect to the repentance which occurs in His conduct? you 
interpret it with similar perverseness just as if it were with fickleness and 
improvidence that He repented, or on the recollection of some wrong-doing; 
because He actually said, "It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king, 
"very much as if He meant that His repentance savoured of an acknowledgment of 
some evil work or error. Well, this is not always implied. For there occurs even 
in good works a confession of repentance, as a reproach and condemnation of the 
man who has proved himself unthankful for a benefit. For instance, in this case 
of Saul, the Creator, who had made no mistake in selecting him for the kingdom, 
and endowing him with His Holy Spirit, makes a statement respecting the 
goodliness of his person, how that He had most fitly chosen him as being at that 
moment the choicest man, so that (as He says) there was not his fellow among the 
children of Israel. Neither was He ignorant how he would afterwards turn out. 
For no one would bear you out in imputing lack of foresight to that God whom, 
since you do not deny Him to be divine, you allow to be also foreseeing; for 
this proper attribute of divinity exists in Him. However, He did, as I have 
said, burden the guilt of Saul with the confession of His own repentance; but as 
there is an absence of all error and wrong in His choice of Saul, it follows 
that this repentance is to be understood as upbraiding another rather than as 
self-incriminating. Look here then, say you: I discover a self-incriminating 
case in the matter of the Ninevites, when the book of Jonah declares, "And God 
repented of the evil that He had said that He would do unto them; and He did it 
not." In accordance with which Jonah himself says unto the Lord, "Therefore I 
fled before unto Tarshish; for I knew that Thou art a gracious God and merciful, 
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest Thee of the evil." It is 
well, therefore, that he premised the attribute of the most good God as most 
patient over the wicked, and most abundant in mercy and kindness over such as 
acknowledged and bewailed their sins, as the Ninevites were then doing. For if 
He who has this attribute is the Most Good, you will have first to relinquish 
that position of yours, that the very contact with evil is incompatible with 
such a Being, that is, with the most good God. And because 316 
Marcion, too, maintains that a good tree ought not to produce bad fruit; but 
yet he has mentioned "evil" (in the passage under discussion), which the most 
good God is incapable of, is there forthcoming any explanation of these "evils," 
which may render them compatible with even the most Good? There is, We say, in 
short, that evil in the present case means, not what may be attributed to the 
Creator's nature as an evil being, but what may be attributed to His power as a 
judge. In accordance with which He declared, "I 
create evil," and, "I frame evil against you;" meaning not to sinful evils, 
but avenging ones. What sort of stigmas pertains to these, congruous as they are 
with God's judicial character, we have sufficiently explained. Now although 
these are called "evils," they are yet not reprehensible in a judge; nor because 
of this their name do they show that the judge is evil: so in like manner will 
this particular evil be understood to be one of this class of judiciary evils, 
and along with them to be compatible with (God as) a judge. 
The Greeks also sometimes use the word "evils" for troubles and injuries (not 
malignant ones), as in this passage of yours is also meant. Therefore, if the 
Creator repented of such evil as this, as showing that the creature deserve 
dcondemnation, and ought to be punished for his sin, then, in the present 
instance no fault of a criminating nature will be imputed to the Creator, for 
having deservedly and worthily decreed the destruction of a city so full of 
iniquity. What therefore He had justly decreed, having no evil purpose in His 
decree, He decreed from the principle of justice, not from malevolence. Yet He 
gave it the name of "evil," because of the evil and desert involved in the very 
suffering itself. Then, you will say, if you excuse the evil under name of 
justice, on the ground that He had justly determined destruction against the 
people of Nineveh, He must even on this argument be blameworthy, for having 
repented of an act of justice, which surely should not be repented of. Certainly 
not, my reply is; God will never repent of an act of justice. And it now remains 
that we should understand what God's repentance means. For although man repents 
most frequently on the recollection of a sin, and occasionally even from the 
unpleasantness of some good action, this is never the case with God. For, 
inasmuch as God neither commits sin nor condemns a good action, in so far is 
there no room in Him for repentance of either a good or an evil deed. Now this 
point is determined for you even in the scripture which we have quoted. Samuel 
says to Saul, "The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and 
hath given it to a neighbour of thine that is better than thou;" and into two 
parts shall Israel be divided: "for He will not turn Himself, nor repent; for He 
does not repent as a man does." According, therefore, to this definition, the 
divine repentance takes in all cases a different form from that of man, in that 
it is never regarded as the result of improvidence or of fickleness, or of any 
condemnation of a good or an evil work. What, then, will be the mode of God's 
repentance? It is already quite clear, if you avoid referring it to human 
conditions. For it will have no other meaning than a simple change of a prior 
purpose; and this is admissible without any blame even in a man, much more in 
God, whose every purpose is faultless. Now in Greek the word for repentance 
(metanoia) is formed, not from the confession of a sin, but from a change 
of mind, which in God we have shown to be regulated by the occurrence of varying 
circumstances. 
CHAP. XXV.--GOD'S DEALINGS WITH ADAM AT THE FALL, AND WITH CAIN AFTER HIS 
CRIME, ADMIRABLY EXPLAINED AND DEFENDED.
It is now high time that I should, in order to meet all objections of this 
kind, proceed to the explanation and clearing up of the other trifles, weak 
points, and inconsistencies, as you deemed them. God calls out to Adam, Where 
art thou? as if ignorant where he was; and when he alleged that the shame of his 
nakedness was the cause (of his hiding himself), He inquired whether he had 
eaten of the tree, as if He were in doubt. By no means; God was neither 
uncertain about the commission of the sin, nor ignorant of Adam's whereabouts. 
It was certainly proper to summon the offender, who was concealing himself from 
the consciousness of his sin, and to bring him forth into the presence of his 
Lord, not merely by the calling out of his name, but 317 
with a home-thrust blow at the sin which he had at that moment committed. For 
the question ought not to be read in a merely interrogative tone, Where art 
thou, Adam? but with an impressive and earnest voice, and with an air of 
imputation, Oh, Adam, where art thou?--as much as to intimate: thou art no 
longer here, thou art in perdition--so that the voice is the utterance of One 
who is at once rebuking and sorrowing. But of course some part of paradise had 
escaped the eye of Him who holds the universe in His hand as if it were a bird's 
nest, and to whom heaven is a throne and earth a footstool; so that He could not 
see, before He summoned him forth, where Adam was, both while lurking and when 
eating of the forbidden fruit! The wolf or the paltry thief escapes not the 
notice of the keeper of your vineyard or your garden! And God, I suppose, with 
His keener vision, from on high was unable to miss the sight of aught which lay 
beneath Him! Foolish heretic, who treat with scorn so fine an argument of God's 
greatness and man's instruction! God put the question with an appearance of 
uncertainty, in order that even here He might prove man to be the subject of a 
free will in the alternative of either a denial or a confession, and give to him 
the opportunity of freely ackowledging his transgression, and, so far, of 
lightening it. In like manner He inquires of Cain where his brother was, just as 
if He had not yet heard the blood of Abel crying from the ground, in order that 
he too might have the opportunity from the same power of the will of 
spontaneously denying, and to this degree aggravating, his crime; and that thus 
there might be supplied to us examples of confessing sins rather than of denying 
them: so that even then was initiated the evangelic doctrine, "By thy words thou 
shall be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned." 
Now, although Adam was by reason of his condition under law subject to death, 
yet was hope preserved to him by the Lord's saying, "Behold, Adam is become as 
one of us;" that is, in consequence of the future taking of the man into the 
divine nature. Then what follows? "And now, lest he put forth his hand, and take 
also of the tree of life, (and eat), and live for ever." Inserting thus the 
particle of present time, "And now," He shows that He had made for a time, and 
at present, a prolongation of man's life. Therefore He did not actually curse 
Adam and Eve, for they were candidates for restoration, and they had been 
relieved by confession. Cain, however, He not only cursed; but when he wished to 
atone for his sin by death, He even prohibited his dying, so that he had to bear 
the load of this prohibition in addition to his crime. This, then, will prove to 
be the ignorance of our God, which was simulated on this account, that 
delinquent man should not be unaware of what he ought to do. Coming down to the 
case of Sodom and Gomorrha, he says: "I will go down now, and see whether they 
have done altogether according to the cry of it which is come unto me; and if 
not, I will know." Well, was He in this instance also uncertain through 
ignorance, and desiring to know? Or was this a necessary tone of utterance, as 
expressive of a minatory and not a dubious sense, under the colour of an 
inquiry? If you make merry at God's "going down," as if He could not except by 
the descent have accomplished His judgment, take care that you do not strike 
your own God with as hard a blow. For He also came down to accomplish what He 
wished. 
CHAP. XXVI.--THE OATH OF GOD: ITS MEANING. MOSES, WHEN DEPRECATING GOD'S 
WRATH AGAINST ISRAEL, A TYPE OF CHRIST.
But God also swears. Well, is it,I wonder, by the God of Marcion? No,no, he 
says; a much vainer oath--by Himself! What was He to do, when He knew of no 
other God; especially when He was swearing to this very point, that besides 
himself there was absolutely no God? Is it then of swearing falsely that you 
convict Him, or of swearing a vain oath? But it is not possible for him to 
appear to have sworn falsely, when he was ignorant, as you say he was, that 
there was another God. For when he swore by that which he knew, he really 
committed no perjury. But it was not a vain oath for him to swear that there was 
no other God. It would indeed be a vain oath, if there had been no persons who 
believed that there were other Gods, like the worshippers of idols then, and the 
heretics of the present day. Therefore He swears by Himself, in order that you 
may believe God, even when He swears that there 318 
is besides Himself no other God at all. But you have yourself, O Marcion, 
compelled God to do this. For even so early as then were you foreseen. Hence, if 
He swears both in His promises and His threatenings, and thus extorts faith 
which at first was difficult, nothing is unworthy of God which causes men to 
believe in God. But (you say) God was even then mean enough in His very 
fierceness, when, in His wrath against the people for their consecration of the 
calf, He makes this request of His servant Moses: "Let me alone, that my wrath 
may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of thee a 
great nation." Accordingly, you maintain that Moses is better than his God, as 
the deprecator, nay the averter, of His anger. "For," said he, "Thou shall not 
do this; or else destroy me along with them." Pitiable are ye also, as well as 
the people, since you know not Christ, prefigured in the person of Moses as the 
deprecator of the Father, and the offerer of His own life for the salvation of 
the people. It is enough, however, that the nation was at the instant really 
given to Moses. That which he, as a servant, was able to ask of the Lord, the 
Lord required of Himself. For this purpose did He say to His servant, "Let me 
alone, that I may consume them," in order that by his entreaty, and by offering 
himself, he might hinder (the threatened judgment), and that you might by such 
an Instance learn how much privilege is vouch-safed with God to a faithful man 
and a prophet. 
CHAP. XXVII.--OTHER OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. GOD'S CONDESCENSION IN THE 
INCARNATION NOTHING DEROGATORY TO THE DIVINE BEING IN THIS ECONOMY. THE DIVINE 
MAJESTY WORTHILY SUSTAINED BY THE ALMIGHTY FATHER, NEVER VISIBLE TO MAN. 
PERVERSENESS OF THE MARCIONITE CAVILS.
And now, that I may briefly pass in review the other points which you have 
thus far been engaged in collecting, as mean, weak, and unworthy, for 
demolishing the Creator, I will propound them in a simple and definite 
statement: that God would have been unable to hold any intercourse with men, if 
He had not taken on Himself the emotions and affections of man, by means of 
which He could temper the strength of His majesty, which would no doubt have 
been incapable of endurance to the moderate capacity of man, by such a 
humiliation as was indeed degrading to Himself, but necessary for man, and such 
as on this very account became worthy of God, because nothing is so worthy of 
God as the salvation of man. If I were arguing with heathens, I should dwell 
more at length on this point; although with heretics too the discussion does not 
stand on very different grounds. Inasmuch as ye yourselves have now come to the 
belief that God moved about in the form and all other circumstances of man's 
nature, you will of course no longer require to be convinced that God conformed 
Himself to humanity, but feel yourselves bound by your own faith. For if the God 
(in whom ye believe,) even from His higher condition, prostrated the supreme 
dignity of His majesty to such a lowliness as to undergo death, even the death 
of the cross, why can you not suppose that some humiliations are becoming to our 
God also, only more tolerable than Jewish contumelies, and crosses, and 
sepulchres? Are these the humiliations which henceforth are to raise a prejudice 
against Christ (the subject as He is of human passions) being a partaker of that 
Godhead against which you make the participation in human qualities a reproach? 
Now we believe that Christ did ever act in the name of God the Father; that He 
actually from the beginning held intercourse with (men); actually communed with 
patriarchs and prophets; was the Son of the Creator; was His Word; whom God made 
His Son by emitting Him from His own self, and thenceforth set Him over every 
dispensation and (administration of) His will, making Him a little lower than 
the angels, as is written in David. In which lowering of His condition He 
received from the Father a dispensation in those very respects which you blame 
as human; from the very beginning learning, even then, (that state of a) man 
which He was destined in the end to become. It is He 319 
who descends, He who interrogates, He who demands, He who swears. With 
regard, however, to the Father, the very gospel which is common to us will 
testify that He was never visible, according to the word of Christ: "No man 
knoweth the Father, save the Son." For even in the Old Testament He had 
declared, "No man shall see me, and live." He means that the Father is 
invisible, in whose authority and in whose name was He God who appeared as the 
Son of God. But with us Christ is received in the person of Christ, because even 
in this manner is He our God. Whatever attributes therefore you require as 
worthy of God, must be found in the Father, who is invisible and unapproachable, 
and placid, and (so to speak) the God of the philosophers; whereas those 
qualities which you censure as unworthy must be supposed to be in the Son, who 
has been seen, and heard, and encountered, the Witness and Servant of the 
Father, uniting in Himself man and God, God in mighty deeds, in weak ones man, 
in order that He may give to man as much as He takes from God. What in your 
esteem is the entire disgrace of my God, Is in fact the sacrament of man's 
salvation God held converse with man, that man might learn to act as God. God 
dealt on equal terms with man, that man might be able to deal on equal terms 
with God. God was found little, that man might become very great. You who 
disdain such a God, I hardly know whether you ex fide believe that God was 
crucified. How great, then, is your perversity in respect of the two characters 
of the Creator! You designate Him as Judge, and reprobate as Cruelty that 
severity of the Judge which only acts in accord with the merits of cases. You 
require God to be very good, and yet despise as meanness that gentleness of His 
which accorded with His kindness, (and) held lowly converse in proportion to the 
mediocrity of man's estate. He pleases you not, whether great or little, neither 
as your judge nor as your friend! What if the same features should be discovered 
in your God? That He too is a judge, we have already shown in the proper 
section: that from being a judge He must needs be severe; and from being severe 
He must also be cruel, if indeed cruel. 
CHAP. XXVIII.--THE TABLES TURNED UPON MARCION, BY CONTRASTS, IN FAVOUR OF 
THE
TRUE GOD.
Now, touching the weaknesses and malignities, and the other (alleged), notes 
(of the Creator), I too shall advance antitheses in rivalry to Marcion's. If my 
God knew not of any other superior to Himself, your god also was utterly unaware 
that there was any beneath himself. It is just what Heraclitus "the obscure" 
said; whether it be up or down, it comes to the same thing. If, indeed, he was 
not ignorant (of his position), it must have occurred to Him from the beginning. 
Sin and death, and the author of sin too--the devil--and all the evil which my 
God permitted to be, this also, did your god permit; for he allowed Him to 
permit it. Our God changed His purposes; in like manner yours did also. For he 
who cast his look so late in the human race, changed that purpose, which for so 
long a period had refused to cast that look. Our God repented Him of the evil in 
a given case; so also did yours. For by the fact that he at last had regard to 
the salvation of man, he showed such a repentance of his previous disregard as 
was due for a wrong deed. But neglect of man's salvation will be accounted a 
wrong deed, simply because it has been remedied by his repentance in the conduct 
of your god. Our God you say commanded a fraudulent act, but in a matter of gold 
and silver. Now, inasmuch as man is more precious than gold and silver, in so 
far is your god more fraudulent still, because he robs man of his Lord and 
Creator. Eye for eye does our God require; but your god does even a greater 
injury, (in your ideas,) when he prevents an act of retaliation. For what man 
will not return a blow, without waiting to be struck a second time. Our 320 
God (you say) knows not whom He ought to choose. Nor does your god, for if he 
had foreknown the issue, he would not have chosen the traitor Judas. If you 
allege that the Creator practised deception in any instance, there was a far 
greater mendacity in your Christ, whose very body was unreal. Many were consumed 
by the severity of my God. Those also who were not saved by your god are verily 
disposed by him to ruin. My God ordered a man to be slain. Your god willed 
himself to be put to death; not less a homicide against himself than in respect 
of him by whom he meant to be slain. I will moreover prove to Marcion that they 
were many who were slain by his god; for he made every one a homicide: in other 
words, he doomed him to perish, except when people failed in no duty towards 
Christ. But the straightforward virtue of truth is contented with few resources. 
Many things will be necessary for falsehood. 
CHAP. XXIX.--MARCION'S OWN ANTITHESES, IF ONLY THE TITLE AND OBJECT OF THE 
WORK BE EXCEPTED, AFFORD PROOFS OF THE CONSISTENT ATTRIBUTES OF THE TRUE 
GOD.
But I would have attacked Marcion's own Antitheses in closer and fuller 
combat, if a more elaborate demolition of them were required in maintaining for 
the Creator the character of a good God and a Judge, alters the examples of both 
points, which we have shown to be so worthy of God. Since, however, these two 
attributes of goodness and justice do together make up the proper fulness of the 
Divine Being as omnipotent, I am able to content myself with having now 
compendiously refuted his Antitheses, which aim at drawing distinctions out of 
the qualities of the (Creator's) artifices, or of His laws, or of His great 
works; and thus sundering Christ from the Creator, as the most Good from the 
Judge, as One who is merciful from Him who is ruthless, and One who brings 
salvation from Him who causes ruin. The truth is, they rather unite the two 
Beings whom they arrange in those diversities (of attribute), which yet are 
compatible in God. For only take away the title of Marcion's book, and the 
intention and purpose of the work itself, and you could get no better 
demonstration that the self-same God was both very good and a Judge, inasmuch as 
these two characters are only competently found in God. Indeed, the very effort 
which is made in the selected examples to oppose Christ to the Creator, conduces 
all the more to their union. For so entirely one and the same was the nature of 
the Divine Beings, the good and the severe, as shown both by the same examples 
and in similar proofs, that It willed to display Its goodness to those on whom 
It had first inflicted Its severity. The difference in time was no matter of 
surprise, when the same God was afterwards merciful in presence of evils which 
had been subdued, who had once been so austere whilst they were as yet 
unsubdued. Thus, by help of the Antitheses, the dispensation of the Creator can 
be more readily shown to have been reformed by Christ, rather than destroyed; 
restored, rather than abolished; especially as you sever your own god from 
everything like acrimonious conduct, even from all rivalry whatsoever with the 
Creator. Now, since this is the case, how comes it to pass that the Antitheses 
demonstrate Him to have been the Creator's rival in every disputed cause? Well, 
even here, too, I will allow that in these causes my God has been a jealous God, 
who has in His own right taken especial care that all things done by Him should 
be in their beginning of a robuster growth; and this in the way of a good, 
because rational emulation, which tends to maturity. In this sense the world 
itself will acknowledge His "antitheses," from the contrariety of its own 
elements, although it has been regulated with the very highest reason. 
Wherefore, most thoughtless Marcion, it was your duty to have shown that one (of 
the two Gods you teach) was a God of light, and the other a God of darkness; and 
then you would have found it an easier task to persuade us that one was a God of 
goodness, the other a God of severity. How ever, the "antithesis" (or variety of 
administration) will rightly be His property, to whom it actually belongs in 
(the government of) the world. 

