
Tertullian












Tertullian 
On the Pallium
CHAPTER I.--TIME CHANGES NATIONS' DRESSES-- AND FORTUNES, 
MEN of Carthage, ever princes of Africa, ennobled by ancient memories, blest 
with modern felicities, I rejoice that times are so prosperous with you that you 
have leisure to spend and pleasure to find in criticising dress. These are the 
"piping times of peace" and plenty. Blessings rain from the empire and from the 
sky. Still, you too of old time wore your garments--your tunics--of another 
shape; and indeed they were in repute for the skill of the weft, and the harmony 
of the hue, and the due proportion of the size, in that they were neither 
prodigally long across the shins, nor immodestly scanty between the knees, nor 
niggardly to the arms, nor tight to the hands, but, without being shadowed by 
even a girdle arranged to divide the folds, they stood on men's backs with 
quadrate symmetry. The garment of the mantle extrinsically--itself too 
quadrangular--thrown back on either shoulder, and meeting closely round the neck 
in the gripe of the buckle, used to repose on the shoulders. Its counterpart is 
now the priestly dress, sacred to AEsculapius, whom you now call your own. So, 
too, in your immediate vicinity, the sister State used to clothe (her citizens); 
and wherever else in Africa Tyre (has settled). But when the urn of worldly lots 
varied, and God favoured the Romans, the sister State, indeed, of her own choice 
hastened to effect a change; in order that when Scipio put in at her ports she 
might already beforehand have greeted him in the way of dress, precocious in her 
Romanizing. To you, however, after the benefit in which your injury resulted, as 
exempting you from the infinity of age, not (deposing you) from your height of 
eminence,--after Gracchus and his foul omens, after Lepidus and his rough jests, 
after Pompeius and his triple altars, and Caesar and his long delays, when 
Statilius Taurus reared your ramparts, and Sentius Saturninus pronounced the 
solemn form of your inauguration,--while concord lends her aid, the gown is 
offered. Well! what a circuit has it taken! from Pelasgians to Lydians; from 
Lydians to Romans: in order that from the shoulders of the sublimer people it 
should descend to embrace Carthaginians! Henceforth, finding your tunic too 
long, you suspend it on a dividing cincture; and the redundancy of your now 
smooth toga you support by gathering it together fold upon fold; and, with 
whatever other garment social condition or dignity or season clothes you, the 
mantle, at any rate, which used to be worn by all ranks and conditions among 
you, you not only are unmindful of, but even deride. For my own part, I wonder 
not (thereat), in the face of a more ancient evidence (of your forgetfulness). 
For the ram withal--not that which Laberius (calls) "Back-twisted-horned, 
wool-skinned, stones-dragging," but a beam-like engine it is, which does 
military service in battering walls--never before poised by any, the redoubted 
Carthage, "Keenest in pursuits of war," is said to have been the first of all to 
have equipped for the oscillatory work of pendulous impetus; modelling the power 
of her engine after the choleric fury of the head-avenging beast. When, however, 
their country's fortunes are at the last gasp, and the ram, now turned Roman, is 
doing his deeds of daring against the ramparts which erst were his own, 
forthwith the Carthaginians stood dumbfounded as at a "novel" and "strange" 
ingenuity: "so much doth Time's long age avail to change!" Thus, in short, it is 
that the mantle, too, is not recognised. 
CHAPTER II. --THE LAW OF CHANGE, OR MUTATION, UNIVERSAL. 
Draw we now our material from some other source, lest Punichood either blush 
or else grieve in the midst of Romans. To change her habit is, at all events, 
the stated function of entire nature. The very world itself (this which we 
inhabit) meantime discharges it. See to it Anaximander, if he thinks there are 
more (worlds): see to it, whoever else (thinks there exists another) anywhere at 
the region of the Meropes, as Silenus prates in the ears of Midas, apt (as those 
cars are), it must be admitted, for even huger fables. Nay, even if Plato thinks 
there exists one of which this of ours is the image, that likewise must 
necessarily have similarly to undergo mutation; inasmuch as, if it is a "world," 
it will consist of diverse substances and offices, answerable to the form of 
that which is here the "world:" for "world" it will not be if it be not just as 
the "world" is. Things which, in diversity, tend to unity, are diverse by 
demutation. In short, it is their vicissitudes which federate the discord of 
their diversity. Thus it will be by mutation that every "world" will exist whose 
corporate structure is the result of diversities, and whose attemperation is the 
result of vicissitudes. 
At all events, this hostelry of ours is versiform,-- a fact which is patent 
to eyes that are closed, or utterly Homeric. Day and night revolve in turn. The 
sun varies by annual stations, the moon by monthly phases. The stars--distinct 
in their confusion--sometimes drop, sometimes resuscitate, somewhat. The circuit 
of the heaven is now resplendent with serenity, now dismal with cloud; or else 
rain-showers come rushing down, and whatever missiles (mingle) with them: 
thereafter (follows) a slight sprinkling, and then again brilliance. So, too, 
the sea has an ill repute for honesty; while at one time, the breezes equably 
swaying it, tranquillity gives it the semblance of probity, calm gives it the 
semblance of even temper; and then all of a sudden it heaves restlessly with 
mountain-waves. Thus, too, if you survey the earth, loving to clothe herself 
seasonably, you would nearly be ready to deny her identity, when, remembering 
her green, you behold her yellow, and will ere long see her hoary too. Of the 
rest of her adornment also, what is there which is not subject to interchanging 
mutation--the higher ridges of her mountains by recursion, the veins of her 
fountains by disappearance, and the pathways of her streams by alluvial 
formation? There was a time when her whole orb, withal, underwent mutation, 
overrun by all waters. To this day marine conchs and tritons' horns sojourn as 
foreigners on the mountains, eager to prove to Plato that even the heights have 
undulated. But withal, by ebbing out, her orb again underwent a formal mutation; 
another, but the same. Even now her shape undergoes local mutations, when (some 
particular) spot is damaged; when among her islands Delos is now no more, Samos 
a heap of sand, and the Sibyl (is thus proved) no liar; when in the Atlantic 
(the isle) that was equal in size to Libya or Asia is sought in vain; when 
formerly a side of Italy, severed to the centre by the shivering shock of the 
Adriatic and the Tyrrhenian seas, leaves Sicily as its relics; when that total 
swoop of discission, whirling backwards the contentious encounters of the mains, 
invested the sea with a novel vice, the vice not of spuing out wrecks, but of 
devouring them! The continent as well suffers from heavenly or else from 
inherent forces. Glance at Palestine. Where Jordan's river is the arbiter of 
boundaries, (behold) a vast waste, and a bereaved region, and bootless land! 
And once (there were there) cities, and flourishing peoples, and the soil 
yielded its fruits. Afterwards, since God is a Judge, impiety earned showers of 
fire: Sodom's day is over, and Gomorrah is no more; and all is ashes; and the 
neighbour sea no less than the soil experiences a living death! Such a cloud 
overcast Etruria, burning down her ancient Volsinii, to teach Campania (all the 
more by the ereption of her Pompeii) to look expectantly upon her own mountains. 
But far be (the repetition of such catastrophes)! Would that Asia, withal, were 
by this time without cause for anxiety about the soil's voracity! Would, too, 
that Africa had once for all quailed before the devouring chasm, expiated by the 
treacherous absorption of one single camp! Many other such detriments besides 
have made innovations upon the fashion of our orb, and moved (particular) spots 
(in it). Very great also has been the licence of wars. But it is no less irksome 
to recount sad details than (to recount) the vicissitudes of kingdoms, (and to 
show) how frequent have been their mutations, from Ninus the progeny of Belus, 
onwards; if indeed Ninus was the first to have a kingdom, as the ancient profane 
authorities assert. Beyond his time the pen is not wont (to travel), in general, 
among you (heathens). From the Assyrians, it may be, the histories of "recorded 
time" begin to open. We, however, who are habitual readers of divine histories, 
are masters of the subject from the nativity of the universe itself. But I 
prefer, at the present time, joyous details, inasmuch as things joyous withal 
are subject to mutation. In short, whatever the sea has washed away, the heaven 
burned down, the earth undermined, the sword shorn down, reappears at some other 
time by the turn of compensation. For in primitive days not only was the earth, 
for the greater part of her circuit, empty and uninhabited; but if any 
particular race had seized upon any part, it existed for itself alone. And so, 
understanding at last that all things worshipped themselves, (the earth) 
consulted to weed and scrape her copiousness (of inhabitants), in one place 
densely packed, in another abandoning their posts; in order that thence (as it 
were from grafts and settings) peoples from peoples, cities from cities, might 
be planted throughout every region of her orb. Transmigrations were made by the 
swarms of redundant races. The exuberance of the Scythians fertilizes the 
Persians; the Phoenicians gush out into Africa; the Phrygians give birth to the 
Romans; the seed of the Chaldeans is led out into Egypt; subsequently, when 
transferred thence, it becomes the Jewish race. So, too, the posterity of 
Hercules, in like wise, proceed to occupy the Peloponnesus for the behoof of 
Temenus. So, again, the Ionian comrades of Neleus furnish Asia with new cities: 
so, again, the Corinthians with Archias, fortify Syracuse. But antiquity is by 
this time a vain thing (to refer to), when our own careers are before our eyes. 
How large a portion of our orb has the present age reformed! how many cities has 
the triple power of our existing empire either produced, or else augmented, or 
else restored! While God favours so many Augusti unitedly, how many populations 
have been transferred to other localities! how many peoples reduced! how many 
orders restored to their ancient splendour! how many barbarians baffled! In 
truth, our orb is the admirably cultivated estate of this empire; every aconite 
of hostility eradicated; and the cactus and bramble of clandestinely crafty 
familiarity wholly uptorn; and (the orb itself) delightsome beyond the orchard 
of Alcinous and the rosary of Midas. Praising, therefore, our orb in its 
mutations, why do you point the finger of scorn at a man? 
CHAPTER III.--BEASTS SIMILARLY SUBJECT TO THE LAW OF MUTATION. 
Beasts, too, instead of a garment, change their form. And yet the peacock 
withal has plumage for a garment, and a garment indeed of the choicest; nay, in 
the bloom of his neck richer than any purple, and in the effulgence of his back 
more gilded than any edging, and in the sweep of his tail more flowing than any 
train; many-coloured, diverse-coloured, and versi-coloured; never itself, ever 
another, albeit ever itself when other; in a word, mutable as oft as moveable. 
The serpent, too, deserves to be mentioned, albeit not in the same breath as the 
peacock; for he too wholly changes what has been allotted him--his hide and his 
age: if it is true, (as it is,) that when he has felt the creeping of old age 
throughout him, he squeezes himself into confinement; crawls into a cave and out 
of his skin simultaneously; and, clean shorn on the spot, immediately on 
crossing the threshold leaves his slough behind him then and there, and uncoils 
himself in a new youth: with his scales his years, too, are repudiated. The 
hyena, if you observe, is of an annual sex, alternately masculine and feminine. 
I say nothing of the stag, because himself withal, the witness of his own age, 
feeding on the serpent, languishes--from the effect of the poison--into youth. 
There is, withal, "A tardigrade field-haunting quadruped, Humble and rough." 
The tortoise of Pacuvius, you think? No. There is another beastling which the 
versicle fits; in size, one of the moderate exceedingly, but a grand name. If, 
without previously knowing him, you hear tell of a chameleon, you will at once 
apprehend something yet more huge united with a lion. But when you stumble upon 
him, generally in a vineyard, his whole bulk sheltered beneath a vine leaf, you 
will forthwith laugh at the egregious audacity of the name, inasmuch as there is 
no moisture even in his body, though in far more minute creatures the body is 
liquefied, The chameleon is a living pellicle. His headkin begins straight from 
his spine, for neck he has none: and thus reflection is hard for him; but, in 
circumspection, his eyes are outdarting, nay, they are revolving points of 
light. Dull and weary, he scarce raises from the ground, but drags, his footstep 
amazedly, and moves forward,--he rather demonstrates, than takes, a step: ever 
fasting, to boot, yet never fainting; agape he feeds; heaving, bellowslike, he 
ruminates; his food wind. Yet withal the chameleon is able to effect a total 
self-mutation, and that is all. For, whereas his colour is properly one, yet, 
whenever anything has approached him, then he blushes. To the chameleon alone 
has been granted--as our common saying has it--to sport with his own hide. 
Much had to be said in order that, after due preparation, we might arrive at 
man. From whatever beginning you admit him as springing, naked at all events and 
ungarmented he came from his fashioner's hand: afterwards, at length, without 
waiting for permission, he possesses himself, by a premature grasp, of wisdom. 
Then and there hastening to forecover what, in his newly made body, it was not 
yet due to modesty (to forecover), he surrounds himself meantime with 
fig-leaves: subsequently, on being driven from the confines of his birthplace 
because he had sinned, he went, skinclad, to the world as to a mine. 
But these are secrets, nor does their knowledge appertain to all. Come, let 
us hear from your own store-- (a store) which the Egyptians narrate, and 
Alexander digests, and his mother reads--touching the time of Osiris, when 
Ammon, rich in sheep, comes to him out of Libya. In short, they tell us that 
Mercury, when among them, delighted with the softness of a ram which he had 
chanced to stroke, flayed a little ewe; and, while he persistently tries and (as 
the pliancy of the material invited him) thins out the thread by assiduous 
traction, wove it into the shape of the pristine net which he had joined with 
strips of linen. But you have preferred to assign all the management of 
wool-work and structure of the loom to Minerva; whereas a more diligent workshop 
was presided over by Arachne. Thenceforth material (was abundant). Nor do I 
speak of the sheep of Miletus, and Selge, and Altinum, or of those for which 
Tarentum or Baetica is famous, with nature for their dyer: but (I speak of the 
fact) that shrubs afford you clothing, and the grassy parts of flax, losing 
their greenness, turn white by washing. Nor was it enough to plant and sow your 
tunic, unless it had likewise fallen to your lot to fish for raiment. For the 
sea withal yields fleeces, inasmuch as the more brilliant shells of a mossy 
wooliness furnish a hairy stuff. Further: it is no secret that the silkworm--a 
species of wormling it is--presently reproduces safe and sound (the fleecy 
threads) which, by drawing them through the air, she distends more skilfully 
than the dial-like webs of spiders, and then devours. In like manner, if you 
kill it, the threads which you coil are forthwith instinct with vivid colour. 
The ingenuities, therefore, of the tailoring art, superadded to, and 
following up, so abundant a store of materials--first with a view to coveting 
humanity, where Necessity led the way; and subsequently with a view to adorning 
withal, ay, and inflating it, where Ambition followed in the wake--have 
promulgated the various forms of garments. Of which forms, part are worn by 
particular nations, without being common to the rest; part, on the other hand, 
universally, as being useful to all: as, for instance, this Mantle, albeit it is 
more Greek (than Latin), has yet by this time found, in speech, a home in 
Latium. With the word the garment entered. And accordingly the very man who used 
to sentence Greeks to extrusion from the city, but learned (when he was now 
advanced in years) their alphabet and speech--the self-same Cato, by baring his 
shoulder at the time of his praetorship, showed no less favour to the Greeks by 
his mantle-like garb. 
CHAP, IV.--CHANGE NOT ALWAYS IMPROVEMENT. 
Why, now, if the Roman fashion is (social) salvation to every one, are you 
nevertheless Greek to a degree, even in points not honourable? Or else, if it is 
not so, whence in the world is it that provinces which have had a better 
training, provinces which nature adapted rather for surmounting by hard 
struggling the difficulties of the soil, derive the pursuits of the 
wrestling-ground--pursuits which fall into a sad old age and labour in vain--and 
the unction with mud, and the rolling in sand, and the dry dietary? Whence comes 
it that some of our Numidians, with their long locks made longer by horsetail 
plumes, learn to bid the barber shave their skin close, and to exempt their 
crown alone from the knife? Whence comes it that men shaggy and hirsute learn to 
teach the resin to feed on their arms with such rapacity, the tweezers to weed 
their chin so thievishly? A prodigy it is, that all this should be done without 
the Mantle! To the Mantle appertains this whole Asiatic practice! What hast 
thou, Libya, and thou, Europe, to do with athletic refinements, which thou 
knowest not how to dress? For, in sooth, what kind of thing is it to practise 
Greekish depilation more than Greekish attire? 
The transfer of dress approximates to culpability just in so far as it is not 
custom, but nature, which suffers the change. There is a wide enough difference 
between the honour due to time, and religion. Let Custom show fidelity to Time, 
Nature to God. To Nature, accordingly, the Larissaean hero gave a shock by 
turning into a virgin; he who had been reared on the marrows of wild beasts 
(whence, too, was derived the composition of his name, because he had been a 
stranger with his lips to the maternal breast); he who had been reared by a 
rocky and wood-haunting and monstrous trainer in a stony school. You would bear 
patiently, if it were in a boy's case, his mother's solicitude; but he at all 
events was already be-haired, he at all events had already secretly given proof 
of his manhood to some one, when he consents to wear the flowing stole, to dress 
his hair, to cultivate his skin, to consult the mirror, to bedizen his neck; 
effeminated even as to his ear by boring, whereof his bust at Sigeum still 
retains the trace. Plainly afterwards he turned soldier: for necessity restored 
him his sex. The clarion had sounded of battle: nor were arms far to seek. "The 
steel's self," says (Homer), "attracteth the hero." Else if, after that 
incentive as well as before, he had persevered in his maidenhood, he might 
withal have been married! Behold, accordingly, mutation! A monster, I call 
him,--a double monster: from man to woman; by and by from woman to man: whereas 
neither ought the truth to have been belied, nor the deception confessed. Each 
fashion of changing was evil: the one opposed to nature, the other contrary to 
safety. 
Still more disgraceful was the case when lust transfigured a man in his 
dress, than when some maternal dread did so: and yet adoration is offered by you 
to me, whom you ought to blush at,--that Clubshaftandhidebearer, who exchanged 
for womanly attire the whole proud heritage of his name! Such licence was 
granted to the secret haunts of Lydia, that Hercules was prostituted in the 
person of Omphale, and Omphale in that of Hercules. Where were Diomed and his 
gory mangers? where Busiris and his funereal altars? where Geryon, triply one? 
The club preferred still to reek with their brains when it was being pestered 
with unguents! The now veteran (stain of the) Hydra's and of the Centaurs' blood 
upon the shafts was gradually eradicated by the pumice-stone, familiar to the 
hair-pin! while voluptuousness insulted over the fact that, after transfixing 
monsters, they should perchance sew a coronet! No sober woman even, or heroine 
of any note, would have adventured her shoulders beneath the hide of such a 
beast, unless after long softening and smoothening down and deodorization (which 
in Omphale's house, I hope, was effected by balsam and fenugreek-salve: I 
suppose the mane, too, submitted to the comb) for fear of getting her tender 
neck imbued with lionly toughness. The yawning mouth stuffed with hair, the 
jaw-teeth overshadowed amid the forelocks, the whole outraged visage, would have 
roared had it been able. Nemea, at all events (if the spot has any presiding 
genius), groaned: for then she looked around, and saw that she had lost her 
lion. What sort of being the said Hercules was in Omphale's silk, the 
description of Omphale in Hercules' hide has inferentially depicted. 
But, again, he who had formerly rivalled the Tirynthian--the pugilist 
Cleomachus--subsequently, at Olympia, after losing by efflux his masculine sex 
by an incredible mutation--bruised within his skin and without, worthy to be 
wreathed among the "Fullers" even of Novius, and deservedly commemorated by the 
mimographer Lentulus in his Catinensians--did, of course, not only cover with 
bracelets the traces left by (the bands of) the cestus, but likewise supplanted 
the coarse ruggedness of his athlete's cloak with some superfinely wrought 
tissue. 
Of Physco and Sardanapalus I must be silent, whom, but for their eminence in 
lusts, no one would recognise as kings. But I must be silent, for fear lest even 
they set up a muttering concerning some of your Caesars, equally lost to shame; 
for fear lest a mandate have been given to canine constancy to point to a Caesar 
impurer than Physco, softer than Sardanapalus, and indeed a second Nero. 
Nor less warmly does the force of vainglory also work for the mutation of 
clothing, even while manhood is preserved. Every affection is a heat: when, 
however, it is blown to (the flame of) affectation, forthwith, by the blaze of 
glory, it is an ardour. From this fuel, therefore, you see a great 
king--inferior only to his glory--seething. He had conquered the Median race, 
and was conquered by Median garb. Doffing the triumphal mail, he degraded 
himself into the captive trousers! The breast dissculptured with scaly bosses, 
by covering it with a transparent texture he bared; punting still after the work 
of war, and (as it were) softening, he extinguished it with the ventilating 
silk! Not sufficiently swelling of spirit was the Macedonian, unless he had 
likewise found delight in a highly inflated garb: only that philosophers withal 
(I believe) themselves affect somewhat of that kind; for I hear that there has 
been (such a thing as) philosophizing in purple. If a philosopher (appears) in 
purple, why not in glided slippers too? For a Tyrian to be shod in anything but 
gold, is by no means consonant with Greek habits. Some one will say, "Well, but 
there was another who wore silk indeed, and shod himself in brazen sandals." 
Worthily, indeed, in order that at the bottom of his Bacchantian raiment he 
might make some tinkling sound, did he walk in cymbals! But if, at that moment, 
Diogenes had been barking from his tub, he would not (have trodden on him) with 
muddy feet--as the Platonic couches testify--but would have carried Empedocles 
down bodily to the secret recesses of the Cloacinae; in order that he who had 
madly thought himself a celestial being might, as a god, salute first his 
sisters, and afterwards men. Such garments, therefore, as alienate from nature 
and modesty, let it be allowed to be just to eye fixedly and point at with the 
finger and expose to ridicule by a nod. Just so, if a man were to wear a dainty 
robe trailing on the ground with Menander-like effeminacy, he would hear applied 
to himself that which the comedian says "What sort of a cloak is that maniac 
wasting?" For, now that the contracted brow of censorial vigilance is long since 
smoothed down, so far as reprehension is concerned, promiscuous usage offers to 
our gaze freedmen in equestrian garb, branded slaves in that of gentlemen, the 
notoriously infamous in that of the freeborn, clowns in that of city-folk, 
buffoons in that of lawyers, rustics in regimentals; the corpse-bearer, the 
pimp, the gladiator trainer, clothe themselves as you do. Turn, again, to women. 
You have to behold what Caecina Severus pressed upon the grove attention of the 
senate--matrons stoleless in public. In fact, the penalty inflicted by the 
decrees of the augur Lentulus upon any matron who had thus cashiered herself was 
the same as for fornication; inasmuch as certain matrons had sedulously promoted 
the disuse of garments which were the evidences and guardians of dignity, as 
being impediments to the practising of prostitution. But now, in their 
self-prostitution, in order that they may the more readily be approached, they 
have abjured stole, and chemise, and bonnet, and cap; yes, and even the very 
litters and sedans in which they used to be kept in privacy and secrecy even in 
public. But while one extinguishes her proper adornments, another blazes forth 
such as are not hers. Look at the street-walkers, the shambles of popular lusts; 
also at the female self-abusers with their sex; and, if it is better to withdraw 
your eyes from such shameful spectacles of publicly slaughtered chastity, yet do 
but look with eyes askance, (and) you will at once see (them to be) matrons! 
And, while the overseer of brothels airs her swelling silk, and consoles her 
neck--more impure than her haunt--with necklaces, and inserts in the armlets 
(which even matrons themselves would, of the guerdons bestowed upon brave men, 
without hesitation have appropriated) hands privy to all that is shameful, 
(while) she fits on her impure leg the pure white or pink shoe; why do you not 
stare at such garbs? or, again, at those which falsely plead religion as the 
supporter of their novelty? while for the sake of an all-white dress, and the 
distinction of a fillet, and the privilege of a helmet, some are initiated into 
(the mysteries of) Ceres; while, on account of an opposite hankering after 
sombre raiment, and a gloomy woollen covering upon the head, others run mad in 
Bellona's temple; while the attraction of surrounding themselves with a tunic 
more broadly striped with purple, and casting over their shoulders a cloak of 
Galatian scarlet, commends Saturn (to the affections of others). When this 
Mantle itself, arranged with more rigorous care, and sandals after the Greek 
model, serve to flatter AEsculapius, how much more should you then accuse and 
assail it with your eyes, as being guilty of superstition--albeit superstition 
simple and unaffected? Certainly, when first it clothes this wisdom which 
renounces superstitions with all their vanities, then most assuredly is the 
Mantle, above all the garments in which you array your gods and goddesses, an 
august robe; and, above all the caps and tufts of your Salii and Flamines, a 
sacerdotal attire. Lower your eyes, I advise you, (and) reverence the garb, on 
the one ground, meantime, (without waiting for others,) of being a renouncer of 
your error. 
CHAPTER V.--VIRTUES OF THE MANTLE. IT PLEADS IN ITS OWN DEFENCE 
"Still," say you, "must we thus change from gown to Mantle?" Why, what if 
from diadem and sceptre? Did Anacharsis change otherwise, when to the royalty of 
Scythia he preferred philosophy? Grant that there be no (miraculous) signs in 
proof of your transformation for the better: there is somewhat which this your 
garb can do. For, to begin with the simplicity of its uptaking: it needs no 
tedious arrangement. Accordingly, there is no necesSity for any artist formally 
to dispose its wrinkled folds from the beginning a day beforehand, and then to 
reduce them to a more finished elegance, and to assign to the guardianship of 
the stretchers the whole figment of the massed boss; subsequently, at daybreak, 
first gathering up by the aid of a girdle the tunic which it were better to have 
woven of more moderate length (in the first instance), and, again scrutinizing 
the boss, and rearranging any disarrangement, to make one part prominent on the 
left, but (making now an end of the folds) to draw backwards from the shoulders 
the circuit of it whence the hollow is formed, and, leaving the right shoulder 
free, heap it still upon the left, with another similar set of folds reserved 
for the back, and thus clothe the man with a burden! In short, I will 
persistently ask your own conscience, What is your first sensation in wearing 
your gown? Do you feel yourself clad, or laded? wearing a garment, or carrying 
it? If you shall answer negatively, I will follow you home; I win see what you 
hasten to do immediately after crossing your threshold. There is really no 
garment the dolling whereof congratulates a man more than the gown's does. Of 
shoes we say nothing--implements as they are of torture proper to the gown, most 
uncleanly protection to the feet, yes, and false too. For who would not find it 
expedient, in cold and heat, to stiffen with feet bare rather than in a shoe 
with feet bound? A mighty munition for the tread have the Venetian 
shoe-factories provided in the shape of effeminate boots! Well, but, than the 
Mantle nothing is more expedite, even if it be double, like that of Crates. 
Nowhere is there a compulsory waste of time in dressing yourself (in it), 
seeing that its whole art consists in loosely covering. That can be effected by 
a single circumjection, and one in no case inelegant: thus it wholly covers 
every part of the man at once. The shoulder it either exposes or encloses: in 
other respects it adheres to the shoulder; it has no surrounding support; it has 
no surrounding tie; it has no anxiety as to the fidelity with which its folds 
keep their place; easily it manages, easily readjusts itself: even in the 
dolling it is consigned to no cross until the morrow. If any shirt is worn 
beneath it, the torment of a girdle is superfluous: if anything in the way of 
shoeing is worn, it is a most cleanly work; or else the feet are rather bare, 
--more manly, at all events, (if bare,) than in shoes. These (pleas I advance) 
for the Mantle in the meantime, in so far as you have defamed it by name. Now, 
however, it challenges you on the score of its function withal. "I," it says, 
"owe no duty to the forum, the election-ground, or the senate-house; I keep no 
obsequious vigil, preoccupy no platforms, hover about no praetorian residences; 
I am not odorant of the canals, am not odorant of the lattices, am no constant 
wearer out of benches, no wholesale router of laws, no barking pleader, no 
judge, no soldier, no king: I have withdrawn from the populace. My only business 
is with myself: except that other care I have none, save not to care. The better 
life you would more enjoy in seclusion than in publicity. But you will decry me 
as indolent. Forsooth, 'we are to live for our country, and empire, and estate.' 

Such used, of old, to be the sentiment. None is born for another, being 
destined to die for himself. At all events, when we come to the Epicuri and 
Zenones, you give the epithet of 'sages' to the whole teacherhood of Quietude, 
who have consecrated that Quietude with the name of 'supreme' and 'unique' 
pleasure. Still, to some extent it will be allowed, even to me, to confer 
benefit on the public. From any and every boundary-stone or altar it is my wont 
to prescribe medicines to morals--medicines which will be more felicitous in 
conferring good health upon public affairs, and states, and empires, than your 
works are. Indeed, if I proceed to encounter you with naked foils, gowns have 
done the commonwealth more hurt than cuirasses. Moreover, I flatter no vices; I 
give quarter to no lethargy, no slothful encrustation. I apply the cauterizing 
iron to the ambition which led M. Tullius to buy a circular table of citron-wood 
for more than 4000, and Asinius Gallus to pay twice as much for an ordinary 
table of the same MooriSh wood (Hem! at what fortunes did they value woody 
dapplings!), or, again, Sulla to frame dishes of an hundred pounds' weight. I 
fear lest that balance be small, when a Drusillanus (and he withal a slave of 
Claudius!) constructs a tray of the weight of 500 lbs.!--a tray indispensable, 
perchance, to the aforesaid tables, for which, if a workshop was erected, there 
ought to have been erected a dining-room too. Equally do I plunge the scalpel 
into the inhumanity which led Vedius Pollio to expose slaves to fill the bellies 
of sea-eels. Delighted, forsooth, with his novel savagery, he kept 
land-monsters, toothless, clawless, hornless: it was his pleasure to turn 
perforce into wild beasts his fish, which (of course) were to be forthwith 
cooked, that in their entrails he himself withal might taste some savour of the 
bodies of his own slaves. I will forelop the gluttony which led Hortensius the 
orator to be the first to have the heart to slay a peacock for the sake of food; 
which led Aufidius Lurco to be the first to vitiate meat with stuffing, and by 
the aid of forcemeats to raise them to an adulterous flavour; which led Asinius 
Celer to purchase the viand of a single mullet at nearly 50; which led Aesopus 
the actor to preserve in his pantry a dish of the value of nearly 800, made up 
of birds of the selfsame costliness (as the mullet aforesaid), consisting of all 
the songsters and talkers; which led his son, after such a titbit, to have the 
hardihood to hunger after somewhat yet more sumptuous: for he swallowed down 
pearls--costly even on the ground of their name--I suppose for fear he should 
have supped more beggarly than his father. I am silent as to the Neros and 
Apicii and Rufi. I will give a cathartic to the impurity of a Scaurus, and the 
gambling of a Curius, and the intemperance of an Antony. And remember that 
these, out of the many (whom I have named), were men of the toga-such as among 
the men of the pallium you would not easily find. These purulencies of a state 
who will eliminate and exsuppurate, save a bemantled speech? 
CHAPTER VI.--FURTHER DISTINCTIONS, AND CROWNING GLORY, OF THE PALLIUM. 
"'With speech,' says (my antagonist), 'you have tried to persuade me,--a most 
sage medicament.' But, albeit utterance be mute--impeded by infancy or else 
checked by bashfulness, for life is content with an even tongueless 
philosophy--my very cut is eloquent. A philosopher, in fact, is heard so long as 
he is seen. My very sight puts vices to the blush. Who suffers not, when he sees 
his own rival? Who can bear to gaze ocularly at him at whom mentally he cannot? 
Grand is the benefit conferred by the Mantle, at the thought whereof moral 
improbity absolutely blushes. Let philosophy now see to the question of her own 
profitableness; for she is not the only associate whom I boast. Other scientific 
arts of public utility I boast. From my store are clothed the first teacher of 
the forms of letters, the first explainer of their sounds, the first trainer in 
the rudiments of arithmetic, the grammarian, the rhetorician, the sophist, the 
medical man, the poet, the musical timebeater, the astrologer, and the 
birdgazer. All that is liberal in studies is covered by my four angles. 'True; 
but all these rank lower than Roman knights.' Well; but your gladiatorial 
trainers, and all their ignominious following, are conducted into the arena in 
togas. This, no doubt, will be the indignity implied in 'From gown to Mantle!'" 
Well, so speaks the Mantle. But I confer on it likewise a fellowship with a 
divine sect and discipline. Joy, Mantle, and exult! A better philosophy has now 
deigned to honour thee, ever since thou hast begun to be a Christian's vesture! 
[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.] 

