
Tertullian












TERTULLIAN 
THE SHOWS, OR DE SPECTACULIS. 
[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.]
CHAP. I.
Ye Servants of God, about to draw near to God, that you may make solemn 
consecration of yourselves to Him, seek well to understand the condition of 
faith, the reasons of the Truth, the laws of Christian Discipline, which forbid 
among other sins of the world, the pleasures of the public shows. Ye who have 
testified and confessed that you have done so already, review the subject, that 
there may be no sinning whether through real or wilful ignorance. For such is 
the power of earthly pleasures, that, to retain the opportunity of still 
partaking of them, it contrives to prolong swilling ignorance, and bribes 
knowledge into playing a dishonest part. To both things, perhaps, some among you 
are allured by the views of the heathens who in this matter are wont to press us 
with arguments, such as these: That the exquisite enjoyments of ear and eye we 
have in things external are not in the least opposed to religion in the mind and 
conscience; and That surely no offence is offered to God, in any human 
enjoyment, by any of our pleasures, which it is not sinful to partake of in its 
own time and place, with all due honour and reverence secured to Him. But this 
is precisely what we are ready to prove: That these things are not consistent 
with true religion and true obedience to the true God. There are some who 
imagine that Christians, a sort of people ever ready to die, are trained into 
the abstinence they practise, with no other object than that of making it less 
difficult to despise life, the fastenings to it being severed as it were. They 
regard it as an art of quenching all desire for that which, so far as they are 
concerned, they have emptied of all that is desirable; and so it is thought to 
be rather a thing of human planning and foresight, than clearly laid down by 
divine command. It were a grievous thing, forsooth, for Christians, while 
continuing in the enjoyment of pleasures so great, to die for God! It is not as 
they say; though, if it were, even Christian obstinacy might well give all 
submission to a plan so suitable, to a rule so excellent. 
CHAP. II.
Then, again, every one is ready with the argument that all things, as we 
teach, were created by God, and given to man for his use, and that they must be 
good, as coming all from so good a source; but that among them are found the 
various constituent elements of the public shows, such as the horse, the lion, 
bodily strength, and musical voice. It cannot, then, be thought that what exists 
by God's own creative will is either foreign or hostile to Him; and if it is not 
opposed to Him, it cannot be regarded as injurious to His worshippers, as 
certainly it is not foreign to them. Beyond all doubt, too, the very buildings 
connected with the places of public amusement, composed as they are of rocks, 
stones, marbles, pillars, are things of God, who has given these various things 
for the earth's embellishment; nay, the very scenes are enacted under God's own 
heaven. How skilful a pleader seems human wisdom to her 80 
self, especially if she has the fear of losing any of her delights--any of 
the sweet enjoyments of worldly existence! In fact, you will find not a few whom 
the imperilling of their pleasures rather than their life holds back from us. 
For even the weakling has no strong dread of death as a debt he knows is due by 
him; while the wise man does not look with contempt on pleasure, regarding it as 
a precious gift--in fact, the one blessedness of life, whether to philosopher or 
fool. Now nobody denies what nobody is ignorant of--for Nature herself is 
teacher of it--that God is the Maker of the universe, and that it is good, and 
that it is man's by free gift of its Maker. But having no intimate acquaintance 
with the Highest, knowing Him only by natural revelation, and not as His 
"friends"-afar off, and not as those who have been brought nigh to Him--men 
cannot but be in ignorance alike of what He enjoins and what He forbids in 
regard to the administration of His world. They must be ignorant, too, of the 
hostile power which works against Him, and perverts to wrong uses the things His 
hand has formed; for you cannot know either the will or the adversary of a God 
you do not know. We must not, then, consider merely by whom all things were 
made, but by whom they have been perverted. We shall find out for what use they 
were made at first, when we find for what they were not. There is a vast 
difference between the corrupted state and that of primal purity, just because 
there is a vast difference between the Creator and the corrupter. Why, all sorts 
of evils, which as indubitably evils even the heathens prohibit, and against 
which they guard themselves, come from the works of God. Take, for instance, 
murder, whether committed by iron, by poison, or by magical enchantments. Iron 
and herbs and demons are all equally creatures of God. Has the Creator, withal, 
provided these things for man's destruction? Nay, He puts His interdict on every 
sort of man-killing by that one summary precept, "Thou shalt not kill." 
Moreover, who but God, the Maker of the world, put in its gold, brass, silver, 
ivory, wood, and all the other materials used in the manufacture of idols? Yet 
has He done this that men may set up a worship in opposition to Himself? On the 
contrary idolatry in His eyes is the crowning sin. What is there offensive to 
God which is not God's? 
But in offending Him, it ceases to be His; and in ceasing to be His, it is in 
His eyes an offending thing. Man himself, guilty as he is of every iniquity, is 
not only a work of God--he is His image, and yet both in soul and body he has 
severed himself from his Maker. For we did not get eyes to minister to lust, and 
the tongue for speaking evil with, and ears to be the receptacle of evil speech, 
and the throat to serve the vice of gluttony, and the belly to be gluttony's 
ally, and the genitals for unchaste excesses, and hands for deeds of violence, 
and the feet for an erring life; or was the soul placed in the body that it 
might become a thought-manufactory of snares, and fraud, and injustice? I think 
not; for if God, as the righteous ex-actor of innocence, hates everything like 
malignity--if He hates utterly such plotting of evil, it is clear beyond a 
doubt, that, of all things that have come from His hand, He has made none to 
lead to works which He condemns, even though these same works may be carried on 
by things of His making; for, in fact, it is the one ground of condemnation, 
that the creature misuses the creation. We, therefore, who in our knowledge of 
the Lord have obtained some knowledge also of His foe--who, in our discovery of 
the Creator, have at the same time laid hands upon the great corrupter, ought 
neither to wonder nor to doubt that, as the prowess of the corrupting and 
God-opposing angel overthrew in the beginning the virtue of man, the work and 
image of God, the possessor of the world, so he has entirely changed man's 
nature--created, like his own, for perfect sinlessness--into his own state of 
wicked enmity against his Maker, that in the very thing whose gift to man, but 
not to him, had grieved him, he might make man guilty in God's eyes, and set up 
his own supremacy. 
CHAP. III.
Fortified by this knowledge against heathen views, let us rather turn to the 
unworthy reasonings of our own people; for the faith of some, either too simple 
or too scrupulous, demands direct authority from Scripture for giving up the 
shows, and holds out that the matter is a doubtful one, because such abstinence 
is not clearly and in words imposed upon God's servants. Well, we never find it 
expressed with the same precision, "Thou shalt not enter circus or theatre, thou 
shalt not look on combat or show;" as it is plainly laid down, "Thou shalt not 
kill; thou shalt not worship an idol; thou shalt not commit adultery or fraud." 
But we find that that first word of David bears an this very sort of thing: 
"Blessed," he says, "is the man who has not gone into the assembly of the 
impious, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of scorners." 
Though he seems to have predicted beforehand of that just man, that he took no 
part in the meetings and deliberations of the Jews, taking counsel about the 
slaying of our Lord, yet divine Scripture has ever far-reaching applications: 
after the immediate sense has been exhausted, in all directions it fortifies the 
practice of the religious life, so that here also you have an utterance which is 
not far from a plain interdicting of the shows. If he called those few Jews an 
assembly of the wicked, how much more will he so designate so vast a gathering 
of heathens! Are the heathens less impious, less sinners, less enemies of 
Christ, than the Jews were then? And see, too, how other things agree. For at 
the shows they also stand in the way. For they call the spaces between the seats 
going round the amphitheatre, and the passages which separate the people running 
down, ways. The place in the curve where the matrons sit is called a chair. 
Therefore, on the contrary, it holds, unblessed is he who has entered any 
council of wicked men, and has stood in any way of sinners, and has sat in any 
chair of scorners. We may understand a thing as spoken generally, even when it 
requires a certain special interpretation to be given to it. For some things 
spoken with a special reference contain in them general truth. When God 
admonishes the Israelites of their duty, or sharply reproves them, He has surely 
a reference to all men; when He threatens destruction to Egypt and Ethiopia, He 
surely pre-condemns every sinning nation, whatever. If, reasoning from species 
to genus, every nation that sins against them is an Egypt and Ethiopia; so also, 
reasoning from genus to species, with reference to the origin of shows, every 
show is an assembly of the wicked. 
CHAP. IV.
Lest any one think that we are dealing in mere argumentative subtleties, I 
shall turn to that highest authority of our "seal" itself. When entering the 
water, we make profession of the Christian faith in the words of its rule; we 
bear public testimony that we have renounced the devil, his pomp, and his 
angels. Well, is it not in connection with idolatry, above all, that you have 
the devil with his pomp and his angels? from which, to speak. briefly--for I do 
not wish to dilate--you have every unclean and wicked spirit. If, therefore, it 
shall be made plain that the entire apparatus of the shows is based upon 
idolatry, beyond all doubt that will carry with it the conclusion that our 
renunciatory testimony in the layer of baptism has reference to the shows, 
which, through their idolatry, have been given over to the devil, and his pomp, 
and his angels. We shall set forth, then, their several origins, in what 
nursing-places they have grown to manhood; next the titles of some of them, by 
what names they are called; then their apparatus, with what superstitions they 
are observed; (then their places, to what patrons they are dedicated;) then the 
arts which minister to them, to what authors they are traced. If any of these 
shall be found to have had no connection with an idol-god, it will be held as 
free at once from the taint of idolatry, and as not coming within the range of 
our baptismal abjuration. 
CHAP. V.
In the matter of their origins, as these are somewhat obscure and but little 
known to many among us, our investigations must go back to a remote antiquity, 
and our authorities be none other than books of heathen literature. Various 
authors are extant who have published works on the subject. The origin of the 
games as given by them is this. Timaeus tells us that immigrants from Asia, 
under the leadership of Tyrrhenus, who, in a contest about his native kingdom, 
had succumbed to his brother, settled down in Etruria. Well, among other 
superstitious observances under the name of religion, they set up in their new 
home public shows. The Romans, at their own request, obtain from them skilled 
performers--the proper seasons--the name too, for it is said they are called 
Ludi, from Lydi. And though Varro derives the name of Ludi from Ludus, that is, 
from play, as they called the Luperci also Ludii, because they ran about making 
sport; still that sporting of young men belongs, in his view, to festal days and 
temples, and objects of religious veneration. However, it is of little 
consequence the origin of the name, when it is certain that the thing springs 
from idolatry. The Liberalia, under the general designation of Ludi, clearly 
declared the glory of Father Bacchus; for to Bacchus these festivities were 
first consecrated by grateful peasants, in return for the boon he conferred on 
them, as they say, making known the pleasures of wine. 
82 
Then the Consualia were called Ludi, and at first were in honour of Neptune, 
for Neptune has the name of Consus also. Thereafter Romulus dedicated the 
Equiria to Mars, though they claim the Consualia too for Romulus, on the ground 
that he consecrated them to Consus, the god, as they will have it, of counsel; 
of the counsel, forsooth, in which he planned the rape of the Sabine virgins for 
wives to his soldiers. An excellent counsel truly; and still I suppose reckoned 
just and righteous by the Romans themselves, I may not say by God. This goes 
also to taint the origin: you cannot surely hold that to be good which has 
sprung from sin, from shamelessness, from violence, from hatred, from a 
fratricidal founder, from a son of Mars. Even now, at the first turning-post in 
the circus, there is a subterranean altar to this same Consus, with an 
inscription to this effect: "Consus, great in counsel, Mars, in battle mighty 
tutelar deities." The priests of the state sacrifice at it on the nones of July; 
the priest of Romulus and the Vestals on the twelfth before the Kalends of 
September. In addition to this, Romulus instituted games in honor of Jupiter 
Feretrius on the Tarpeian Hill, according to the statement Piso has handed down 
to us, called both Tarpeian and Capitoline. After him Numa Pompilius instituted 
games to Mars and Robigo (for they have also invented a goddess of rust); then 
Tullus Hostilius; then Ancus Martius; and various others in succession did the 
like. As to the idols in whose honour these games were established, ample 
information is to be fount in the pages of Suetonius Tranquillus. But we need 
say no more to prove the accusation of idolatrous origin. 
CHAP. VI.
To the testimony of antiquity is added that of later games instituted in 
their turn, and betraying their origin from the titles which they bear even at 
the present day, in which it is imprinted as on their very face, for what idol 
and for what religious object games, whether of the one kind or the other, were 
designed. You have festivals bearing the name of the great Mother and Apollo of 
Ceres too, and Neptune, and Jupiter Latiaris, and Flora, all celebrated for a 
common end; the others have their religious origin in the birthdays and 
solemnities of kings, in public successes in municipal holidays. 
There are also testamentary exhibitions, in which funeral honours are 
rendered to the memories of private persons; and this according to an 
institution of ancient times. For from the first the "Ludi" were regarded as of 
two sons, sacred and funereal, that is in honour of the heathen deities and of 
the dead. 
But in the matter of idolatry, it makes no difference with us under what name 
or title it is practised, while it has to do with the wicked spirits whom we 
abjure. If it is lawful to offer homage to the dead, it will be just as lawful 
to offer it to their gods: you have the same origin in both cases; there is the 
same idolatry; there is on our part the same solemn renunciation of all 
idolatry. 
CHAP. VII.
The two kinds of public games, then, have one origin; and they have common 
names, as owning the same parentage. So, too, as they are equally tainted with 
the sin of idolatry, their foundress, they must needs be like each other in 
their pomp. But the more ambitious preliminary display of the circus games to 
which the name procession specially belongs, is in itself the proof to whom the 
whole thing appertains, in the many images the long line of statues, the 
chariots of all sorts, the thrones, the crowns, the dresses. What high religious 
rites besides, what sacrifices precede, come between, and follow. How many 
guilds, how many priesthoods, how many offices are set astir, is known to the 
inhabitants of the great city in which the demon convention has its 
headquarters. If these things are done in humbler style in the provinces, in 
accordance with their inferior means, still all circus games must be counted as 
belonging to that from which they are derived; the fountain from which they 
spring defiles them. The tiny streamlet from its very spring-head, the little 
twig from its very budding, contains in it the essential nature of its origin. 
It may be grand or mean, no matter, any circus procession whatever is offensive 
to God. Though there be few images to grace it, there is idolatry in one; though 
there be no more than a single sacred car, it is a chariot of Jupiter: anything 
of idolatry whatever, whether meanly arrayed or modestly rich and gorgeous, 
taints it in its origin. 
CHAP. VIII.
To follow out my plan in regard to places: the circus is chiefly consecrated 
to the Sun, whose temple stands in the middle of it, and whose image shines 
forth from its temple summit; for they have not thought it proper to pay sacred 
honours underneath a roof to an object they have itself in open space. 
83 
Those who assert that the first spectacle was exhibited by Circe, and in 
honour of the Sun her father, as they will have it, maintain also the name of 
circus was derived from her. Plainly, then, the enchantress did this in the name 
of the parties whose priestess she was--I mean the demons and spirits of evil. 
What an aggregation of idolatries you see, accordingly, in the decoration of the 
place! Every ornament of the circus is a temple by itself. The eggs are regarded 
as sacred to the Castors, by men who are not ashamed to profess faith in their 
production from the egg of a swan, which was no other than Jupiter himself. The 
Dolphins vomit forth in honour of Neptune. Images of Sessia, so called as the 
goddess of sowing; of Messia, so called as the goddess of reaping; of Tutulina, 
so called as the fruit-protecting deity--load the pillars. In front of these you 
have three altars to these three gods--Great, Mighty, Victorious. They reckon 
these of Samo-Thrace. The huge Obelisk, as Hermeteles affirms, is set up in 
public to the Sun; its inscription, like its origin, belongs to Egyptian 
superstition. Cheerless were the demon-gathering without their Mater Magna; and 
so she presides there over the Euripus. Consus, as we have mentioned, lies 
hidden under ground at the Murcian Goals. These two sprang from an idol. For 
they will have it that Murcia is the goddess of love; and to her, at that spot, 
they have consecrated a temple. See, Christian, how many impure names have taken 
possession of the circus! You have nothing to do with a sacred place which is 
tenanted by such multitudes of diabolic spirits. And speaking of places, this is 
the suitable occasion for some remarks in anticipation of a point that some will 
raise. What, then, you say; shall I be in danger of pollution if I go to the 
circus when the games are not being celebrated? There is no law forbidding the 
mere places to us. For not only the places for show-gatherings, but even the 
temples, may be entered without any peril of his religion by the servant of God, 
if he has only some honest reason for it, unconnected with their proper business 
and official duties. Why, even the streets and the market-place, and the baths, 
and the taverns, and our very dwelling-places, are not altogether free from 
idols. Satan and his angels have filled the whole world. It is not by merely 
being in the world, however, that we lapse from God, but by touching and 
tainting ourselves with the world's sins. I shall break with my Maker, that is, 
by going to the Capitol or the temple of Serapis to sacrifice or adore, as I 
shall also do by going as a spectator to the circus and the theatre. The places 
in themselves do not contaminate, but what is done in them; from this even the 
places themselves, we maintain, become defiled. The polluted things pollute us. 
It is on this account that we set before you to whom places of the kind are 
dedicated, that we may prove the things which are done in them to belong to the 
idol-patrons to whom the very places are sacred. 
CHAP. IX.
Now as to the kind of performances peculiar to the circus exhibitions. In 
former days equestrianism was practised in a simple way on horseback, and 
certainly its ordinary use had nothing sinful in it; but when it was dragged 
into the games, it passed from the service of God into the employment of demons. 
Accordingly this kind of circus performances is regarded as sacred to Castor and 
Pollux, to whom, Stesichorus tells us, horses were given by Mercury. And 
Neptune, too, is an equestrian deity, by the Greeks called Hippius. In regard to 
the team, they have consecrated the chariot and four to the sun; the chariot and 
pair to the moon. But, as the poet has it, "Erichthonius first dared to yoke 
four horses to the chariot, and to ride upon its wheels with victorious 
swiftness." Erichthonius, the son of Vulcan and Minerva, fruit of unworthy 
passion upon earth, is a demon-monster, nay, the devil himself, and no mere 
snake. But if Trochilus the Argive is maker of the first chariot, he dedicated 
that work of his to Juno. If Romulus first exhibited the four-horse chariot at 
Rome, he too, I think, has a place given him among idols, at least if he and 
Quirinus are the same. But as chariots had such inventors, the charioteers were 
naturally dressed, too, in the colours of idolatry; for at first these were only 
two, namely white and red,--the former sacred to the winter with its glistening 
snows, the latter sacred to the summer with its ruddy sun: but afterwards, in 
the progress of luxury as well as of superstition, red was dedicated by some to 
Mars, and white by others to the Zephyrs, while green was given to Mother Earth, 
or spring, and azure to the sky and sea, or autumn. But as idolatry of every 
kind is condemned by God, that form of it surely shares the condemnation which 
is offered to the elements of nature. 
CHAP. X.
Let us pass on now to theatrical exhibitions, which we have already shown 
have a common. 
84 
origin with the circus, and bear like idolatrous designations--even as from 
the first they have borne the name of "Ludi," and equally minister to idols. 
They resemble each other also in their pomp, having the same procession to the 
scene of their display from temples and altars, and that mournful profusion of 
incense and blood, with music of pipes and trumpets, all under the direction of 
the soothsayer and the undertaker, those two foul masters of funeral rites and 
sacrifices. So as we went on from the origin of the "Ludi" to the circus games, 
we shall now direct our course thence to those of the theatre, beginning with 
the place of exhibition. At first the theatre was properly a temple of Venus; 
and, to speak briefly, it was owing to this that stage performances were allowed 
to escape censure, and got a footing in the world. For ofttimes the censors, in 
the interests of morality, put down above all the rising theatres, foreseeing, 
as they did, that there was great danger of their leading to a general 
profligacy; so that already, from this accordance of their own people with us, 
there is a witness to the heathen, and in the anticipatory judgment of human 
knowledge even a confirmation of our views. Accordingly Pompey the Great, less 
only than his theatre, when he had erected that citadel of all impurities, 
fearing some time or other censorian condemnation of his memory, superposed on 
it a temple of Venus; and summoning by public proclamation the people to its 
consecration, he called it not a theatre, but a temple, "under which," said he, 
"we have placed tiers of seats for viewing the shows." So he threw a veil over a 
structure on which condemnation had been often passed, and which is ever to be 
held in reprobation, by pretending that it was a sacred place; and by means of 
superstition he blinded the eyes of a virtuous discipline. But Venus and Bacchus 
are close allies. These two evil spirits are in sworn confederacy with each 
other, as the patrons of drunkenness and lust. So the theatre of Venus is as 
well the house of Bacchus: for they properly gave the name of Liberalia also to 
other theatrical amusements--which besides being consecrated to Bacchus (as were 
the Dionysia of the Greeks), were instituted by him; and, without doubt, the 
performances of the theatre have the common patronage of these two deities. That 
immodesty of gesture and attire which so specially and peculiarly characterizes 
the stage are consecrated to them--the one deity wanton by her sex, the other by 
his drapery; while its services of voice, and song, and lute, and pipe, belong 
to Apollos, and Muses, and Minervas, and Mercuries. You will hate, O Christian, 
the things whose authors must be the objects of your utter detestation. So we 
would now make a remark about the arts of the theatre, about the things also 
whose authors in the names we execrate. We know that the names of the dead are 
nothing, as are their images; but we know well enough, too, who, when images are 
set up, under these names carry on their wicked work, and exult in the homage 
rendered to them, and pretend to be divine--none other than spirits accursed, 
than devils. We see, therefore, that the arts also are consecrated to the 
service of the beings who dwell in the names of their founders; and that things 
cannot be held free from the taint of idolatry whose inventors have got a place 
among the gods for their discoveries. Nay, as regards the arts, we ought to have 
gone further back, and barred all further argument by the position that the 
demons, predetermining in their own interests from the first, among other evils 
of idolatry, the pollutions of the public shows, with the object of drawing man 
away from his Lord and binding him to their own service, carried out their 
purpose by bestowing on him the artistic gifts which the shows require. For none 
but themselves would have made provision and preparation for the objects they 
had in view; nor would they have given the arts to the world by any but those in 
whose names, and images, and histories they set up for their own ends the 
artifice of consecration. 
CHAP. XI.
In fulfilment of our plan, let us now go on to consider the combats. Their 
origin is akin to that of the games (ludi). Hence they are kept as either sacred 
or funereal, as they have been instituted in honour of the idol-gods of the 
nations or of the dead. Thus, too, they are called Olympian in honour of 
Jupiter, known at Rome as the Capitoline; Nemean, in honour of Hercules; 
Isthmian, in honour of Neptune; the rest mortuarii, as belonging to the dead. 
What wonder, then, if idolatry pollutes the combat-parade with profane crowns, 
with sacerdotal chiefs, with attendants belonging to the various colleges, last 
of all with the blood of its sacrifices? To add a completing word about the 
"place"--in the common place for the college of the arts sacred to the Muses, 
and Apollo, and Minerva, and also for that of the arts dedicated to Mars, they 
with contest and sound of trumpet emulate the circus in the arena, which is a 
real temple--I mean of the god whose festivals it celebrates. The gymnastic arts 
also originated with their Castors, and Herculeses, and Mercuries. 
85 
CHAP. XII.
It remains for us to examine the "spectacle" most noted of all, and in 
highest favour. It is called a dutiful service (munus), from its being an 
office, for it bears the name of "officium" as well as "munus." The ancients 
thought that in this solemnity they rendered offices to the dead; at a later 
period, with a cruelty more refined, they somewhat modified its character. For 
formerly, in the belief that the souls of the departed were appeased by human 
blood, they were in the habit of buying captives or slaves of wicked 
disposition, and immolating them in their funeral obsequies. Afterwards they 
thought good to throw the veil of pleasure over their iniquity. Those, 
therefore, whom they had provided for the combat, and then trained in arms as 
best they could, only that they might learn to die, they, on the funeral day, 
killed at the places of sepulture. They alleviated death by murders. Such is the 
origin of the "Munus." But by degrees their refinement came up to their cruelty; 
for these human wild beasts could not find pleasure exquisite enough, save in 
the spectacle of men torn to pieces by wild beasts. Offerings to propitiate the 
dead then were regarded as belonging to the class of funeral sacrifices; and 
these are idolatry: for idolatry, in fact, is a sort of homage to the departed; 
the one as well as the other is a service to dead men. Moreover, demons have 
abode in the images of the dead. To refer also to the matter of names, though 
this sort of exhibition has passed from honours of the dead to honours of the 
living, I mean, to quaestorships and magistracies--to priestly offices of 
different kinds; yet, since idolatry still cleaves to the dignity's name, 
whatever is done in its name partakes of its impurity. The same remark will 
apply to the procession of the "Munus," as we look at that in the pomp which is 
connected with these honours themselves; for the purple robes, the fasces, the 
fillets the crowns, the proclamations too, and edicts, the sacred feasts of the 
day before, are not without the pomp of the devil, without invitation of demons. 
What need, then, of dwelling on the place of horrors, which is too much even for 
the tongue of the perjurer? For the amphitheatre is consecrated to names more 
numerous and more dire than is the Capitol itself, temple of all demons as it 
is. There are as many unclean spirits there as it holds men. To conclude with a 
single remark about the arts which have a place in it, we know that its two 
sorts of amusement have for their patrons Mars and Diana. 
CHAP. XIII.
We have, I think, faithfully carried out our plan of showing in how many 
different ways the sin of idolatry clings to the shows, in respect of their 
origins, their titles, their equipments, their places of celebration, their 
arts; and we may hold it as a thing beyond all doubt, that for us who have twice 
renounced all idols, they are utterly unsuitable. "Not that an idol is 
anything," as the apostle says, but that the homage they render is to demons, 
who are the real occupants of these consecrated images, whether of dead men or 
(as they think) of gods. On this account, therefore, because they have a common 
source--for their dead and their deities are one--we abstain from both 
idolatries. Nor do we dislike the temples less than the monuments: we have 
nothing to do with either altar, we adore neither image; we do not offer 
sacrifices to the gods, and we make no funeral oblations to the departed; nay, 
we do not partake of what is offered either in the one case or the other, for we 
cannot partake of God's feast and the feast of devils. If, then, we keep throat 
and belly free from such defilements, how much more do we withhold our nobler 
parts, our ears and eyes, from the idolatrous and funereal enjoyments, which are 
not passed through the body, but are digested in the very spirit and soul, whose 
purity, much more than that of our bodily organs, God has a right to claim from 
us. 
CHAP. XIV.
Having sufficiently established the charge of idolatry, which alone ought to 
be reason enough for our giving up the shows, let us now ex abundanti look at 
the subject in another way, for the sake of those especially who keep themselves 
comfortable in the thought that the abstinence we urge is not in so many words 
enjoined, as if in the condemnation of the lusts of the world there was not 
involved a sufficient declaration against all these amusements. For as there is 
a lust of money, or rank, or eating, or impure enjoyment, or glory, so there is 
also a lust of pleasure. But the show is just a sort of pleasure. I think, then, 
that under the general designation of lusts, pleasures are included; in like 
manner, under the general idea of pleasures, 86 
you have as a specific class the "shows." But we have spoken already of how 
it is with the places of exhibition, that they are not polluting in themselves, 
but owing to the things that are done in them from which they imbibe impurity, 
and then spirt it again on others. 
CHAP. XV.
Having done enough, then, as we have said, in regard to that principal 
argument, that there is in them all the taint of idolatry--having sufficiently 
dealt with that, let us now contrast the other characteristics of the show with 
the things of God. God has enjoined us to deal calmly, gently, quietly, and 
peacefully with the Holy Spirit, because these things are alone in keeping with 
the goodness of His nature, with His tenderness and sensitiveness, and not to 
vex Him with rage, ill-nature, anger, or grief. Well, how shall this be made to 
accord with the shows? For the show always leads to spiritual agitation, since 
where there is pleasure, there is keenness of feeling giving pleasure its zest; 
and where there is keenness of feeling, there is rivalry giving in turn its zest 
to that. Then, too, where you have rivalry, you have rage, bitterness, wrath and 
grief, with all bad things which flow from them--the whole entirely out of 
keeping with the religion of Christ. For even suppose one should enjoy the shows 
in a moderate way, as befits his rank, age or nature, still he is not 
undisturbed in mind, without some unuttered movings of the inner man. No one 
partakes of pleasures such as these without their strong excitements; no one 
comes under their excitements without their natural lapses. These lapses, again, 
create passionate desire. If there is no desire, there is no pleasure, and he is 
chargeable with trifling who goes where nothing is gotten; in my view, even that 
is foreign to us. Moreover, a man pronounces his own condemnation in the very 
act of taking his place among those with whom, by his disinclination to be like 
them, he confesses he has no sympathy. It is not enough that we do no such 
things ourselves, unless we break all connection also with those who do. "If 
thou sawest a thief," says the Scripture, "thou consentedst with him." Would 
that we did not even inhabit the same world with these wicked men! But though 
that wish cannot be realized, yet even now we are separate from them in what is 
of the world; for the world is God's, but the worldly is the devil's. 
CHAP. XVI.
Since, then, all passionate excitement is forbidden us, we are debarred from 
every kind of spectacle, and especially from the circus, where such excitement 
presides as in its proper element. See the people coming to it already under 
strong emotion, already tumultuous, already passion-blind, already agitated 
about their bets. The praetor is too slow for them: their eyes are ever rolling 
as though along with the lots in his urn; then they hang all eager on the 
signal; there is the united shout of a common madness. Observe how "out of 
themselves" they are by their foolish speeches. "He has thrown it!" they 
exclaim; and they announce each one to his neighbour what all have seen. I have 
clearest evidence of their blindness; they do not see what is really thrown. 
They think it a "signal cloth," but it is the likeness of the devil cast 
headlong from on high. And the result accordingly is, that they fly into rages, 
and passions, and discords, and all that they who are consecrated to peace ought 
never to indulge in. Then there are curses and reproaches, with no cause of 
hatred; there are cries of applause, with nothing to merit them. What are the 
partakers in all this--not their own masters--to obtain of it for themselves? 
unless, it may be, that which makes them not their own: they are saddened by 
another's sorrow, they are gladdened by another's joy. Whatever they desire on 
the one hand, or detest on the other, is entirely foreign to themselves. So love 
with them is a useless thing, and hatred is unjust. Or is a causeless love 
perhaps more legitimate than a causeless hatred? God certainly forbids us to 
hate even with a reason for our hating; for He commands us to love our enemies. 
God forbids us to curse, though there be some ground for doing so, in commanding 
that those who curse us we are to bless. But what is more merciless than the 
circus, where people do not spare even their rulers and fellow-citizens? If any 
of its madnesses are becoming elsewhere in the saints of God, they will be 
seemly in the circus too; but if they are nowhere right, so neither are they 
there. 
CHAP. XVII.
Are we not, in like manner, enjoined to put away from us all immodesty? On 
this ground, again, we are excluded from the theatre, which is immodesty's own 
peculiar abode, where nothing is in repute but what elsewhere is disreputable. 
So the best path to the highest favour of its god is the vileness 87 
which the Atellan gesticulates, which the buffoon in woman's clothes 
exhibits, destroying all natural modesty, so that they blush more readily at 
home than at the play, which finally is done from his childhood on the person of 
the pantomime, that he may become an actor. The very harlots, too, victims of 
the public lust, are brought upon the stage, their misery increased as being 
there in the presence of their own sex, from whom alone they are wont to hide 
themselves: they are paraded publicly before every age and every rank--their 
abode, their gains, their praises, are set forth, and that even in the hearing 
of those who should not hear such things. I say nothing about other matters, 
which it were good to hide away in their own darkness and their own gloomy 
caves, lest they should stain the light of day. Let the Senate, let all ranks, 
blush for very shame! Why, even these miserable women, who by their own gestures 
destroy their modesty, dreading the light of day, and the people's gaze, know 
something of shame at least once a year. But if we ought to abominate all that 
is immodest, on what ground is it right to hear what we must not speak? For all 
licentiousness of speech, nay, every idle word, is condemned by God. Why, in the 
same way, is it right to look on what it is disgraceful to do? How is it that 
the things which defile a man in going out of his mouth, are not regarded as 
doing so when they go in at his eyes and ears--when eyes and ears are the 
immediate attendants on the spirit--and that can never be pure whose 
servants-in-waiting are impure? You have the theatre forbidden, then, in the 
forbidding of immodesty. If, again, we despise the teaching of secular 
literature as being foolishness in God's eyes, our duty is plain enough in 
regard to those spectacles, which from this source derive the tragic or comic 
play. If tragedies and comedies are the bloody and wanton, the impious and 
licentious inventors of crimes and lusts, it is not good even that there should 
be any calling to remembrance the atrocious or the vile. What you reject in 
deed, you are not to bid welcome to in word. 
CHAP. XVIII.
But if you argue that the racecourse is mentioned in Scripture, I grant it at 
once. But you will not refuse to admit that the things which are done there are 
not for you to look upon: the blows, and kicks, and cuffs, and all the 
recklessness of hand, and everything like that disfiguration of the human 
countenance, which is nothing less than the disfiguration of God's own image. 
You will never give your approval to those foolish racing and throwing feats, 
and yet more foolish leapings; you will never find pleasure in injurious or 
useless exhibitions of strength; certainly you will not regard with approval 
those efforts after an artificial body which aim at surpassing the Creator's 
work; and you will have the very opposite of complacency in the athletes Greece, 
in the inactivity of peace, feeds up. And the wrestler's art is a devil's thing. 
The devil wrestled with, and crushed to death, the first human beings. Its very 
attitude has power in it of the serpent kind, firm to hold--tortures to 
clasp--slippery to glide away. You have no need of crowns; why do you strive to 
get pleasures from crowns? 
CHAP. XIX.
We shall now see how the Scriptures condemn the amphitheatre. If we can 
maintain that it is right to indulge in the cruel, and the impious, and the 
fierce, let us go there. If we are what we are said to be, let us regale 
ourselves there with human blood. It is good, no doubt, to have the guilty 
punished. Who but the criminal himself will deny that? And yet the innocent can 
find no pleasure in another's sufferings: he rather mourns that a brother has 
sinned so heinously as to need a punishment so dreadful. But who is my guarantee 
that it is always the guilty who are adjudged to the wild beasts, or to some 
other doom, and that the guiltless never suffer from the revenge of the judge, 
or the weakness of the defence, or the pressure of the rack? How much better, 
then, is it for me to remain ignorant of the punishment inflicted on the wicked, 
lest I am obliged to know also of the good coming to untimely ends--if I may 
speak of goodness in the case at all! At any rate, gladiators not chargeable 
with crime are offered in sale for the games, that they may become the victims 
of the public pleasure. Even in the case of those who are judicially condemned 
to the amphitheatre, what a monstrous thing it is, that, in undergoing their 
punishment, they, from some less serious delinquency, advance to the criminality 
of manslayers! But I mean these remarks for heathen. As to Christians, I shall 
not insult them by adding another word as to the aversion with which they should 
regard this sort of exhibition; though no one is more able than myself to set 
forth fully the whole subject, unless it be one who is still in the habit 88 
of going to the shows. I would rather withal be incomplete than set memory 
a-working. 
CHAP. XX.
How vain, then--nay, how desperate--is the reasoning of persons, who, just 
because they decline to lose a pleasure, hold out that we cannot point to the 
specific words or the very place where this abstinence is mentioned, and where 
the servants of God are directly forbidden to have anything to do with such 
assemblies! I heard lately a novel defence of himself by a certain play-lover. 
"The sun," said he, "nay, God Himself, looks down from heaven on the show, 
and no pollution is contracted." Yes, and the sun, too, pours down his rays into 
the common sewer without being defiled. As for God, would that all crimes were 
hid from His eye, that we might all escape judgment! But He looks on robberies 
too; He looks on falsehoods, adulteries, frauds, idolatries, and these same 
shows; and precisely on that account we will not look on them, lest the 
All-seeing see us. You are putting on the same level, O man, the criminal and 
the judge; the criminal who is a criminal because he is seen, and the Judge who 
is a Judge because He sees. Are we set, then, on playing the madman outside the 
circus boundaries? Outside the gates of the theatre are we bent on lewdness, 
outside the course on arrogance, and outside the amphitheatre on cruelty, 
because outside the porticoes, the tiers and the curtains, too, God has eyes? 
Never and nowhere is that free from blame which God ever condemns; never and 
nowhere is it right to do what you may not do at all times and in all places. It 
is the freedom of the truth from change of opinion and varying judgments which 
constitutes its perfection, and gives it its claims to full mastery, unchanging 
reverence, and faithful obedience. That which is really good or really evil 
cannot be ought else. But in all things the truth of God is immutable. 
CHAP. XXI.
The heathen, who have not a full revelation of the truth, for they are not 
taught of God, hold a thing evil and good as it suits self-will and passion, 
making that which is good in one place evil in another, and that which is evil 
in one place in another good. So it strangely happens, that the same man who can 
scarcely in public lift up his tunic, even when necessity of nature presses him, 
takes it off in the circus, as if bent on exposing himself before everybody; the 
father who carefully protects and guards his virgin daughter's ears from every 
polluting word, takes her to the theatre himself, exposing her to all its vile 
words and attitudes; he, again, who in the streets lays hands on or covers with 
reproaches the brawling pugilist, in the arena gives all encouragement to 
combats of a much more serious kind; and he who looks with horror on the corpse 
of one who has died under the common law of nature, in the amphitheatre gazes 
down with most patient eyes on bodies all mangled and torn and smeared with 
their own blood; nay, the very man who comes to the show, because he thinks 
murderers ought to suffer for their crime, drives the unwilling gladiator to the 
murderous deed with rods and scourges; and one who demands the lion for every 
manslayer of deeper dye, will have the staff for the savage swordsman, and 
rewards him with the cap of liberty. Yes and he must have the poor victim back 
again, that he may get a sight of his face--with zest inspecting near at hand 
the man whom he wished torn in pieces at safe distance from him: so much the 
more cruel he if that was not his wish. 
CHAP. XXII.
What wonder is there in it? Such inconsistencies as these are just such as we 
might expect from men, who confuse and change the nature of good and evil in 
their inconstancy of feeling and fickleness in judgment. Why, the authors and 
managers of the spectacles, in that very respect with reference to which they 
highly laud the charioteers, and actors, and wrestlers, and those most loving 
gladiators, to whom men prostitute their souls, women too their bodies, slight 
and trample on them, though for their sakes they are guilty of the deeds they 
reprobate; nay, they doom them to ignominy and the loss of their rights as 
citizens, excluding them from the Curia, and the rostra, from senatorial and 
equestrian rank, and from all other honours as well as certain distinctions. 
What perversity! They have pleasure in those whom yet they punish; they put all 
slights on those to whom, at the same time, they award their approbation; they 
magnify the art and brand the artist. What an outrageous thing it is, to blacken 
a man on account of the very things which make him meritorious in their eyes! 
Nay, what a confession that the things are evil, when their authors, even in 
highest favour, are not without a mark of disgrace upon them! 
89 
CHAP. XXIII.
Seeing, then, man's own reflections, even in spite of the sweetness of 
pleasure, lead him to think that people such as these should be condemned to a 
hapless lot of infamy, losing all the advantages connected with the possession 
of the dignities of life, how much more does the divine righteousness inflict 
punishment on those who give themselves to these arts! Will God have any 
pleasure in the charioteer who disquiets so many souls, rouses up so many 
furious passions, and creates so many various moods, either crowned like a 
priest or wearing the colours of a pimp,decked out by the devil that he may be 
whirled away in his chariot, as though with the object of taking off Elijah? 
Will He be pleased with him who applies the razor to himself, and completely 
changes his features; who, with no respect for his face, is not content with 
making it as like as possible to Saturn and Isis and Bacchus, but gives it 
quietly over to contumelious blows, as if in mockery of our Lord? The devil, 
forsooth, makes it part, too, of his teaching, that the cheek is to be meekly 
offered to the smiter. In the same way, with their high shoes, he has made the 
tragic actors taller, because "none can add a cubit to his stature." His desire 
is to make Christ a liar. And in regard to the wearing of masks, I ask is that 
according to the mind of God, who forbids the making of every likeness, and 
especially then the likeness of man who is His own image? The Author of truth 
hates all the false; He regards as adultery all that is unreal. Condemning, 
therefore, as He does hypocrisy in every form, He never will approve any putting 
on of voice, or sex, or age; He never will approve pretended loves, and wraths, 
and groans, and tears. Then, too, as in His law it is declared that the man is 
cursed who attires himself in female garments, what must be His judgment of the 
pantomime, who is even brought up to play the woman! And will the boxer go 
unpunished? I suppose he received these caestus-scars, and the thick skin of his 
fists, and these growths upon his ears, at his creation! God, too, gave him eyes 
for no other end than that they might be knocked out in fighting! I say nothing 
of him who, to save himself, thrusts another in the lion's way, that he may not 
be too little of a murderer when he puts to death that very same man on the 
arena. 
CHAP. XXIV.
In how many other ways shall we yet further show that nothing which is 
peculiar to the shows has God's approval, or without that approval is becoming 
in God's servants? If we have succeeded in making it plain that they were 
instituted entirely for the devil's sake, and have been got up entirely with the 
devil's things (for all that is not God's, or is not pleasing in His eyes, 
belongs to His wicked rival), this simply means that in them you have that pomp 
of the devil which in the "seal" of our faith we abjure. We should have no 
connection with the things which, we abjure, whether in deed or word, whether by 
looking on them or looking forward to them; but do we not abjure and rescind 
that baptismal pledge, when we cease to bear its testimony? Does it then remain 
for us to apply to the heathen themselves. Let them tell us, then, whether it is 
right in Christians to frequent the show. Why, the rejection of these amusements 
is the chief sign to them that a man has adopted the Christian faith. If any 
one, then, puts away the faith's distinctive badge, he is plainly guilty of 
denying it. What hope can you possibly retain in regard to a man who does that? 
When you go over to the enemy's camp, you throw down your arms, desert the 
standards and the oath of allegiance to your chief: you cast in your lot for 
life or death with your new friends. 
CHAP. XXV.
Seated where there is nothing of God, will one be thinking of his Maker? Will 
there be peace in his soul when there is eager strife there for a charioteer? 
Wrought up into a frenzied excitement, will he learn to be modest? Nay, in the 
whole thing he will meet with no greater temptation than that gay attiring of 
the men and women. The very intermingling of emotions, the very agreements and 
disagreements with each other in the bestowment of their favours, where you have 
such close communion, blow up the sparks of passion. And then there is scarce 
any other object in going to the show, but to see and to be seen. When a tragic 
actor is declaiming, will one be giving thought to prophetic appeals? Amid the 
measures of the effeminate player, will he call up to himself a psalm? And when 
the athletes are hard at struggle, will he be ready to proclaim that there must 
be no striking again? And with his eye fixed on the bites of bears, and the 
sponge-nets of the net-fighters, can he be moved by compassion? May God avert 
from His people any such passionate eagerness after a cruel enjoyment! For how 
monstrous it is to go from God's church to the devil's--from 90 
the sky to the stye, as they say; to raise your hands to God, and then to 
weary them in the applause of an actor; out of the mouth, from which you uttered 
Amen over the Holy Thing, to give witness in a gladiator's favour; to cry 
"forever" to any one else but God and Christ! 
CHAP. XXVI.
Why may not those who go into the temptations of the show become accessible 
also to evil spirits? We have the case of the woman--the Lord Himself is 
witness--who went to the theatre, and came back possessed. In the outcasting, 
accordingly, when the unclean creature was upbraided with having dared to attack 
a believer, he firmly replied, "And in truth I did it most righteously, for I 
found her in my domain." Another case, too, is well known, in which a woman had 
been hearing a tragedian, and on the very night she saw in her sleep a linen 
cloth--the actor's name being mentioned at the same time with strong 
disapproval--and five days after that woman was no more. 
How many other undoubted proofs we have had in the case of persons who, by 
keeping company with the devil in the shows, have fallen from the Lord! For no 
one can serve two masters. What fellowship has light with darkness, life with 
death? 
CHAP. XXVII.
We ought to detest these heathen meetings and assemblies, if on no other 
account than that there God's name is blasphemed--that there the cry "To the 
lions!" is daily raised against us--that from thence persecuting decrees are 
wont to emanate, and temptations are sent forth. What will you do if you are 
caught in that heaving tide of impious judgments? Not that there any harm is 
likely to come to you from men: nobody knows that you are a Christian; but think 
how it fares with you in heaven. For at the very time the devil is working havoc 
in the church, do you doubt that the angels are looking down from above, and 
marking every man, who speaks and who listens to the blaspheming word, who lends 
his tongue and who lends his ears to the service of Satan against God? Shall you 
not then shun those tiers where the enemies of Christ assemble, that seat of all 
that is pestilential, and the very super incumbent atmosphere all impure with 
wicked cries? Grant that you have there things that are pleasant, things both 
agreeable and innocent in themselves; even some things that are excellent. 
Nobody dilutes poison with gall and hellebore: the accursed thing is put into 
condiments well seasoned and of sweetest taste. So, too, the devil puts into the 
deadly draught which he prepares, things of God most pleasant and most 
acceptable. Everything there, then, that is either brave, noble, loud-sounding, 
melodious, or exquisite in taste, hold it but as the honey drop of a poisoned 
cake; nor make so much of your taste for its pleasures, as of the danger you run 
from its attractions. 
CHAP. XXVIII.
With such dainties as these let the devil's guests be feasted. The places and 
the times, the inviter too, are theirs. Our banquets, our nuptial joys, are yet 
to come. We cannot sit down in fellowship with them, as neither can they with 
us. Things in this matter go by their turns. Now they have gladness and we are 
troubled. "The world," says Jesus, "shall rejoice; ye shall be sorrowful." Let 
us mourn, then, while the heathen are merry, that in the day of their sorrow we 
may rejoice; lest, sharing now in their gladness, we share then also in their 
grief. Thou art too dainty, Christian, if thou wouldst have pleasure in this 
life as well as in the next; nay, a fool thou art, if thou thinkest this life's 
pleasures to be really pleasures. The philosophers, for instance, give the name 
of pleasure to quietness and repose; in that they have their bliss; in that they 
find entertainment: they even glory in it. You long for the goal, and the stage, 
and the dust, and the place of combat! I would have you answer me this question: 
Can we not live without pleasure, who cannot but with pleasure die? For what is 
our wish but the apostle's, to leave the world, and be taken up into the 
fellowship of our Lord? You have your joys where you have your longings. 
CHAP. XXIX.
Even as things are, if your thought is to spend this period of existence in 
enjoyments, how are you so ungrateful as to reckon insufficient, as not 
thankfully to recognize the many and exquisite pleasures God has bestowed upon 
you? For what more delightful 91 
than to have God the Father and our Lord at peace with us, than revelation of 
the truth than confession of our errors, than pardon of the innumerable sins of 
our past life? What greater pleasure than distaste of pleasure itself, contempt 
of all that the world can give, true liberty, a pure conscience, a contented 
life, and freedom from all fear of death? What nobler than to tread under foot 
the gods of the nations--to exorcise evil spirits--to perform cures--to seek 
divine revealings--to live to God? These are the pleasures, these the spectacles 
that befit Christian men--holy, everlasting, free. Count of these as your circus 
games, fix your eyes on the courses of the world, the gliding seasons, reckon up 
the periods of time, long for the goal of the final consummation, defend the 
societies of the churches, be startled at God's signal, be roused up at the 
angel's trump, glory in the palms of martyrdom. If the literature of the stage 
delight you, we have literature in abundance of our own--plenty of verses, 
sentences, songs, proverbs; and these not fabulous, but true; not tricks of art, 
but plain realities. Would you have also fightings and wrestlings? Well, of 
these there is no lacking, and they are not of slight account. Behold unchastity 
overcome by chastity, perfidy slain by faithfulness, cruelty stricken by 
compassion, impudence thrown into the shade by modesty: these are the contests 
we have among us, and in these we win our crowns. Would you have something of 
blood too? You have Christ's. 
CHAP. XXX.
But what a spectacle is that fast-approaching advent of our Lord, now owned 
by all, now highly exalted, now a triumphant One! What that exultation of the 
angelic hosts! What the glory of the rising saints! What the kingdom of the just 
thereafter! What the city New Jerusalem! Yes, and there are other sights: that 
last day of judgment, with its everlasting issues; that day unlooked for by the 
nations, the theme of their derision, when the world hoary with age, and all its 
many products, shall be consumed in one great flame! How vast a spectacle then 
bursts upon the eye! What there excites my admiration? what my derision? Which 
sight gives me joy? which rouses me to exultation?--as I see so many illustrious 
monarchs, whose reception into the heavens was publicly announced, groaning now 
in the lowest darkness with great Jove himself, and those, too, who bore witness 
of their exultation; governors of provinces, too, who persecuted the Christian 
name, in fires more fierce than those with which in the days of their pride they 
raged against the followers of Christ. What world' s wise men besides, the very 
philosophers, in fact, who taught their followers that God had no concern in 
ought that is sublunary, and were wont to assure them that either they had no 
souls, or that they would never return to the bodies which at death they had 
left, now covered with shame before the poor deluded ones, as one fire consumes 
them! Poets also, trembling not before the judgment-seat of Rhadamanthus or 
Minos, but of the unexpected Christ! I shall have a better opportunity then of 
hearing the tragedians, louder-voiced in their own calamity; of viewing the 
play-actors, much more "dissolute" in the dissolving flame; of looking upon the 
charioteer, all glowing in his chariot of fire; of beholding the wrestlers, not 
in their gymnasia, but tossing in the fiery billows; unless even then I shall 
not care to attend to such ministers of sin, in my eager wish rather to fix a 
gaze insatiable on those whose fury vented itself against the Lord. "This," I 
shall say, "this is that carpenter's or hireling's son, that Sabbath-breaker, 
that Samaritan and devil-possessed! This is He whom you purchased from Judas! 
This is He whom you struck with reed and fist, whom you contemptuously spat 
upon, to whom you gave gall and vinegar to drink! This is He whom His disciples 
secretly stole away, that it might be said He had risen again, or the gardener 
abstracted, that his lettuces might come to no harm from the crowds of 
visitants!" What quaestor or priest in his munificence will bestow on you the 
favour of seeing and exulting in such things as these? And yet even now we in a 
measure have them by faith in the picturings of imagination. But what are the 
things which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and which have not so much as 
dimly dawned upon the human heart? Whatever they are, they are nobler, I 
believe, than circus, and both theatres, and every race-course. 

