
Tertullian












Tertullian 
On monogamy
CHAP. I.--DIFFERENT VIEWS IN REGARD TO MARRIAGE HELD BY HERETICS, PSYCHIC, 
AND SPIRITUALISTS. 
HERETICS do away with marriages; Psychics accumulate them. The former many 
not even once; the latter not only once. What dost thou, Law of the Creator? 
Between alien eunuchs and thine own grooms, thou complainest as much of the 
over-obedience of thine own household as of the contempt of strangers. They who 
abuse thee, do thee equal hurt with them who use thee not. In fact, neither is 
such continence laudable because it is heretical, nor such licence defensible 
because it is psychical. The former is blasphemous, the latter wanton; the 
former destroys the God of marriages, the latter puts Him to the blush. Among 
us, however, whom the recognition of spiritual gifts entitles to be deservedly 
called Spiritual, continence is as religious as licence is modest; since both 
the one and the other are in harmony with the Creator. 
Continence honours the law of marriage, licence tempers it; the former is not 
forced, the latter is regulated; the former recognises the power of free choice, 
the latter recognises a limit. We admit one marriage, just as we do one God. The 
law of marriage reaps an accession of honour where it is associated with 
shamefastness. But to the Psychics, since they receive not the Spirit, the 
things which are the Spirit's are not pleasing. Thus, so long as the things 
which are the Spirit's please them not, the things which are of the flesh will 
please, as being the contraries of the Spirit. "The flesh," saith (the apostle), 
"lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh." But what will 
the flesh "lust" after, except what is more of the flesh? For which reason 
withal, in. the beginning, it became estranged from the Spirit. "My Spirit," 
saith (God), "shall not permanently abide in these men eternally, for that they 
are flesh." 
CHAP. II.--THE SPIRITUALISTS VINDICATED FROM 
THE CHARGE OF NOVELTY. 
And so they upbraid the discipline of monogamy with being a heresy; nor is 
there any other cause whence they find themselves compelled to deny the 
Paraclete more than the fact that they esteem Him to be the institutor of a 
novel discipline, and a discipline which they find most harsh: so that this is 
already the first ground on which we must join issue in a general handling (of 
the subject), whether there is room for maintaining that the Paraclete has 
taught any such thing as can either be charged with novelty, in opposition to 
catholic tradition, or with burdensomeness, in opposition to the "light burden" 
of the Lord. 
Now concerning each point the Lord Himself has pronounced. For in saying, "I 
still have many things to say unto you, but ye are not yet able to bear them: 
when the Holy Spirit shall be come, He will lead you into all truth," He 
sufficiently, of course, sets before us that He will bring such (teachings) as 
may be esteemed alike novel, as having never before been published, and finally 
burdensome, as if that were the reason why they were not published. 
"It follows," you say, "that by this line of argument, anything you please 
which is novel and burdensome may be ascribed to the Paraclete, even if it have 
come from the adversary spirit." No, of course. For the adversary spirit would 
be apparent from the diversity of his preaching, beginning by adulterating the 
rule of faith, and so (going on to) adulterating the order of discipline; 
because the corruption of that which holds the first grade, (that is, of faith, 
which is prior to discipline,) comes first. A man must of necessity hold 
heretical views of God first, and then of His institution. But the Paraclete, 
having many things to teach fully which the Lord deferred till He came, 
(according to the pre-definition,) will begin by bearing emphatic witness to 
Christ, (as being) such as we believe (Him to be), together with the whole order 
of God the Creator, and will glorify Him, and will "bring to remembrance" 
concerning Him. And when He has thus been recognised (as the promised 
Comforter), on the ground of the cardinal rule, He will reveal those "many 
things" which appertain to disciplines; while the integrity of His preaching 
commands credit for these (revelations), albeit they be "novel," inasmuch as 
they are. now in course of revelation, albeit they be "burdensome," inasmuch as 
not even now are they found bearable: (revelations), however, of none other 
Christ than (the One) who said that He had withal "other many things" which were 
to be fully taught by the Paraclete, no less burdensome to men of our own day 
than to them, by whom they were then "not yet able to be borne." 
CHAP. III.--THE QUESTION OF NOVELTY FURTHER CONSIDERED IN CONNECTION WITH THE 
WORDS OF THE LORD AND HIS APOSTLES. 
But (as for the question) whether monogamy be "burdensome," let the still 
shameless "infirmity of the flesh" look to that: let us meantime come to an 
agreement as to whether it be "novel." This (even) broader assertion we make: 
that even if the Paraclete had in this our day definitely prescribed a virginity 
or continence total and absolute, so as not to permit the heat of the flesh to 
foam itself down even in single marriage, even thus He would seem to be 
introducing nothing of "novelty;" seeing that the Lord Himself opens "the 
kingdoms of the heavens" to "eunuchs," as being Himself, withal, a virgin; to 
whom looking, the apostle also--himself too for this reason abstinent--gives the 
preference to continence. ("Yes"), you say, "but saving the law of marriage." 
Saving it, plainly, and we will see under what limitations; nevertheless already 
destroying it, in so far as he gives the preference to continence. "Good," he 
says, " (it is) for a man not to have contact with a woman." It follows that it 
is evil to have contact with her; for nothing is contrary to good except evil. 
And accordingly (he says), "It remains, that both they who have wives so be as 
if they have not," that it may be the more binding on them who have not to 
abstain from having them. He renders reasons, likewise, for so advising: that 
the unmarried think about God, but the married about how, in (their) marriage, 
each may please his (partner). And I may contend, that what is permitted is not 
absolutely good. For what is absolutely good is not permitted, but needs no 
asking to make it lawful. Permission has its cause sometimes even in necessity. 
Finally, in this case, there is no volition on the part of him who permits 
marriage. For his volition points another way. "I will," he says, "that you all 
so be as I too." And when he shows that (so to abide) is "better," what, pray, 
does he demonstrate himself to "will," but what he has premised is "better?" And 
thus, if he permits something other than what he has "willed"--permitted not 
voluntarily, but of necessity--he shows that what he has unwillingly granted as 
an indulgence is not absolutely good. Finally, when he says, "Better it is to 
marry than to burn," what sort of good must that be understood to be which is 
better than a penalty? which cannot seem "better" except when compared to a 
thing very bad? "Good" is that which keeps this name per se; without 
comparison--I say not with an evil, but even--with some other good: so that, 
even if it be compared to and overshadowed by another good, it nevertheless 
remains in (possession of) the name of good. If, on the other hand, comparison 
with evil is the mean which obliges it to be called good; it is not so much 
"good" as a species of inferior evil, which, when obscured by a higher evil, is 
driven to the name of good. Take away, in Short, the condition, so as not to 
say, "Better it is to marry than to burn;" and I question whether you will have 
the hardihood to say, "Better (it is) to marry," not adding than what it is 
better. This done, then, it becomes not" better;" and while not "better," not 
"good" either, the condition being taken away which, while making it "better" 
than another thing, in that sense obliges it to be considered "good." Better it 
is to lose one eye than two. If, however, you withdraw from the comparison of 
either evil, it will not be better to have one eye, because it is not even good. 

What, now, if he accommodatingly grants all indulgence to marry on the ground 
of his own (that is, of human) sense, out of the necessity which we have 
mentioned, inasmuch as "better it is to marry than to burn?" In fact, when he 
turns to the second case, by saying, "But to the married I officially 
announce--not I, but the Lord"--he shows that those things which he had said 
above had not been (the dictates) of the Lord's authority, but of human 
judgment. When, however, he turns their minds back to continence, ("But I will 
you all so to be,") "I think, moreover," he says, "I too have the Spirit of 
God;" in order that, if he had granted any indulgence out of necessity, that, by 
the Holy Spirit's authority, he might recall. But John, too, when advising us 
that "we ought so to walk as the Lord withal did," of course admonished us to 
walk as well in accordance with sanctity of the flesh (as in accordance with His 
example in other respects). Accordingly he says more manifestly: "And every 
(man) who hath this hope in Him maketh himself chaste, just as Himself withal is 
chaste." For elsewhere, again, (we read): "Be ye holy, just as He withal was 
holy "--in the flesh, namely. For of the Spirit he would not have said (that), 
inasmuch as the Spirit is without any external influence recognised as "holy," 
nor does He wait to be admonished to sanctity, which is His proper nature. But 
the flesh is taught sanctity; and that withal, in Christ, was holy. 
Therefore, if all these (considerations) obliterate the licence of marrying, 
whether we look into the condition on which the licence is granted, or the 
preference of continence which is imposed. why, after the apostles, could not 
the same Spirit, supervening for the purpose of conducting disciplehood into 
"all truth" through the gradations of the times (according to what the preacher 
says, "A time to everything"), impose by this time a final bridle upon the 
flesh, no longer obliquely calling us away from marriage, but openly; since now 
more (than ever) "the time is become wound up,"--about 160 years having elapsed 
since then? Would you not spontaneously ponder (thus) in your own mind: "This 
discipline is old, shown beforehand, even at that early date, in the Lord's 
flesh and will, (and) successively thereafter in both the counsels and the 
examples of His apostles? 
Of old we were destined to this sanctity. Nothing of novelty is the Paraclete 
introducing. What He premonished, He is (now) definitively appointing; what He 
deferred, He is (now) exacting." And presently, by revolving these thoughts, you 
will easily persuade yourself that it was much more competent to the Paraclete 
to preach unity of marriage, who could withal have preached its annulling; and 
that it is more credible that He should have tempered what it would have become 
Him even to have abolished, if you understand what Christ's "will" is. Herein 
also you ought to recognise the Paraclete in His character of Comforter, in that 
He excuses your infirmity from (the stringency of) an absolute continence. 
CHAP. IV.--WAIVING ALLUSION TO THE PARACLETE, TERTULLIAN COMES TO THE 
CONSIDERATION OF THE ANCIENT SCRIPTURES, AND THEIR TESTIMONY ON THE SUBJECT IN 
HAND. 
Waiving, now, the mention of the Paraclete, as of some authority of our own, 
evolve we the common instruments of the primitive Scriptures. This very thing is 
demonstrable by us: that the rule of monogamy is neither novel nor strange, nay 
rather, is both ancient, and proper to Christians; so that you may be sensible 
that the Paraclete is rather its restitutor than institutor. As for what 
pertains to antiquity, what more ancient formal type can be brought forward, 
than the very original fount of the human race? One female did God fashion for 
the male, culling one rib of his, and (of course) (one) out of a plurality. But, 
moreover, in the introductory speech which preceded the work itself, He said, 
"It is not good for the man that he be alone; let us make an help-meet for him." 
For He would have said "helpers" if He had destined him to have more wives (than 
one). He added, too, a law concerning the future; if, that is, (the words) "And 
two shall be (made) into one flesh"--not three, nor more; else they would be no 
more "two" if (there were) more--were prophetically uttered. The law stood 
(firm). In short, the unity of marriage lasted to the very end in the case of 
the authors of our race; not because there were no other women, but because the 
reason why there were none was that the first-fruits of the race might not be 
contaminated by a double marriage. Otherwise, had God willed, there could withal 
have been (others); at all events, he might have taken from the abundance of his 
own daughters--having no less an Eve (taken) out of his own bones and flesh--if 
piety had allowed it to be done. But where the first crime (is found)homicide, 
inaugurated in fratricide--no crime was so worthy of the second place as a 
double marriage. For it makes no difference whether a man have had two wives 
singly, or whether individuals (taken) at the same time have made two. The 
number of (the individuals) conjoined and separate is the same. Still, God's 
institution, after once for all suffering violence through Lamech, remained firm 
to the very end of that race. Second Lamech there arose none, in the way of 
being husband to two wives. What Scripture does not note, it denies. Other 
iniquities provoke the deluge: (iniquities) once for all avenged, whatever was 
their nature; not, however, "seventy-seven times," which (is the vengeance 
which) double marriages have deserved. 
But again: the reformation of the second human race is traced from monogamy 
as its mother. Once more, "two (joined) into one flesh" undertake (the duty of) 
"growing and multiplying,"--Noah, (namely), and his wife, and their sons, in 
single marriage. Even in the very animals monogamy is recognised, for fear that 
even beasts should be born of adultery. "Out of all beasts," said (God), "out of 
all flesh, two shall thou lead into the ark, that they may live with thee, male 
and female: they shall be (taken) from all flying animals according to (their) 
kind, and from all creepers of the earth according to their kind; two out of all 
shall enter unto thee, male and female." In the same formula, too, He.orders 
sets of sevens, made up of pairs, to be gathered to him, consisting of male and 
female--one male and one female What more shall I say? Even unclean birds were 
not allowed to enter with two females each. 
CHAP. V.--CONNECTION OF THESE PRIMEVAL 
TESTIMONIES WITH CHRIST. 
Thus far for the testimony of things primordial, and the sanction of our 
origin, and the prejudgment of the divine institution, which of course is a law, 
not (merely) a memorial inasmuch as, if it was." so done from the beginning," we 
find ourselves directed to the beginning by Christ: just as, in the question of 
divorce, by saying that that had been permitted by Moses on account of their 
hard-heartedness but from the beginning it had not been so, He doubtless recalls 
to "the beginning" the (law of) the individuity of marriage. And accordingly, 
those whom God "from the beginning" conjoined, "two into one flesh," man shall 
not at the present day separate. The apostle, too, writing to the Ephesians, 
says that God "had proposed in Himself, at the dispensation of the fulfilment of 
the times, to recall to the head" (that is, to the beginning) "things universal 
in Christ, which are above the heavens and above the earth in Him." So, too, the 
two letters of Greece, the first and the last, the Lord assumes to Himself, as 
figures of the beginning and end! which concur in Himself: so that, just as 
Alpha rolls on till it reaches Omega, and again Omega rolls back till it reaches 
Alpha, in the same way He might show that in Himself is both the downward course 
of the beginning on to the end, and the backward course of the end up to the 
beginning; so that every economy, ending in Him through whom it began,--through 
the Word of God, that is, who was made flesh,--may have an end correspondent to 
its beginning. 
And so truly in Christ are all things recalled to "the beginning," that even 
faith returns from circumcision to the integrity of that (original) flesh, as 
"it was from the beginning; and freedom of meats and abstinence from blood 
alone, as "it was from the beginning;" and the individuality of marriage, as "it 
was from the beginning;" and the restriction of divorce, which was not "from the 
beginning;" and lastly, the whole man into Paradise, where he was "from the 
beginning." Why, then, ought He not to restore Adam thither at least as a 
monogamist, who cannot present him in so entire perfection as he was when 
dismissed thence? Accordingly, so far as pertains to the restitution of the 
beginning, the logic both of the dispensation you live under, and of your hope, 
exact this from you, that what was "from the beginning" (should be) in 
accordance with "the beginning;" Which (beginning) you find counted in Adam, and 
recounted in Noah. Make your election, in which of the twain you account your 
"beginning." In both, the censorial power of monogamy claims you for itself. But 
again: if the beginning passes on to the end (as Alpha to Omega), as the end 
passes back to the beginning (as Omega to Alpha), and thus our origin is 
transferred to Christ, the animal to the spiritual--inasmuch as " (that was) not 
first which is spiritual, but (that) which animal; then what spiritual,"--let 
us, in like manner (as before), see whether you owe this very (same) thing to 
this second origin also: whether the last Adam also meet you in the selfsame 
form as the first; since the last Adam (that is, Christ) was entirely unwedded, 
as was even the first Adam before his exile. 
But, presenting to your weakness the gift of the example of His own flesh, 
the more perfect Adam--that is, Christ, more perfect on this account as well (as 
on others), that He was more entirely pure--stands before you, if you are 
willing (to copy Him), as a voluntary celibate in the flesh. If, however, you 
are unequal (to that perfection), He stands before you a monogamist in spirit, 
having one Church as His spouse, according to the figure of Adam and of Eve, 
which (figure) the apostle interprets of that great sacrament of Christ and the 
Church, (teaching that), through the spiritual, it was analogous to the carnal 
monogamy. You see, therefore, after what manner, renewing your origin even in 
Christ, you cannot trace down that (origin) without the profession of monogamy; 
unless, (that is), you be in flesh what He is in spirit; albeit withal, what He 
was in flesh, you equally ought to have been. 
CHAP. VI.--THE CASE OF ABRAHAM, AND ITS 
BEARING ON THE PRESENT QUESTION. 
But let us proceed with our inquiry into some eminent chief fathers of our 
origin: for there are some to whom our monogamist parents Adam and Noah are not 
pleasing, nor perhaps Christ either. To Abraham, in fine, they appeal; 
prohibited though they are to acknowledge any other father than God. Grant, now, 
that Abraham is our father; grant, too, that Paul is. "In the Gospel," says he, 
"I have begotten you." Show yourself a son even of Abraham. For your origin in 
him, you must know, iS not referable to every period of his life: there is a 
definite time at which he is your father. For if" faith" is the source whence we 
are reckoned to Abraham as his "sons" (as the apostle teaches, saying to the 
Galatians, "You know, consequently, that (they) who are of faith, these are sons 
of Abraham"), when did Abraham "believe God and it was accounted to him for 
righteousness?" I suppose when still in monogamy, since (he was) not yet in 
circumcision. But if afterwards. he changed to either (opposite)--to digamy 
through cohabitation with his handmaid, and to circumcision through the seal of 
the testament--you cannot acknowledge him as your father except at that time 
when he "believed God," if it is true that it is according to faith that you are 
his son, not according to flesh. Else, if it be the later Abraham whom you 
follow as your father--that is, the digamist (Abraham)--receive him withal in 
his circumcision. If you reject his circumcision, it follows that you will 
refuse his digamy too. Two characters of his mutually diverse in two several 
ways, you will not be able to blend. His digamy began with circumcision, his 
monogamy with uncircumcision. You receive digamy; admit circumcision too. You 
retain uncircumcision; you are bound to monogamy too. Moreover, so true is it 
that it is of the monogamist Abraham that you are the son, just as of the 
uncircumcised, that if you be circumcised you immediately cease to be his son, 
inasmuch as you will not be "of faith," but of the seal of a faith which had 
been justified in uncircumcision. You bare the apostle: learn (of him), together 
with the Galatians. In like manner, too, if you have involved yourself in 
digamy, you are not the son of that Abraham whose "faith" preceded in monogamy. 
For albeit it is subsequently that he is called "a father of many nations," 
still it is of those (nations) who, as the fruit of the "faith" which precedes 
digamy, had to be accounted "sons of Abraham." 
Thenceforward let matters see to themselves. Figures are one thing; laws 
another. Images are one thing; statutes another. Images pass away when 
fulfilled: statutes remain permanently to be fulfilled. Images prophesy: 
statutes govern. What that digamy of Abraham portends, the same apostle fully 
teaches, the interpreter of each testament, just as he likewise lays it down 
that our "seed" is called in Isaac. If you are "of the free woman," and belong 
to Isaac, he, at all events, maintained unity of marriage to the last. 
These accordingly, I suppose, are they in whom my origin is counted. All 
others I ignore. And if I glance around at their examples-- (examples) of some 
David heaping up marriages for himself even through sanguinary means, of some 
Solomon rich in wives as well as in other riches--you are bidden to "follow the 
better things;" and you have withal Joseph but once wedded, and on this score I 
venture to say better than his father; you have Moses, the intimate eye-witness 
of God; you have Aaron the chief priest. The second Moses, also, of the second 
People, who led our representatives into the (possession of) the promise of God, 
in whom the Name (of Jesus) was first inaugurated, was no digamist. 
CHAP. VII.--FROM PATRIARCHAL, TERTULLIAN 
COMES TO LEGAL, PRECEDENTS. 
After the ancient examples of the patriarchs, let us equally pass on to the 
ancient documents of the legal Scriptures, that we may treat in order of all our 
canon. And since there are some who sometimes assert that they have nothing to 
do with the law (which Christ has not dissolved, but fulfilled), sometimes catch 
at such parts of the law as they choose; plainly do we too assert that the law 
has deceased in this sense, that its burdens--according to the sentence of the 
apostles--which not even the fathers were able to sustain, have wholly ceased: 
such (parts), however. as relate to righteousness not only permanently remain 
reserved, but even amplified; in order, to be sure, that our righteousness may 
be able to redound above the righteousness of the scribes and of the Pharisees. 
If "righteousness" must, of course chastity must too. If, then, forasmuch as 
there is in the law a precept that a man is to take in marriage the wife of his 
brother if he have died without children, for the purpose of raising up seed to 
his brother; and this may happen repeatedly to the same person, according to 
that crafty question of the Sadducees; men for that reason think that frequency 
of marriage is permitted in other cases as well: it will be their duty to 
understand first the reason of the precept itself; and thus they will come to 
know that that reason, now ceasing, is among those parts of the law which have 
been cancelled. Necessary it was that there should be a succession to the 
marriage of a brother if he died childless: first, because that ancient 
benediction, "Grow and multiply," had still to run its course; secondly, because 
the sins of the fathers used to be exacted even from the sons; thirdly, because 
eunuchs and barren persons used to be regarded as ignominious. And thus, for 
fear that such as had died childless, not from natural inability, but from being 
prematurely overtaken by death, should be judged equally accursed (with the 
other class); for this reason a vicarious and (so to say) posthumous offspring 
used to be supplied them. But (now), when the "extremity of the times" has 
cancelled (the command) "Grow and multiply," since the apostle superinduces 
(another command), "It remaineth, that both they who have wives so be as if they 
have not," because "the time is compressed; and "the sour grape" chewed by "the 
fathers" has ceased "to set the sons' teeth on edge," for, "each one shall die 
in his own sin;" and "eunuchs" not only have lost ignominy, but have even 
deserved grace, being invited into "the kingdoms of the heavens:" the law of 
succeeding to the wife of a brother being buried, its contrary has 
obtained--that of not succeeding to the wife of a brother. And thus, as we have 
said before, what has ceased to be valid, on the cessation of its reason, cannot 
furnish a ground of argument to another. Therefore a wife, when her husband is 
dead, will not marry; for if she marry, she will of course be marrying (his) 
brother: for "all we are brethren." Again, the woman, if intending to marry, has 
to marry "in the Lord;" that is, not to an heathen, but to a brother, inasmuch 
as even the ancient law forbids" marriage with members of another tribe. Since, 
moreover, even in Leviticus there is a caution, "Whoever shall have taken (his) 
brother's wife, is uncleanness--turpitude; without children shall die;" beyond 
doubt, while the man is prohibited from marrying a second time, the woman is 
prohibited too, having no one to marry except a brother. In what way, then, an 
agreement shall be established between the apostle and the Law (which he is not 
impugning in its entirety), shall be shown when we shall have come to his own 
epistle. Meantime, so far as pertains to the law, the lines of argument drawn 
from it are more suitable for us (than for our opponents). In short, the same 
(law) prohibits priests from marrying a second time. The daughter also of a 
priest it bids, if widowed or repudiated, if she have had no seed, to return 
into her father's home and be nourished from his bread. The reason why (it is 
said), "If she have had no seed," is not that if she have she may marry 
again--for how much more will she abstain from marrying if she have sons?--but 
that, if she have, she may be "nourished" by her son rather than by her father; 
in order that the son, too, may carry out the precept of God, "Honour father and 
mother." Us, moreover, Jesus, the Father's Highest and Great Priest, clothing us 
from His own store--inasmuch as they "who are baptized in Christ have put on 
Christ"--has made "priests to God His Father," according to John. For the reason 
why He recalls that young man who was hastening to his father's obsequies, is 
that He may show that we are called priests by Him; (priests) whom the Law used 
to forbid to be present at the sepulture of parents: "Over every dead soul," it 
says, "the priest shall not enter, and over his own father and over his own 
mother he shall not be contaminated." "Does it follow that we too are bound to 
observe this prohibition?" No, of course. For our one Father, God, lives, and 
our mother, the Church; and neither are we dead who live to God, nor do we bury 
our dead, inasmuch as they too are living in Christ. At all events, priests we 
are called by Christ; debtors to monogamy, in accordance with the pristine Law 
of God, which prophesied at that time of us in its own priests. 
CHAP. VIII.--FROM THE LAW TERTULLIAN COMES TO THE GOSPEL. HE BEGINS WITH 
EXAMPLES BEFORE PROCEEDING TO DOGMAS. 
Turning now to the law, which is properly ours--that is, to the Gospel--by 
what kind of examples are we met, until we come to definite dogmas? Behold, 
there immediately present themselves to us, on the threshold as it were, the two 
priestesses of Christian sanctity, Monogamy and Continence: one modest, in 
Zechariah the priest; one absolute, in John the forerunner: one appeasing God; 
one preaching Christ: one proclaiming a perfect priest; one exhibiting "more 
than a prophet,"--him, namely, who has not only preached or personally pointed 
out, but even baptized Christ. For who was more worthily to perform the 
initiatory rite on the body of the Lord, than flesh similar in kind to that 
which conceived and gave birth to that (body)? And indeed it was a virgin, about 
to marry once for all after her delivery, who gave birth to Christ, in order 
that each title of sanctity might be fulfilled in Christ's parentage, by means 
of a mother who was both virgin, and wife of one husband. Again, when He is 
presented as an infant in the temple, who is it who receives Him into his hands? 
who is the first to recognise Him in spirit? A man "just and circumspect," and 
of course no digamist, (which is plain) even (from this consideration), lest 
(otherwise) Christ should presently be more worthily preached by a woman, an 
aged widow, and "the wife of one man;" who, living devoted to the temple, was 
(already) giving in her own person a sufficient token what sort of persons ought 
to be the adherents to the spiritual temple,--that is, the Church. Such 
eye-witnesses the Lord in infancy found; no different ones had He in adult age. 
Peter alone do I find--through (the mention of) his "mother-in-law",--to have 
been married. Monogamist I am led to presume him by consideration of the Church, 
which, built upon him, was destined to appoint every grade of her Order from 
monogamists. The rest, while I do not find them married, I must of necessity 
understand to have been either eunuchs or continent. Nor indeed, if, among the 
Greeks, in accordance with the carelessness of custom, women and wives are 
classed under a common name--however, there is a name proper to wives--shall we 
therefore so interpret Paul as if he demonstrates the apostles to have had 
wives? For if he were disputing about marriages, as he does in the sequel, where 
the apostle could better have named some particular example, it would appear 
right for him to say, "For have we not the power of leading about wives, like 
the other apostles and Cephas?" But when he subjoins those (expressions)which 
show his abstinence from (insisting on) the supply of maintenance, saying, "For 
have we not the power of eating and drinking?" he does not demonstrate that 
"wives" were led about by the apostles, whom even such as have not still have 
the power of eating and drinking; but simply "women," who used to minister to 
them in the stone way (as they did) when accompanying the Lord. But further, if 
Christ reproves the scribes and Pharisees, sitting in the official chair of 
Moses, but not doing what they taught, what kind of (supposition). is it that He 
Himself withal should set upon His own official chair men who were mindful 
rather to enjoin-- (but) not likewise to practise--sanctity of the flesh, which 
(sanctity) He had in all ways recommended to their teaching and 
practising?--first by His own example, then by all other arguments; while He 
tells (them) that "the kingdom of heavens" is "children's;" while He associates 
with these (children) others who, after marriage, remained (or became)virgins;" 
while He calls (them) to (copy) the simplicity of the dove, a bird not merely 
innocuous, but modest too, and whereof one male knows one female; while He 
denies the Samaritan woman's (partner to be) a husband, that He may show that 
manifold husbandry is adultery; while, in the revelation of His own glory, He 
prefers, from among so many saints and prophets, to have with him Moses and 
Elias"--the one a monogamist, the other a voluntary celibate (for Elias was 
nothing else than John, who came "in the power and spirit of Elias"); while that 
"man gluttonous and toping," the "frequenter of luncheons and suppers, in the 
company of publicans and sinners," sups once for all at a single marriage, 
though, of course, many were marrying (around Him); for He willed to attend 
(marriages) only so often as (He willed) them to be. 
CHAP. IX.--FROM EXAMPLES TERTULLIAN PASSES TO DIRECT DOGMATIC TEACHINGS. HE 
BEGINS WITH THE LORD'S TEACHING. 
But grant that these argumentations may be thought to be forced and founded 
on conjectures, if no dogmatic teachings have stood parallel with them which the 
Lord uttered in treating of divorce, which, permitted formerly, He now 
prohibits, first because "from the beginning it was not so," like plurality of 
marriage; secondly, because "What God hath conjoined, man shall not 
separate,"--for fear, namely, that he contravene the Lord: for He alone shall 
"separate" who has "conjoined" (separate, moreover, not through the harshness of 
divorce, which (harshness) He censures and restrains, but through the debt of 
death) if, indeed, "one of two sparrows falleth not on the ground without the 
Father's will." Therefore if those whom God has conjoined man shall not separate 
by divorce, it is equally congruous that those whom God has separated by death 
man is not to conjoin by marriage; the joining of the separation will be just as 
contrary to God's will as would have been the separation of the conjunction. 
So far as regards the non-destruction of the will of God, and the restruction 
of the law of "the beginning." But another reason, too, conspires; nay, not 
another, but (one)which imposed the law of "the beginning," and moved the will 
of God to prohibit divorce: the fact thatwho shall have dismissed his wife, 
except on the ground of adultery, makes her commit adultery; and who shall have 
married a (woman) dismissed by her husband, of course commits adultery. A 
divorced woman cannot even marry legitimately; and if she commit any such act 
without the name of marriage, does it not fall under the category of adultery, 
in that adultery is crime in the way of marriage? Such is God's verdict, within 
straiter limits than men's, that universally, whether through marriage or 
promiscuously, the admission of a second man (to intercourse) is pronounced 
adultery by Him. For let us see what marriage is in the eye of God; and thus we 
shall learn what adultery equally is. Marriage is (this): when God joins "two 
into one flesh;" or else, finding (them already) joined in the same flesh, has 
given His seal to the conjunction. Adultery is (this): when, the two having 
been--in whatsoever way--disjoined, other--nay, rather alien--flesh is mingled 
(with either): flesh concerning which it cannot be affirmed, "This is flesh out 
of my flesh, and this bone out of my bones." For this, once for all done and 
pronounced, as from the beginning, so now too, cannot apply to "other" flesh. 
Accordingly, it will be without cause that you will say that God wills not a 
divorced woman to be joined to another man "while her husband liveth," as if He 
do will it "when he is dead;" whereas if she is not bound to him when dead, no 
more is she when living. "Alike when divorce dissevers marriage as when death 
does, she will not be bound to him by whom the binding medium has been broken 
off." To whom, then, will she be bound? In the eye of God, it matters nought 
whether she marry during her life or after his death. For it is not against him 
that she sins, but against herself. "Any sin which a man may have committed is 
external to the body; but ] who commits adultery sins against his own body." 
But--as we have previously laid down above--whoever shall intermingle with 
himself "other" flesh, over and above that pristine flesh which God either 
conjoined into two or else found (already) conjoined, commits adultery. And the 
reason why He has abolished divorce, which "was not from the beginning," is, 
that He may strengthen that which "was from the beginning"--the permanent 
conjunction, (namely), of "two into one flesh:" for fear that necessity or 
opportunity for a third union of flesh may make an irruption (into His 
dominion); permitting divorce to no cause but one--if, (that is), the (evil) 
against which precaution is taken chance to have occurred beforehand. So true, 
moreover, is it that divorce "was not from the beginning," that among the Romans 
it is not till after the six hundredth year from the building of the city that 
this kind of "hard-heartedness" is set down as having been committed. But they 
indulge in promiscuous adulteries, even without divorcing (their partners): to 
us, even if we do divorce them, even marriage will not be lawful. 
CHAP. X.--ST. PAUL'S TEACHING ON THE SUBJECT. 
From this point I see that we are challenged by an appeal to the apostle; for 
the more easy apprehension of whose meaning we must all the more earnestly 
inculcate (the assertion), that a woman is more bound when her husband is dead 
not to admit (to marriage) another husband. For let us reflect that divorce 
either is caused by discord, or else causes discord; whereas death is an event 
resulting from the law of God, not from an offence of man; and that it is a debt 
which all owe, even the unmarried. Therefore, if a divorced woman, who has been 
separated (from her husband)in soul as well as body, through discord, anger, 
hatred, and the causes of these--injury, or contumely, or whatsoever cause of 
complaint--is bound to a personal enemy, not to say a husband, how much more 
will one who, neither by her own nor her husband's fault, but by an event 
resulting from the Lord's law, has been--not separated from, but left behind 
by--her consort, be his, even when dead, to whom, even when dead, she owes (the 
debt of) concord? From him from whom she has heard no (word of) divorce she does 
not turn away; with him she is, to whom she has written no (document of) 
divorce; him whom she was unwilling to have lost, she retains. She has within 
her the licence of the mind, which represents to a man, in imaginary enjoyment, 
all things which he has not. In short, I ask the woman herself, "Tell me, 
sister, have you sent your husband before you (to his rest) in peace?" What will 
she answer? (Will she say), "In discord?" In that case she is the more bound to 
him with whom she has a cause (to plead) at the bar of God. She who is bound (to 
another) has not departed (from him). But (will she say), "In peace?" In that 
case, she must necessarily persevere in that (peace) with him whom she will no 
longer have the power to divorce; not that she would, even if she had been able 
to divorce him, have been marriageable. Indeed, she prays for his soul, and 
requests refreshment for him meanwhile, and fellowship (with him) in the first 
resurrection; and she offers (her sacrifice) on the anniversaries of his falling 
asleep. For, unless she does these deeds, she has in the true sense divorced 
him, so far as in her lies; and indeed the more iniquitously--inasmuch as (she 
did it) as far as was in her power--because she had no power (to do it); and 
with the more indignity, inasmuch as it is with more indignity if (her reason 
for doing it is) because he did not deserve it. Or else shall we, pray, cease to 
be after death, according to (the teaching of) some Epicurus, and not according 
to (that of) Christ? But if we believe the resurrection of the dead, of course 
we shall be bound to them with whom we are destined to rise, to render an 
account the one of the other. "But if 'in that age they will neither marry nor 
be given in marriage, but will be equal to angels,' is not the fact that there 
will be no restitution of the conjugal relation a reason why we shall not be 
bound to our departed consorts?" Nay, but the more shall we be bound (to them), 
because we are destined to a better estate--destined (as we are) to rise to a 
spiritual consortship, to recognise as well our own selves as them who are ours. 
Else how shall we sing thanks to God to eternity, if there shall remain in us no 
sense and memory of this debt; if we shall be reformed in substance, not in 
consciousness? Consequently, we who shall be with God shall be together; since 
we shall all be with the one God--albeit the wages be various, albeit there be 
"many mansions", in the house of the same Father having laboured for the "one 
penny " of the self-same hire, that is, of eternal life; in which (eternal life) 
God will still less separate them whom He has conjoined, than in this lesser 
life He forbids them to be separated. 
Since this is so, how will a woman have room for another husband, who is, 
even to futurity, in the possession of her own? (Moreover, we speak to each sex, 
even if our discourse address itself but to the one; inasmuch as one discipline 
is incumbent [on both].) She will have one in spirit, one in flesh. This will be 
adultery, the conscious affection of one woman for two men. If the one has been 
disjoined from her flesh, but remains in her heart--in that place where even 
cogitation without carnal contact achieves beforehand both adultery by 
concupiscence, and matrimony by volition--he is to this hour her husband, 
possessing the very thing which is the mean whereby he became so--her mind, 
namely, in which withal, if another shall find a habitation, this will be a 
crime. Besides, excluded he Is not, if he has withdrawn from viler carnal 
commerce. A more honourable husband is he, in proportion as he is become more 
pure. 
CHAP. XI.--FURTHER REMARKS UPON ST. PAUL'S 
TEACHING. 
Grant, now, that you marry "in the Lord," in accordance with the law and the 
apostle--if, notwithstanding, you care even about this--with what face do you 
request (the solemnizing of) a matrimony which is unlawful to those of whom you 
request it; of a monogamist bishop, of presbyters and deacons bound by the same 
solemn engagement, of widows whose Order you have in your own person refused? 
And they, plainly, will give husbands and wives as they would morsels of bread; 
for this is their rendering of "To every one who asketh thee thou shalt give!" 
And they will join you together in a virgin church, the one betrothed of the one 
Christ! And you will pray for your husbands, the new and the old. Make your 
election, to which of the twain you will play the adulteress. I think, to both. 
But if you have any wisdom, be silent on behalf of the dead one. Let your 
silence be to him a divorce, already endorsed in the dotal gifts of another. In 
this way you will earn the new husband's favour, if you forget the old. You 
ought to take more pains to please him for whose sake you have not preferred to 
please God! Such (conduct) the Psychics will have it the apostle approved, or 
else totally failed to think about, when he wrote: "The woman is bound for such 
length of time as her husband liveth; but if he shall have died, she is free; 
whom she will let her marry, only in the Lord." For it is out of this passage 
that they draw their defence of the licence of second marriage; nay, even of 
(marriages) to any amount, if of second (marriage): for that which has ceased to 
be once.for all, is open to any and every number. But the sense in which the 
apostle did write will be apparent, if first an agreement be come to that he did 
not write it in the sense of which the Psychics avail themselves. Such an 
agreement, moreover, will be come to if one first recall to mind those 
(passages) which are diverse from the passage in question, when tried by the 
standard of doctrine, of volition, and of Paul's own discipline. For, if he 
permits second nuptials, which were not "from the beginning," how does he affirm 
that all things are being recollected to the beginning in Christ? If he wills us 
to iterate conjugal connections, how does he maintain that "our seed is called" 
in the but once married Isaac as its author? How does he make monogamy the base 
of his disposition of the whole Ecclesiastical Order, if this rule does not 
antecedently hold good in the case of laics, from whose ranks the Ecclesiastical 
Order proceeds? How does he call away from the enjoyment of marriage such as are 
still in the married position, saying that "the time is wound up," if he calls 
back again into marriage such as through death had escaped from marriage? If 
these (passages) are diverse from that one about which the present question is, 
it will be agreed (as we have said) that he did not write in that sense.of which 
the Psychics avail themselves; inasmuch as it is easier (of belief) that that 
one passage should have some explanation agreeable with the others, than that an 
apostle should seem to have taught (principles) mutually diverse. That 
explanation we shall be able to discover in the subject-matter itself. What was 
the subject-matter which led the apostle to write such (words)? The inexperience 
of a new and just rising Church, which he was rearing, to wit, "with milk," not 
yet with the "solid food" of stronger doctrine; inexperience so great, that that 
infancy of faith prevented them from yet knowing what they were to do in regard 
of carnal and sexual necessity. The very phases themselves of this 
(inexperience) are intelligible from (the apostle's) rescripts, when he says: 
"But concerning these (things) which ye write; good it is for a man not to touch 
a woman; but, on account of fornications, let each one have his own wife." He 
shows that there were who, having been "apprehended by the faith" in (the state 
of) marriage, were apprehensive that it might not be lawful for them 
thenceforward to enjoy their marriage, because they had believed on the holy 
flesh of Christ. And yet it is "by way of allowance" that he makes the 
concession, "not by way of command;" that is, indulging, not enjoining, the 
practice. On the other hand, he "willed rather" that all should be what he 
himself was. Similarly, too, in sending a rescript on (the subject of) divorce, 
he demonstrates that some had been thinking over that also, chiefly because 
withal they did not suppose that they were to persevere, after faith, in heathen 
marriages. They sought counsel, further, "concerning virgins"--for "precept of 
the Lord" there was none-- (and were told) that "it is good for a man if he so 
remain permanently;" ("so"), of course, as he may have been found by the faith. 
"Thou hast been bound to a wife, seek not loosing; thou hast been loosed from a 
wife, seek not a wife." "But if thou shalt have taken to (thyself) a wife, thou 
hast not sinned;" because to one who, before believing, had been "loosed from a 
wife," she will not be counted a second wife who, subsequently to believing, is 
the first: for it is from (the time of our) believing that our life itself dates 
its origin. But here he says that he "is sparing them;" else "pressure of the 
flesh" would shortly follow, in consequence of the straits of the times, which 
shunned the encumbrances of marriage: yea, rather solicitude must be felt about 
earning the Lord's favour than a husband's. And thus he recalls his permission. 
So, then, in the very same passage in which he definitely rules that "each one 
ought permanently to remain in that calling in which he shall be called;" 
adding, "A woman is bound so long as her husband liveth; but if he shall have 
fallen asleep, she is free: whom she shall wish let her marry, only in the 
Lord," he hence also demonstrates that such a woman is to be understood as has 
withal herself been "found" (by the faith) "loosed from a husband," similarly as 
the husband "loosed from a wife"--the "loosing" having taken place through 
death, of course, not through divorce; inasmuch as to the divorced he would 
grant no permission to marry, in the teeth of the primary precept. And so "a 
woman, if she shall have married, will not sin;" because he will not be reckoned 
a second husband who is, subsequently to her believing, the first, any more 
(than a wife thus taken will be counted a second wife). And so truly is this the 
case, that he therefore adds, "only in the Lord;" because the question in 
agitation was about her who had had a heathen (husband), and had believed 
subsequently to losing him: for fear, to wit, that she might presume herself 
able to marry a heathen even after believing; albeit not even this is an object 
of care to the Psychics. Let us plainly know that, in the Greek original, it 
does not stand in the form which (through the either crafty or simple alteration 
of two syllables) has gone out into common use, "But if her husband shall haze 
fallen asleep," as if it were speaking of the future, and thereby seemed to 
pertain to her who has lost her husband when already in a believing state. If 
this indeed had been so, licence let loose without limit would have granted a 
(fresh) husband as often as one had been lost, without @ any such modesty in 
marrying as is congruous even to heathens. But even if it had been so, as if 
referring to future tim,e, "If any (woman's). husband shall have died, even the 
future would just as much pertain to her whose husband shall die before she 
believed. Take it which way you. will, provided you do not overturn the rest. 
For since these (other passages) agree to the sense (given above): "Thou hast 
been called a slave; care not:" "Thou hast been called in uncircumcision; be not 
circumcised:" "Thou hast been called in circumcision; become not uncircumcised:" 
with which concurs, "Thou hast been bound to a wife; seek not loosing: thou hast 
been loosed from a wife; seek not a wife,"--manifest enough it is that these 
passages pertain to such as, finding themselves in a new and recent "calling," 
were consulting (the apostle) on the subject of those (circumstantial 
conditions) in which they had been "apprehended" by the faith. 
This will be the interpretation of that passage, to be examined as to whether 
it be congruous with the time and the occasion, and with the examples and 
arguments preceding as well as with the sentences and senses succeeding, and 
primarily with the individual advice and practice of the apostle himself: for 
nothing is so much to be guarded as (the care) that no one be found 
self-contradictory. 
CHAP. XII.--THE EXPLANATION OF THE 
PASSAGE OFFERED BY THE PSYCHICS CONSIDERED. 
Listen, withal, to the very subtle argumentation on the contrary side. "So 
true is it," say (our opponents), "that the apostle has permitted the iteration 
of marriage, that it is only such as are in the Clerical Order that he has 
stringently bound to the yoke of monogamy. For that which he prescribes to 
certain (individuals) he does not prescribe to all." Does it then follow, too, 
that to bishops alone he does not prescribe what he does enjoin upon all; if 
what he does prescribe to bishops he does not enjoin upon all? or is it 
therefore to all because to bishops? and therefore to bishops because to all? 
For whence is it that the bishops and clergy come? Is it not from all If all are 
not bound to monogamy, whence are monogamists (to he taken) into the clerical 
rank? Will some separate order of monogamists have to be instituted, from which 
to make selection for the clerical body?; but when we are extolling and 
inflating ourselves in opposition to the clergy, then "we are all one:" then "we 
are all priests, because He hath made us priests to (His) God and Father." When 
we are challenged to a thorough equalization with the sacerdotal discipline, we 
lay down the (priestly) fillets, and (still) are on a par! The question in hand 
(when the apostle was writing), was with reference to Ecclesiastical 
Orders--what son of men ought to be ordained. It was therefore fitting that all 
the form of the common discipline should be set forth on its fore-front, as an 
edict to be in a certain sense universally and carefully attended to, that the 
laity might the better know that they must themselves observe that order which 
was indispensable to their overseers; and that even the office of honour itself 
might not flatter itself in anything tending to licence, as if on the ground of 
privilege of position. The Holy Spirit foresaw that some would say, "All things 
are lawful to bishops;" just as that bishop of Utina of yours feared not even 
the Scantinian law. Why, how many digamists, too, preside in your churches; 
insulting the apostle, of course: at all events, not blushing when these 
passages are read under their presidency! 
Come, now, you who think that an exceptional law of monogamy is made with 
reference to bishops, abandon withal your remaining disciplinary titles, which, 
together with monogamy, are ascribed to bishops. Refuse to be "irreprehensible, 
sober, of good morals, orderly, hospitable, easy to be taught;" nay, indeed, 
"given to wine, prompt with the hand to strike, combative, money-loving, not 
ruling your house, nor caring for your children's discipline,"--no, nor 
"courting good renown even from strangers." For if bishops have a law of their 
own teaching monogamy, the other (characteristics) likewise, which will be the 
fitting concomitants of monogamy, will have been written (exclusively) for 
bishops. With laics, however, to whom monogamy is not suitable, the other 
(characteristics) also have nothing to do. (Thus), Psychic, you have (if you 
please) evaded the bonds of discipline in its entirety! Be consistent in 
prescribing, that "what is enjoined upon certain (individuals) is not enjoined 
upon all;" or else, if the other (characteristics) indeed are common, but 
monogamy is imposed upon bishops alone, (tell me), pray, whether they alone are 
to be pronounced Christians upon whom is conferred the entirety of discipline? 

CHAP. XIII.--FURTHER OBJECTIONS FROM ST. PAUL 
ANSWERED. 
"But again, writing to Timotheus, he 'wills the very young (women) to marry, 
bear children, act the housewife.'" He is (here) directing (his speech) to such 
as he denotes above--"very young widows," who, after being, "apprehended" in 
widowhood, and (subsequently) wooed for some length of time, after they have had 
Christ in their affections, "wish to marry, having judgment, because they have 
rescinded the first faith,"--that (faith), to wit, by which they were "found" in 
widowhood, and, after professing it, do not persevere. For which reason he 
"wills" them to "marry," for fear of their subsequently rescinding the first 
faith of professed widowhood; not to sanction their marrying as often as ever 
they may refuse to persevere in a widowhood plied with temptation--nay, rather, 
spent in indulgence. 
"We read him withal writing to the Romans: 'But the woman who is under an 
husband, is bound to her husband (while)living; but if he shall have died, she 
has been emancipated from the law of the husband.' Doubtless, then, the husband 
living, she will be thought to commit adultery if she shall have been joined to 
a second husband. If, however, the husband shall have died, she has been freed 
from (his) law, that she is not an adulteress if made (wife) to another 
husband." But read the sequel as well in order that this sense, which flatters 
you, may evade (your grasp). "And so," he says, "my brethren, be ye too made 
dead to the law through the body of Christ, that ye may be made (subject) to a 
second,--to Him, namely, who hath risen from the dead, that we may bear fruit to 
God. For when we were in the flesh, the passions of sin, which (passions) used 
to be efficiently caused through the law, (wrought) in our members unto the 
bearing of fruit to death; but now we have been emancipated from the law, being 
dead (to that) in which we used to be held, unto the serving of God in newness 
of spirit, and not in oldness of letter." Therefore, if he bids us "be made dead 
to the law through the body of Christ," (which is the Church, which consists in 
the spirit of newness,) not "through the letter of oldness," (that is, of the 
law,)--taking you away from the law, which does not keep a wife, when her 
husband is dead, from becoming (wife) to another husband--he reduces you to 
(subjection to) the contrary condition, that you are not to marry when you have 
lost your husband; and in as far as you would not be accounted an adulteress if 
you became (wife) to a second husband after the death of your (first) husband, 
if you were still bound to act in (subjection to) the law, in so far as a result 
of the diversity of (your) condition, he does prejudge you (guilty) of adultery 
if, after the death of your husband, you do marry another: inasmuch as you have 
now been made dead to the law, it cannot be lawful for you, now that you have 
withdrawn from that (law) in the eye of which it was lawful for you. 
CHAP. XIV.--EVEN IF THE PERMISSION HAD BEEN GIVEN BY ST. PAUL IN THE SENSE 
WHICH THE PSYCHICS ALLEGE, IT WAS MERELY LIKE THE MOSAIC PERMISSION OF 
DIVORCE--A CONDESCENSION TO HUMAN HARD-HEARTEDNESS. 
Now, if the apostle had even absolutely permitted marriage when one's partner 
has been lost subsequently to (conversion to) the faith, he would have done, 
just as (he did) the other (actions) which he did adversely to the (strict) 
letter of his own rule, to suit the circumstances. of the times: circumcising 
Timotheus on account of "supposititious false brethren;" and leading certain 
"shaven men" into the temple on account of the observant watchfulness of the 
Jews--he who chastises the Galatians when they desire to live in (observance of) 
the law. But so did circumstances require him to "become all things to all, in 
order to gain all;" "travailing m birth with them until Christ should be formed 
in them;" and "cherishing, as it were a nurse," the little ones of faith, by 
teaching them some things "by way of indulgence, not by way of command"--for it 
is one thing to indulge, another to bid--permitting a temporary licence of 
re-marriage on account of the "weakness of the flesh," just as Moses of 
divorcing on account of "the hardness of the heart." 
And here, accordingly, we will render the supplement of this (his) meaning. 
For if Christ abrogated what Moses enjoined, because "from the beginning was not 
so;" and--this being so--Christ will not therefore be reputed to have come from 
some other Power; why may not the Paraclete, too, have abrogated an indulgence 
which Paul granted--because second marriage withal "was not from the 
beginning"--without deserving on this account to be regarded with suspicion, as 
if he were an alien spirit, provided only that the superinduction be worthy of 
God and of Christ? If it was worthy of God and of Christ to check 
"hard-heartedness" when the time (for its indulgence) was fully expired, why 
should it not be more worthy both of God and of Christ to shake off "infirmity 
of the flesh" when "the time" is already mart "wound up?" If it is just that 
marriage be not severed, it is, of course, honourable too that it be not 
iterated. In short, in the estimation of the world, each is accounted a mark of 
good discipline: one under the name of concord; one, of modesty. "Hardness of 
heart" reigned till Christ's time; let "infirmity of the flesh" (be content to) 
have reigned till the time of the Paraclete. The New Law abrogated divorce--it 
had (somewhat) to abrogate; the New Prophecy (abrogates) second marriage, (which 
is) no less a divorce of the former (marriage). But the "hardness of heart" 
yielded to Christ more readily than the "infirmity of the flesh." The latter 
claims Paul in its own support more than the former Moses; if, indeed, it is 
claiming him in its support when it catches: at his indulgence, (but) refuses 
his prescript--eluding his more deliberate opinions and his constant "wills," 
not suffering us to render to the apostle the (obedience) which he "prefers," 
And how long will this most shameless "infirmity" persevere in waging a war 
of extermination against the "better things?" The time for its indulgence was 
(the interval) until the Paraclete began His operations, to whose coming were 
deferred by the Lord (the things) which in H's day "could not be endured;" which 
it is now no longer competent for any one to be unable to endure, seeing that He 
through whom the power of enduring is granted is not wanting. How long shall we 
allege "the flesh," because the Lord said, "the flesh is weak?" But He has 
withal premised that "the Spirit is prompt," in order that the Spirit may 
vanquish the flesh--that the weak may yield to the stronger. For again He says, 
"Let him who is able to receive, receive;" that is, let him who is not able go 
his way. That rich man did go his way who had not "received" the precept of 
dividing his substance to the needy, and was abandoned by the Lord to his own 
opinion. Nor will "harshness" be on this account imputed to Christ, the Found of 
the vicious action of each individual free-will. "Behold," saith He, "I have set 
before thee good and evil." Choose that which is good: if you cannot, because 
you will not--for that you can if you will He has shown, because He has proposed 
each to your free-will--you ought to depart from Him whose will you do not. 
CHAP. XV.--UNFAIRNESS OF CHARGING THE DISCIPLES OF THE NEW PROPHECY WITH 
HARSHNESS. THE CHARGE RATHER TO BE RETORTED UPON THE PSYCHICS. 
What harshness, therefore, is here on our part, if we renounce (communion 
with) such as do not the will of God? What heresy, if we judge second marriage, 
as being unlawful, akin to adultery? For what is adultery but unlawful marriage? 
The apostle sets a brand upon those who were wont entirely to forbid marriage, 
who were wont at the same time to lay an interdict on meats which God has 
created. We, however, no more do away with marriage if we abjure its repetition, 
than we reprobate meats if we fast oftener (than others). It is one thing to do 
away with, another to regulate; it is one thing to, lay down a law of not 
marrying, it is another to fix a limit to marrying. To speak plainly, if they 
who reproach us with harshness, or esteem heresy (to exist) in this (our) cause, 
foster the "infirmity of the flesh" to such a degree as to think it must have 
support accorded to it in frequency of marriage; why do they in another case 
neither accord it support nor foster it with indulgence--when, (namely), 
torments have reduced it to a denial (of the faith)? For, of course, that 
(infirmity) is more capable of excuse which has fallen in battle, than (that) 
which (has fallen) in the bed-chamber; (that) which has succumbed on the rack, 
than (that) which (has succumbed) on the bridal bed; (that) which has yielded to 
cruelty, than (that) which (has yielded) to appetite; that which has been 
overcome groaning, than (that) which (has been overcome) in heat. But the former 
they excommunicate, because it has not "endured unto the end:" the latter they 
prop up, as if withal it has "endured unto the end." Propose (the question) why 
each has not "endured unto the end;" and you will find the cause of that 
(infirmity) to be more honourable which has been unable to sustain savagery, 
than (of that) which (has been unable to sustain) modesty. And yet not even a 
bloodwrung--not to say an immodest--defection does the "infirmity of the flesh" 
excuse! 
CHAP. XVI.--WEAKNESS OF THE PLEAS URGED IN DEFENCE OF SECOND MARRIAGE. 
But I smile when (the plea of) "infirmity of the flesh" is advanced in 
opposition (to us: infirmity) which is (rather) to be called the height of 
strength. Iteration of marriage is an affair of strength: to rise again from the 
ease of continence to the works of the flesh, is (a thing requiting) substantial 
reins. Such "infirmity" is equal, to a third, and a fourth, and even (perhaps) a 
seventh marriage; as (being a thing) which increases its strength as often as 
its weakness; which will no longer have (the support of) an apostle's authority, 
but of some Hermogenes--wont to marry more women than he paints. For in him 
matter is abundant: whence he presumes that even the soul is material; and 
therefore much more (than other men) he has not the Spirit from God, being no 
longer even a Psychic, because even his psychic element is not derived from 
God's afflatus! What if a man allege "indigence," so as to profess that his 
flesh is openly prostituted, and given in marriage for the sake of maintenance; 
forgetting that there is to be no careful thought about food and clothing? He 
has God (to look to), the Foster-father even of ravens, the Rearer even of 
flowers. What if he plead the loneliness of his home? as if one woman afforded 
company to a man ever on the eve of flight! He has, of course, a widow (at 
hand), whom it will be lawful for him to take. Not one such wife, but even a 
plurality, it is permitted to have. What if a man thinks on posterity, with 
thoughts like the eyes of Lot's wife; so that a man is to make the fact that 
from his former marriage he has had no children a reason for repeating marriage? 
A Christian, forsooth, will seek heirs, disinherited as he is from the entire 
world! He has "brethren;" he has the Church as his mother. The case is different 
if men believe that, at the bar of Christ as well (as of Rome), action is taken 
on the principle of the Julian laws; and imagine that the unmarried and 
childless cannot receive their portion in full, in accordance with the testament 
of God. Let such (as thus think), then, marry to the very end; that in this 
confusion of flesh they, like Sodom and Gomorrah, and the day of the deluge, may 
be overtaken by the fated final end of the world. A third saying let them add, 
"Let us eat, and drink, and really, for to-morrow we shall die;" not reflecting 
that the "woe" (denounced) "on such as are with child, and are giving suck," 
will fall far more heavily and bitterly in the "universal shaking" of the entire 
world than it did in the devastation of one fraction of Judaea. Let them 
accumulate by their iterated marriages fruits right seasonable for the last 
times--breasts heaving, and wombs qualmish, and infants whimpering. Let them 
prepare for Antichrist (children) upon whom he may more passionately (than 
Pharaoh) spend his savagery.He will lead to them murderous midwives. 
CHAP. XVII.--HEATHEN EXAMPLES CRY SHAME UPON THIS "INFIRMITY OF THE FLESH." 
They will have plainly a specious privilege to plead before Christ--the 
everlasting "infirmity of the flesh!" But upon this (infirmity) will sit in 
judgment no longer an Isaac, our monogamist father; or a John, a noted voluntary 
celibate of Christ's; or a Judith, daughter of Merari; or so many other examples 
of saints. Heathens are wont to be destined our judges. There will arise a queen 
of Carthage, and give sentence upon the Christians, who, refugee as she was, 
living on alien soil, and at that very time the originator of so mighty a state, 
whereas she ought unasked to have craved royal nuptials, yet, for fear she 
should experience a second marriage, preferred on the contrary rather to "burn" 
than to "marry." Her assessor will be the Roman matron who, having--albeit it 
was through noctural violence, nevertheless--known another man, washed away with 
blood the stain of her flesh, that she might avenge upon her own person (the 
honour of) monogamy. There have been, too, who preferred to die for their 
husbands rather than marry after their husbands' death. To idols, at all events, 
both monogamy and widowhood serve as apparitors. On Fortuna Muliebris, as on 
Mother Matuta, none but a once wedded woman hangs the wreath. Once for all do 
the Pontifex Maximus and the wife of a Flamen marry. The priestesses of Ceres, 
even during the lifetime and with the consent of their husbands, are widowed by 
amicable separation. There are, too, who may judge us on the ground of absolute 
continence: the virgins of Vesta, and of the Achaian Juno, and of the Scythian 
Diana, and of the Pythian Apollo. On the ground of continence the priests 
likewise of the famous Egyptian bull will judge the "infirmity" of Christians. 
Blush, O flesh, who hast "put on" Christ! Suffice it thee once for all to 
marry, whereto "from the beginning" thou wast created, whereto by "the end" thou 
art being recalled! Return at least to the former Adam, if to the last thou 
canst not! Once for all did he taste of the tree; once for all felt 
concupiscence; once for all veiled his shame; once for all blushed in the 
presence of God; once for all concealed his guilty hue; once for all was exiled 
from the paradise of holiness; once for all thenceforward married. If you were 
"in him," you have your norm; if you have passed over "into Christ," you will be 
bound to be (yet) better. Exhibit (to us) a third Adam, and him a digamist; and 
then you will be able to be what, between the two, you cannot. 
[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. THELWALL.] 

